                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ECONOMICS OF AESTHETICS AND THREE CENTURIES OF ART PRICE
                               RECORDS

                                        William Goetzmann
                                         Elena Mamonova
                                        Christophe Spaenjers

                                        Working Paper 20440
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20440


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20440.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by William Goetzmann, Elena Mamonova, and Christophe Spaenjers. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Aesthetics and Three Centuries of Art Price Records
William Goetzmann, Elena Mamonova, and Christophe Spaenjers
NBER Working Paper No. 20440
August 2014
JEL No. D01,D44,G01,N00,Z1

                                             ABSTRACT

Aggregate art price patterns mask a lot of underlying variation—both in the time series and in the cross-
section. We argue that, to increase our understanding of the market for aesthetics, it is helpful to take
a micro perspective on the formation of art prices, and acknowledge that each artwork gives rise to
a market for trading in its private-value benefits. We discuss relevant recent literature, and illustrate
the potential of this approach through a historical study of art price records between 1701 and 2014.
Our newly constructed series also points to the importance of developments in the industrial organization
of the art market for long-term price trends.


William Goetzmann                                   Christophe Spaenjers
School of Management                                HEC Paris - Department of Finance
Yale University                                     1 rue de la Libération
Box 208200                                          78351 Jouy en Josas cedex
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                            France
and NBER                                            spaenjers@hec.fr
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Elena Mamonova
PO Box 638
Belgrade Lakes, ME 04918
eamamonova@gmail.com
I. Introduction

Over the last half century, a growing literature in economics has substantially improved our
knowledge of the risk-return properties of diversified art portfolios, the correlation patterns
between artwork characteristics and prices, and the impact of shifts in income and wealth
distributions on average art prices. Yet, the aggregate time-series dynamics and average cross-
sectional pricing differences hide a lot of variation—variation that is very relevant to collector-
investors (who are typically undiversified) and to observers of the art market (who often want to
learn about the dynamics of art buyers’ preferences from prices).

In this paper, we argue that, to further increase the economic understanding of the market for
aesthetics, we need to examine the formation of art prices on a disaggregate level. Our starting
point is that anybody’s valuation of an artwork should be a function of both the expected (non-
financial) private-value benefits over the holding period and the expected (financial) resale
revenues (Lovo and Spaenjers, 2014). Of course, the latter cashflow is in itself endogenously
related to the distribution of tastes among potential buyers at the time of resale. Each individual
artwork thus gives rise to a market for trading in its (current and future) private-value benefits.
Within this framework, we discuss recent theoretical and empirical studies on the different forces
driving the willingness to pay of bidders at art auctions. Emerging conclusions of this body of
work are that the enjoyment associated with art ownership is multi-faceted, that preferences
interact with wealth in determining the magnitude of private values, and that beliefs about resale
revenues affect auction outcomes.

We then illustrate the relevance of a micro perspective on the formation of art prices through a
particular case study. Based on historical research, we identify 35 sales of artworks between 1701
and 2014 that set price records (in nominal GBP terms) at auction. At one time in history each of
these pieces held the special distinction of being the most expensive work of art ever sold through
a commonly observed market. A review of these works reveals an interesting paradox: an
extraordinary price does not necessarily equate to a unique or extraordinary artwork. Moreover,
the timing of record transactions does not always coincide with general periods of price increases.
Based on an in-depth study of the different sales in our series, we conclude that auction price
records are often set in situations characterized by one or more of the following elements: (i)
extreme supply constraints, (ii) instances of social competition among “nouveaux riches”, (iii)


                                                                                                 2
resolution of uncertainty about the potential resale value of the artwork, and (iv) idiosyncratic
shifts from hedonic weights. Going beyond the main focus of this paper, our historical study also
suggests the importance of developments in the industrial organization of the market in driving
aggregate price trends.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the main strands of the
literature on art prices. Section III evaluates where progress can still be made, and Section IV
reviews recent contributions that go in this direction. Section V presents our record series, and
Section VI explains how it illustrates the relevance of a micro perspective on art prices. Section
VII briefly discusses the importance of considering institutional changes in the art market when
looking into long-term price trends. Section VIII concludes.



II. Main Strands of the Literature on Art Prices

II.1. Art price indexes and the risk-return trade-off

The first efforts to estimate the investment performance of art occurred in the early 1960s. A
popular book by Rush (1961) presented indices for different artistic genres and even included a
comparison with stocks (Coslor and Spaenjers, 2013). Academic interest in the topic grew with a
number of contributions (e.g., Anderson, 1974; Baumol, 1986; Goetzmann, 1993) that used
auction sales data compiled by Reitlinger (1961). Over the last two decades, researchers have
applied hedonic and repeat-sales regressions—methods to estimate price indexes for infrequently
traded assets—to ever-larger databases of art auction sales (e.g., Mei and Moses, 2002; Renneboog
and Spaenjers, 2013). Some studies focus on particular media (e.g., Pesando, 1993) or specific
artist nationalities (e.g, Agnello and Pierce, 1996; Renneboog and Van Houtte, 2002). Even if
different papers come to different conclusions with respect to the long-term returns to art
investments, estimated returns generally beat inflation but remain below the performance of
equities. Over the last half century, returns may have been better at the higher end of the market
(e.g., Renneboog and Spaenjers, 2013).

Recent reseach has pointed to a number of potential methodological issues with price index
estimates. For example, there is the issue of endogeneity of trading. Items may only (re)sell if they
have gone up in value (Goetzmann, 1996). Korteweg, Kräussl, and Verwijmeren (2013) correct


                                                                                                   3
for such survivorship bias and find that repeat-sales art price indexes may have to be adjusted
downwards. Next, art price indexes may underestimate the volatility of the underlying portfolio of
assets, as they are estimated using price data that are typically aggregated over annual periods (e.g.,
Campbell, 2008; Renneboog and Spaenjers, 2013).



II.2. Hedonic pricing

Hedonic regressions do not only enable the construction of price indexes, but they also allow
insight into what are the price-determining or “utility-bearing” (Rosen, 1974) characteristics of
artworks. Hedonic models estimated in art price studies typically include easily quantifiable
characteristics of the work (e.g., size, medium, strength of attribution) and the artist (e.g, artist
dummies and/or reputation measures). The regression results then show the implicit “premia”—
and thus the average willingness to pay among art buyers—associated with certain characteristics.
(To allow for changes in the shadow prices over time, one can apply an “adjacent-period” model
(Triplett, 2004) in which hedonic regressions are estimated separately over smaller subperiods.)
For example, Renneboog and Spaenjers (2013) find that works that are “attributed to” an artist are
on average 52% cheaper than works that are undoubtedly by the artist; the authors also quantify
the premia that art buyers are paying on average for oil paintings, signed works of art, self-portraits,
etc. Next to variables related to the work and the artist, hedonic models often also include
characteristics of the sale (e.g, auction house, month of sale), which are supposed to pick up
otherwise unobservable differences in quality.



II.3. Wealth, income, and art market returns

An artwork is essentially a claim on an infinite stream of non-financial consumption dividends,
namely the pleasure and pride experienced by its consecutive owners. As such consumption of art
is discretionary, the marginal utility of—and therefore the willingness to pay for—its non-
pecuniary payoffs can be expected to vary with wealth shocks (Aït-Sahalia, Parker, and Yogo,
2004). Art price indexes typically drop in recessionary periods. Several of the previously-
mentioned papers has also found a positive correlation between (lagged) equity returns and price
changes in the art market.


                                                                                                      4
As masterpieces are unique and indivisible goods that are in excess demand, the number and the
buying power of wealthy households may be more relevant in determining the price of high-end
art than the average wealth across all households—just like for real estate in “superstar cities”
(Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai, 2013). Goetzmann, Renneboog, and Spaenjers (2011) find evidence
that high-end art prices tend to go up in periods of increasing income inequality.



III. Where Do We Stand, and Where To Go Next?

The literature has painted a clear picture of the aggregate historical dynamics of the art market,
and of the average long-term returns. This work is important, because it allows to compare the
risk-return profile of “art” —or a certain type of art—with those of other asset classes, and to
evaluate the potential role for diversified art collections—or even art investment funds—in a
portfolio. At the same time, however, it should be recognized that price indexes hide a lot of
variation, and may not be representative of the price dynamics for any individual artist or artwork.
We can get a sense of how much of the variation in art prices is systematic by looking at the R-
squareds of repeated-sales regressions. Goetzmann (1993) and Mei and Moses (2002) report that
their indexes explain 0.59 and 0.64 of the sample return variation, respectively. Art price indexes
thus leave a substantial part of the returns on individual objects unexplained, which is especially
relevant as many collector-investors—by choice or by lack of investable capital—focus on a very
small of artists and thus tend to be undiversified. Relatedly, even if hedonic models do rather well
in explaining cross-sectional price differences between artworks, they mask variation in the
distribution of preferences—aesthetic or not—that exists for each individual work. Furthermore,
the structure of both preferences and wealth across potential art buyers may change over time, and
expectations about the future market conditions for an artwork will of course affect anybody’s
willingness to pay for an artwork today. For all these reasons we may be able to increase the
economic understanding of the auction market for aesthetics by going beyond aggregate price
dynamics, and acknowledging that a separate trading “market” is associated with each individual
artwork.




                                                                                                  5
IV. New Perspectives on Art Prices

The basic framework that we use in this paper is borrowed from Lovo and Spaenjers (2014). The
authors formalize the concept of an “emotional dividend”, by defining it as how much an individual
would be willing and able to pay for each period of ownership of an artwork. It is thus the
quantitative counterpart of the non-financial utility associated with being an art owner. Anybody’s
valuation of an artwork then equals the present value of the emotional dividends from the item that
can be enjoyed between purchase and resale, plus the present value of the expected auction
proceeds (net of transaction costs) at resale. Or, more formally, any individual i’s valuation can be
expressed as follows:

      PVi,t = PV(emotional dividends) i,t→t’ + PV(resale revenues) t’                            (1)

where t is the time of purchase and t’ is the (optimally selected) time of resale. The magnitude of
the emotional dividend per period—which determines the first, private-value component in
equation (1)—depends both on individual i’s preferences and on his financial wealth. The expected
resale revenues—which determine the second, common-value component in equation (1)—are
endogenous to the distribution of emotional dividends in the population of bidders at time t’: the
resale price can be expected to be higher if more individuals derive high enjoyment from the work.
This element of the time-t valuation should be the same for all non-credit-constrained bidders
planning to resell at t’.

In the following paragraphs, we will review recent literature on the nature of the emotional
dividends or private-value benefits associated with art ownership, on the interaction between
preferences and wealth in determining the distribution of private values, and on the impact of
(beliefs about) the common-value component on the willingness to pay.



IV.1. Private-value benefits

It is important to recognize that the preferences underpinning the non-financial utility that
individuals derive from owning an artwork can have many origins. Of course, there is the viewing
pleasure, and the admiration of artistic skill or “genius”. But why are duplicates then not worth as
much as original artworks? And why do we observe price differences between works with different
strengths of attribution to Old Masters (Renneboog and Spaenjers, 2013) or between original and


                                                                                                   6
posthumous Rembrandt prints (Lazzaro, 2006)? Recent research by Newman and Bloom (2012)
documents two underlying psychological mechanisms that could explain these findings: both “the
assessment of the art object as a unique creative act (performance) and the degree of physical
contact with the original artist (contagion)” have an effect on people’s valuations.

A subtle twist is that the pride and enjoyment associated with ownership may be much stronger
than the pleasure experienced by art lovers when in front of a work of art that they like. Frey and
Eichenberger (1995) argue that “an art object yields additional benefits if it is owned (and not just
rented) because the art object’s ‘aura’ is therewith appropriated”. The importance of such
ownership effects could explain the absence of a well-developed art rental market.

Art buyers may not only be paying for the personal satisfaction of ownership; the social aspect is
probably important as well, for example because of the Veblenian idea of conspicuous
consumption. Heffetz (2011) shows that there is a relation between the visibility of expenditures
on a category of goods and the elasticity of consumption with respect to income. There may of
course be cross-sectional variation in the visibility of art spending that is related to the type of art
purchased. Anecdotal evidence suggests that one reason for the popularity of artists like Jeff
Koons, Damien Hirst, Andy Warhol, etc. in recent years is their recognizability—even to people
who can hardly be described as connoisseurs. (An alternative explanation for why many of the
world’s wealthy regularly seem to compete for the same items is that public perceptions of one’s
preferences may determine social status (Bernheim, 1994). In this view, famous art collectors’
intrinsic preferences are not necessarily aligned, but they conform to a homogeneous standard of
behavior out of status concerns.)

Yet, the durability of art makes it not only a consumption good, but also a store and display of
wealth. If wealth provides social status, then it may directly enter into the utility function of
economic agents. In the presence of such a “capitalist spirit” (e.g., Bakshi and Chen, 1996; Carroll,
2000), the wealthy may pay a premium for art relative to the stream of consumption services that
is inherent to the artwork. Mandel (2011) constructs an asset pricing model that incorporates a
conspicuous utility dividend that is a function of the art’s price. It thus formalizes a relation
between the private-value and the common-value components of an artwork’s value.

Also social competition within the more limited confines of the auction room may be important.
Auction participants may get utility from winning for winning’s sake—to be the “top dog”

                                                                                                      7
(Shogren and Hayes, 1997). Even if the experimental evidence for such an effect is limited (Holt
and Sherman, 1994; Shogren and Hayes, 1997), it could play a more important role when members
of the global elite are competing for a trophy item.

The above observations that ownership is a condition for full enjoyment and that the need for social
recognition may impact bidding behavior also suggests the importance of supply in the
determination of prices. We define supply as the number of artworks of an artist that are still in
private hands. Supply typically shrinks over time, as museums continue acquiring items but only
rarely de-accession. Moreover, there is the issue of re-attributions. For many Old Masters, the
number of works that are considered to be executed by the master himself has decreased as
attention to authenticity heightened and technology advanced over the twentieth century; Seinstra
(2014) shows how the number of paintings included in various Rembrandt “oeuvre catalogues”
more or less halved over the twentieth century. If supply is severely constrained, bidders may be
faced with their one and only opportunity to acquire an item by a certain artist if it comes up for
sale, reinforcing the idea that an auction can indeed be “won”, and inducing exceptionally high
demand.

The above discussion makes clear that the emotional dividends—the non-financial utility—from
acquiring and owning an artwork can take many different forms. Whether hedonic regression
models are able to explain cross-sectional price variation between art objects depends on whether
hedonic characteristics capture these private-value-determining features and on whether there exist
a lot of idiosyncratic shifts from average preferences. (It is probably not a surprise that hedonic
regression models perform exceptionally well in the market for diamonds.)



IV.2. Time-series variation in the distribution of private values

Aggregate art price indexes will capture the price dynamics of individual artists or works more
accurately if there is a substantial systematic component in how emotional dividends change over
time. There will be less variation in price changes around the average trend if preferences are
relatively stable over time. While the multi-dimensional nature of preferences for artworks makes
this hard to evaluate, it seems that aesthetic tastes at least do not change as much as sometimes
assumed, even over longer time frames (Graddy, 2013). However, it is important to recognize that
changing wealth patterns may still change the structure of art prices, by making certain groups of

                                                                                                  8
individuals’ preferences more impactful. Hiraki et al. (2009) find a strong correlation between the
demand for art by Japanese collectors and Japanese stock prices, leading to an increase in
Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art during the “bubble period” in the Japanese economy.
Renneboog and Spaenjers (2014) show that national equity markets help explaining country-
specific art returns, but less for the artists with the highest reputations. So, while the correlation
between the aggregate movements of wealth and art prices (cf. Section II) are interesting, the
interaction between regional wealth patterns and local cultural tastes certainly deserves as much
attention.



IV.3. Beliefs about the common-value component

It is clear that rationally-behaving art owners will only want to resell when the expected auction
proceeds exceed the (individual-specific) value of continued ownership. Under certain conditions,
increases in price levels in the art market may thus trigger increases in the volume of consignments
to auction houses. One factor that will directly impact expected auction proceeds is a change in
the number of bidders in the market (Goetzmann and Spiegel, 1995; Lovo and Spaenjers, 2014).
If there is uncertainty about what the shape of the (future) distribution of private-value benefits—
which determines the common-value component—looks like, then also changes in the beliefs
about this distribution should impact the valuation of an artwork. Using survey data, Pénasse,
Renneboog, and Spaenjers (2014) find that, in the cross-section, optimistic beliefs in the market
outlook for specific artists are correlated with higher prices. Beggs and Graddy (2008) show
downward price trends after buy-ins (i.e., items failing to reach the reserve price), which can be
explained by common-value effects. Also decreases or increases in the uncertainty surrounding
the common-value component may of course affect valuations. Finally, and relatedly, differences
of opinion about the expected resale value may encourage relatively pessimistic art owners to sell
to optimists, in the spirit of, for example, Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).



V. Art at Auction: A Record of Records

On 12 November 2013, “Three Studies of Lucian Freud”, a Francis Bacon triptych, was sold
through auction in New York. An anonymous bidder paid 127 million USD, or almost 90 million


                                                                                                    9
GBP, for the work—a new world record price for a work of art at auction. Like previous record
sales, the transaction was covered extensively by the popular press, and triggered both unbelief—
“how can a painting be worth so much money?”—and even anger—“it’s morally very wrong”. In
this section, we construct a long-term history of auction record prices, going back to the start of
the eighteenth century.



V.1. Defining and identifying records

We use the following criteria to identify art auction record prices. First, we only consider artworks
(created by an identifiable artist), so no books, jewelry, etc. We exclude lots in which multiple
artworks are pooled together. Second, the work needs to be traded at a public auction. Moreover,
we only consider the highest price from each auction: if a record gets broken within the same sale,
we exclude it from the list. Third, at the auction the work needs to be acquired by a party other
than the consignor. In other words, we consider record-breaking reserve prices as irrelevant.
Fourth, we consider prices including auction house transactions costs payable by the winning
bidder, as we want to capture the total sum laid out by the acquirer. Christie’s and Sotheby’s
introduced a buyer’s premium in the 1970s, but other auction houses already had buyer’s fees in
place before. (However, we do not consider VAT and other taxes.) Fifth, it is clear that the currency
perspective may matter. Because the global art market for a very long time was centered in London,
we take a GBP perspective. New York only became an important trading place for art in the
twentieth century.

Even starting from such clear guidelines, the identification of record-breaking transactions in the
history of the art auction market is difficult. Although online art auction databases have good
coverage going back until the 1960s at least, no exhaustive online or offline database exists for
older auctions. However, throughout history, a number of different “repertoires” or “indexes”
listing art auction sales have been published. The starting point of our research is a book published
in 1961 by art historian Gerard Reitlinger, titled “The Economics of Taste: The Rise and Fall of
Picture Prices, 1760-1960”. Reitlinger listed for a wide range of artists a history of prices,
sometimes even going back to before 1760. However, closer examination of the highest prices in
Reitlinger reveals that many of the prices included are not auction prices, but prices of private
transactions, reserve prices, estimates, and so on. We exclude all these non-auction prices. We then

                                                                                                  10
further investigate all remaining relevant entries, by cross-checking and potentially correcting the
sale and price information in Reitlinger with a number of sources, such as the online art historical
databases Lugt’s Répertoire Online and the Getty Provenance Index. We also consult (often
annotated) hard copies of the original auction catalogues in the National Art Library in London, or
alternatively order them from online booksellers. We only include a potentially record-breaking
transaction in our list if it does not violate any of the criteria spelled out before, and if the available
evidence allows us to determine the location and date of the auction, and the exact price paid.

We then review a number of additional historical auction sale repertoires, to see whether there are
any record sales between 1701 and 1960 not included in Reitlinger. We identify two records for
the early 1700s (using an exchange rate of 11 guilders to the pound) in a collection of priced Dutch
art auction catalogues put together by Gerard Hoet (1752). Automized queries on the text of the
two volumes of Roberts (1897) describing the important sales at Christie’s between 1766 and 1896,
and of the seven volumes of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century auction results of Mireur (1911-
1912), did not yield additional transactions that are records according to the criteria spelled out
before.

For the period since the publication of Reitlinger’s volume, our starting point is the online database
Blouin Art Sales Index (BASI). We convert all prices to GBP and add the buyer’s premium
whenever necessary. One additional record-breaking post-1960 transaction not included in BASI,
the 1961 sale of Rembrandt’s “Aristotle contemplating the bust of Homer”, was identified based
on a review of press articles on auction price records.

The above-described procedure results in a database of 35 art auction records between 1701 and
2014. Table 1 shows for each record the date of sale, the price in British pounds, the name of the
artist, the title of the work, and the location of sale. As also illustrated by Figure 1—which shows
the timing of records, together with an aggregate art price index from Goetzmann, Renneboog, and
Spaenjers (2011) and a number of macro-economic data series—records have mainly been
clustered in three periods: the early 1800s, the 1910s and 1920s, and post-1950.

                               [Insert Table 1 and Figure 1 about here]




                                                                                                        11
V.2. Caveats

We need to stress that our list should not be considered as “the” list of records, but as “a” list of
records, for three reasons. First, we believe that the criteria we used to identify records are sensible
and defensible, but they are not without impact on the list. We can give many examples. If we had
taken a USD rather than GBP perspective, there would have been no 1984 Raphael and 2002
Rubens records; by contrast, our list would have included a 1986 Manet record. A focus on deflated
rather than nominal prices would have implied a shorter list. Because we only consider one artwork
per auction, there are no 1958 Manet and Van Gogh records on our record. If we had focused on
hammer prices rather than prices inclusive of transaction costs, a 1913 Romney record would have
to be added and a 1980 Van Gogh dropped from our list. Second, it is not impossible—it is even
probable—that we have missed a record-breaking auction. For example, Mühsam (1925) mentions
an 1872 sale of a Van Dyck painting in London for 37,800 GBP. That sale would be a record, but
we could not find any evidence of the auction in other data sources. More generally, for the first
250 years of our time frame, we need to base our analysis on a selective reading—it is practically
infeasible to review all sales in all books covering the history of the art market—of the data that
have survived. Third, there are a few items that may not entirely follow our own criteria. For
example, it is unclear whether the 1804 Dou record should be considered as a buy-in, as “experts”
involved in the sale pushed up the price and the work was eventually purchased by the auctioneer.
Also the 1811 Rembrandt sale is suspect, as Smith (1829-1842) notes that the price was run up by
the previous owner who had before the auction agreed to sell it privately to “His Majesty”.



V.3. Art Auction Records 1701-2014

For all transactions listed in Table 1, we collect as much information as possible on the identity of
the seller and the circumstances of the sale, the identity of the buyer (and other bidders), the
characteristics and the history of ownership of the artwork, and the organization of the sale by the
auction house. Sources that we consult include auction catalogues, notes on the transactions in the
Getty Provenance Index and the different art market reference works mentioned before, books on
the history of the art market, press articles and academic texts covering the record sales, and entries
on the artworks in Wikipedia and on museum websites. We briefly describe the chronology of our
list here, but a full description of all works is of course beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                                                                     12
The list starts with a string of eight records set between 1701 and 1811 by three seventeenth-
century Dutch and Flemish masters: Gerard Dou (four times), Anthony Van Dyck (twice), and
Rembrandt (twice). The high prices paid for Dou may nowadays be a surprise to many, but
Reitlinger (1961) notes that “in 1771 a Gerard Dou was about the most expensive thing you could
buy”. According to Smith (1829-1842), Dou’s “Picture in three wings” that set a record in 1771 is
the same work as the “Interior with woman and child” that is the first entry on our list. At the 1771
sale, the work was bought by an agent of Catherine the Great, but the ship that transported it sank
on the way to Russia. Also the two Van Dyck sales of “Rest on the flight into Egypt” in 1713 and
1733 refer to one and the same painting. In the 1713, it was the first lot in the sale of the collection
of William III of England, who had died in 1702 (Jonckheere, 2004). At the 1733 sale, it was
bought for Sir Robert Walpole, but it would later move to Catherine the Great’s collection. The
1808 Dou record is the last transaction in the Netherlands on our list. The next entry, the sale of
Rembrandt’s “Shipwright and his wife” in 1811 is the first of many record transactions at either
Christie’s or Sotheby’s.

After 1811, our list shows a gap of more than four decades. In 1852, a painting by Murillo on the
“Immaculate conception” was auctioned off as part of the estate sale of one of Napoleon’s
commanders, Marshal Soult, who had “compiled” an impressive art collection during the invasion
of Spain. The work triggered a bidding war between the Louvre, the National Gallery, and the Tsar
of Russia, and was ultimately auctioned off to the Louvre for 24,600 GPB, more than four times
the price paid for Rembrandt’s “Shipwright and his wife”. (The painting has later been donated
back to Spain.)

It took almost sixty years before the record set by the Murillo was broken. In 1910, art dealer
Joseph Duveen bought “An old woman” by Frans Hals at auction in New York—the first record
sale in the U.S.—for the equivalent of 28,250 GBP (and resold it to Henry Frick for 31,000 GBP).
The transaction was quickly followed by more Old Master record transactions. In 1912, a
Mantegna painting was sold in Berlin for 29,500 GBP, and in 1913 Duveen paid 44,000 GBP for
a Rembrandt in Paris. Both paintings were resold to Benjamin Altman. New records continued to
be set after the end of the first World War, but the works looked entirely different. In 1919 and
1926, George Romney and Sir Thomas Lawrence became the most expensive artists ever, with
their late-eighteenth-century portraits of girls and women.


                                                                                                     13
Only in 1957 did an auction price eclipse the 77,700 GBP paid for Lawrence’s “Pinkie” in 1926.
A still-life with apples by Gauguin was sold for 104,630 GBP at auction in Paris. In 1958, the
Cezanne painting “Garcon au gilet rouge” was sold for more than double the previous record price.
The work was the sixth lot in an auction of seven modern masterpieces; lots three (Manet) and
four (Van Gogh) had already broken the Gauguin record. Yet, the record price was quickly
exceeded by the sum paid for Rubens in 1959, and then for Rembrandt in 1961. The 817,052 GBP
paid for Rembrandt’s “Aristotle contemplating the bust of Homer” in 1961 was more than three
times more than the 275,000 GBP paid for Rubens two years before. In turn, the Rembrandt record
was shattered in 1970, when 2.3 million GBP was paid for a Velasquez portrait. Both the
Rembrandt and the Velasquez were acquired by the Metropolitan Museum.

In the 11 years from 1980 until 1990, our list shows nine records, which is as much as over the
first two centuries of our sample. Of course, the art market boom in this period is well-known. The
record went from 2.5 million GBP for one Van Gogh (“Le jardin du poete, Arles”) in 1980 to 49
million GBP for another one (“Portrait du Dr. Gachet”) in 1990. Two other Van Gogh paintings
set records in between. In March 1987, almost 25 million GBP was paid for a painting from Van
Gogh’s Sunflower series—more than three times the 8.1 million GBP price tag associated with
Mantegna’s “Adoration of the Magi” in 1985—and less than eight months later “Irises” raised 30.3
million GBP. Apart from the Van Goghs and the Mantegna, we also see record prices for works
by J.M.W. Turner in 1980 and 1984, for a Raphael in 1984—the only drawing on our list—and
for a Picasso in Paris in 1989. Although the sale of Picasso’s “Les Noces de Pierrette” was held in
Paris, the auction house published a bilingual French-Japanese sale catalogue, held an exhibition
of the work in Tokyo a few weeks before the sale, and organized a video satellite connection with
the Japanese capital during the auction. It was the first record sale outside the main auction rooms
of Sotheby’s or Christie’s in more than four decades.

In the early 2000s, the record set in 1990 by Van Gogh’s portrait of his doctor was broken first by
a large-scale Rubens masterpiece, and then by Picasso’s “Garçon à la pipe”. In 2010, Giacometti’s
“L’homme qui marche I” was the first and only statue to become the record holder, but it quickly
yielded its position to another Picasso, “Nude, green leaves, and bust”. A version of Munch’s
iconic “The scream” sold for 74 million GBP in 2012. But in 2013, Acquavella Gallery, bidding
on behalf of an unknown client, paid 89.4 million for Bacon’s triple portrait of Lucian Freud—in
June 2014 still the most expensive piece of art ever to be sold at auction worldwide.

                                                                                                 14
VI. Understanding (Record) Art Prices

Our record series reinforces previous findings on the relation between macro-economic trends on
the one hand and art prices on the other. For example, Figure 1 suggests that sharply decreasing
wealth inequality (and trade openness) in the U.K. and the U.S. can help explaining the lack of
records between 1926 and 1957, and that the fast succession of records over the last three-four
decades is related to the strong growth in wealth worldwide. However, the records also illustrate
the problem with a pure macro perspective. Even adjusting for the changes in taste through time,
we see a decoupling of price from quality at the boundary. The record-breaking works are for the
most part not regarded as the masterworks of the artists who created them, and in a few cases
maybe not even as works of artists generally considered as “masters”. Moreover, record
transactions do not always coincide with periods of price increases, and vice versa we have often
observed long periods of (average) price increases without seeing records (e.g., the second half of
the nineteenth century).

We conjecture that auction price records are often set in situations characterized by one or more
of the following elements: (i) extreme supply constraints, (ii) instances of social competition
among “nouveaux riches”, (iii) resolution of uncertainty about the potential resale value of the
artwork, and (iv) idiosyncratic shifts from hedonic weights. In the following paragraphs, we will
address each of these points, which illustrate the relevance of the micro perspective on art price
formation advocated in Section IV.



VI.1. Supply constraints

One recurring feature in our series—especially for records set by Old Masters—is the issue of
extreme supply constraints. For example, the increasingly tiny supply of high-quality Raphael
works surely contributed to the record price paid for a Raphael study in black chalk—according to
the catalogue entry “an auxiliary cartoon”—in 1984. A year later, a news report on the acquisition
of Mantegna’s “Adoration of the Magi” said that “Mantegna paintings are rare, and very few are
left in private hands” (Los Angeles Times, 1985). Until three years before its record sale in 2004,




                                                                                                15
Rubens’ “Massacre of the innocents” was considered to be by one of his assistants or followers;
the re-attribution turned it into one of the very few large-scale paintings not yet in museums.



VI.2. New wealth and the establishment of social recognition

The changes in the type of purchasers of our record pieces are informative. In the eighteenth and
nineteenth century the buyers were mainly European monarchs and rulers. In the early twentieth
century we only see purchases by—or on behalf of—wealthy American businessmen: Henry Frick,
Benjamin Altman, Andrew Mellon, and Henry Huntington. These acquisitions were part of
“America’s raid on Europe’s great pictures” (Saltzman, 2009); art dealer Joseph Duveen famously
commented that “Europe has a great deal of art, and America has a great deal of money”. Much of
this wealth had been created relatively recently. After the Second World War, the population of
buyers internationalizes, in line with changing wealth patterns, but continues to consist mainly of
bankers, industrialists, etc. The strong Japanese demand in the late 1980s that followed the
country’s economic boom also manifests itself in our record series: Japanese buyers were behind
three of the four record purchases between 1987 and 1990.

Apart from the importance of new money itself, our record series also clearly illustrates the role
of social competition—often among “nouveaux riches”—in the determination of art prices at
auction. Indeed, some of the record prices materialized after a fierce bidding war between different
parties. We give a few examples. The Louvre, the National Gallery, and the Tsar of Russia fought
for Murillo’s “Immaculate conception” (1852). Jouin (1895) describes the sale as follows: “The
greatest nations were represented with their rival gold, and loud applause accompanied each royal
bid. When, for the sum of 615,300 francs, it was knocked down—‘To France, gentlemen!’ cried
the Count de Nieuwerkerke—then broke forth the delirium of a battle won.” Before the 1910 sale
of Frans Hals’ portrait of an old woman, art dealer Knoedler had vowed not to let his rival Duveen
“get this picture at any price within reason” (Saltzman, 2009). Hook (2009) writes that Greek ship
owners competed for Gauguin’s “Apples” (1957).

Social competition can also explain some of the clustering of records that we observe: it is well
known, for example, that in the early twentieth century many Americans were competing for
similar-looking works. For example, after a (private-market record) purchase of a Rembrandt by
Peter Widener in 1911, Benjamin Altman “informed Henry Duveen that he required his own

                                                                                                  16
Rembrandt” (Saltzman, 2009). Duveen would pay an auction record price buying a Rembrandt for
Altman in 1913. Similarly, Secrest (2004) reports on the competition between Andrew Mellon and
Henry Huntington for Romney and Lawrence portraits—leading to auction record prices in 1926.



VI.3. Resolution of uncertainty about the resale value

Our record series includes a number of works of which multiple versions or editions exist, and that
can thus not necessarily be described as “unique”. For example, Vincent Van Gogh did a whole
series of sunflower paintings; by the time of the 1987 sale of one of them, other versions were in
the National Gallery in London, the Museum of Art in Philadelphia, and the Rijksmuseum in
Amsterdam. Similarly, different versions of Giacometti’s record-breaking statue or Munch’s “The
scream” exist, but most or all are in museums, validating the importance of the work for sale. For
such works, prices may be especially high because there is little uncertainty about the existing
preferences for the work—and therefore about the resale potential.

Also the frequent succession of records by the same artist in short time periods can be linked not
only to idiosyncratic changes in the demand for “consumption” of the artist’s work but also to the
idea of resolution of uncertainty about the resale value. In such a view, the increased propensity of
art owners to sell after increases in price levels could have contributed to the clustering of
records—both on a market-wide and on an artist-specific level—over time.



VI.4. Idiosyncratic shifts from hedonic weights

Even taking into account the above factors, it is difficult to comprehend record prices for a study
in black chalk (Raphael), for a Giacometti statue of which six editions and four artist proofs exist
(and that realized a price about four times the pre-sale estimate), or for George Romney and
Thomas Lawrence portraits, without relying on idiosyncratic shifts from hedonic preferences.
Clearly, hedonic models only capture “average” preferences as shown by all available historical
transactions, and deviations from these average correlations between artwork characteristics and
prices can be important in practice.



VII. Art Price Records and the Industrial Organization of the Art Market

                                                                                                  17
Ashenfelter and Graddy (2003) argued that “the auction institution itself, with commissions,
experts, pre-sale estimates, reserve prices, and sequential sales, can have a profound influence on
the price of art”. Our study of record-breaking auction also highlights the importance of
developments in the industrial organization of the art market for long-term price trends. First, the
structure of auction houses’ transaction fees—commissions charged to sellers and premiums
charged to buyers—has changed over time. We already said before that a focus on hammer prices
would have yielded a shorter lists, which is in line with recent evidence that bidders capitalize
buyers’ premia into their bids (Marks, 2009), even if it is still unclear to which extent bidders take
into account the impact of transaction costs on potential resale revenues. Second, auction houses
started offering credit to potential buyers in the 1980s—a controversial move at the time (Lacey,
1998) that may have pushed up prices. In 1987, Sotheby’s financed half of Australian industrialist
Alan Bond’s record purchase of Vincent van Gogh’s “Irises”, with the painting itself as collateral.
Bond was not able to repay the loan, and in 1990 sold the piece to the Getty museum in deal also
involving Sotheby's. (Recently, auction houses have also guaranteed minimum prices to sellers of
many high-end works, which may again affect bidders’ willingness to pay (Graddy and Hamilton,
2013).) Third, a more general issue is that only over the last half century the auction market has
become a retail market. Before that, auctions were mainly a wholesale trading place, and much
higher prices were occasionally recorded in the transactions of dealers (who may or may not have
bought at auction). For example, some of the private market prices mentioned in Saltzman (2009)
for the early twentieth century far exceed the auction records of around the same period. This also
implies that very-long-term trends in auction prices may slightly overestimate the increase in the
willingness to pay for art over time.



VIII. Conclusion

Aggregate art price patterns mask a lot of underlying variation—both in the time series and in the
cross-section. We argue that, to increase our understanding of the market for aesthetics, it is helpful
to take a micro perspective on the formation of art prices, and acknowledge that each artwork gives
rise to a market for trading in its private-value benefits. We discuss relevant recent literature, and
illustrate the potential of this approach through a historical study of art price records between 1701




                                                                                                    18
and 2014. Our newly constructed series also points to the importance of developments in the
industrial organization of the art market for long-term price trends.




                                                                                        19
References

Aït-Sahalia, Yacine, Jonathan A. Parker, and Motohiro Yogo. 2004. “Luxury goods and the equity premium.” Journal
   of Finance, 59 (6): 2959-3004.

Agnello, Richard J., and Renée K. Pierce. 1996. “Financial returns, price determinants, and genre effects in American
   art investment.” Journal of Cultural Economics, 20 (4): 359-393.

Anderson, Robert C. 1974. “Paintings as an investment.” Economic Inquiry, 12 (1): 13-26.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Kathryn Graddy. 2003. “Auctions and the price of art.” Journal of Economic Literature, 41
   (3): 763-786.

Bakshi, Gurdip S., and Zhiwu Chen. 1996. “The spirit of capitalism and stock-market prices.” American Economic
   Review, 86 (1): 133-157.

Baumol, William J. 1986. “Unnatural value: Or art investment as floating crap game.” American Economic Review,
   76 (2): 10-14.

Beggs, Alan, and Kathryn Graddy. 2008. “Failure to meet the reserve price: The impact on returns to art.” Journal of
   Cultural Economics, 32 (4): 301-320.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1994. “A theory of conformity.” Journal of Political Economy, 102 (5): 841-877.

Campbell, Rachel. 2008. “Art as a financial investment.” Journal of Alternative Investments, 10 (4): 64-81.

Carroll, Christopher D. 2000. “Why do the rich save so much?” In: Joel B. Slemrod (ed.), Does Atlas Shrug? The
   Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Coslor, Erica, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2013. Organizational and epistemic change: The growth of the art investment
   field. Working paper.

Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton. 2002. Triumph of the Optimists. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press.

Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton. 2013. Global Investment Returns Yearbook 2013. Zurich: Credit
   Suisse Research Institute.

Frey, Bruno S., and Reiner Eichenberger. 1995. “On the rate of return in the art market: Survey and evaluation.”
   European Economic Review, 39 (3/4): 528–537.

Goetzmann, William N. 1993. “Accounting for taste: Art and the financial markets over three centuries.” American
   Economic Review, 83 (5): 1370-1376.

Goetzmann, William N. 1996. “How costly is the fall from fashion? Survivorship bias in the painting market.” In:
   Victor A. Ginsburgh and Pierre-Michel Menger (eds.), Economics of the Arts: Selected Essays, Amsterdam:
   Elsevier.



                                                                                                                  20
Goetzmann, William N., Luc Renneboog, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2011. “Art and money.” American Economic
   Review, 101 (3): 222-226.

Goetzmann, William N., and Matthew Spiegel. 1995. “Private value components, and the winner’s curse in an art
   index.” European Economic Review, 39 (3/4): 549-555.

Graddy, Kathryn. 2013. “Taste endures! The rankings of Roger de Piles (†1709) and three centuries of art prices.”
   Journal of Economic History, 73 (3): 766-791.

Graddy, Kathryn, and Jonathan Hamilton. 2013. Third-party guarantees in art auctions. Mimeo.

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. 2013. “Superstar cities.” American Economic Journal:
   Economic Policy, 5 (4): 167-199.

Heffetz, Ori. 2011. “A test of conspicuous consumption: Visibility and income elasticities.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 93 (4): 1101-1117.

Hiraki, Takato, Akitoshi Ito, Darius A. Spieth, and Naoya Takezawa. 2009. “How did Japanese investments influence
   international art prices?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44 (6): 1489-1514.

Hills, Sally, Ryland Thomas, and Nicholas Dimsdale. 2010. The UK recession in context — what do three centuries
   of data tell us? URL: bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/threecenturiesofdata.xls

Hoet, Gerard. 1752. Catalogus of naamlyst van schilderyen met derzelver pryzen, Zedert een lange reeks van Jaaren
   zoo in Holland als op andere Plaatzen in het openbaar verkogt; Benevens een Verzameling van Lysten van
   Verscheyden nog in wezen zynde Cabinetten. ‘s Gravenhage: Pieter Gerard van Baalen.

Holt, Charles A., and Roger Sherman. 1994. The loser’s curse. American Economic Review, 84 (3): 642-652.

Hook, Philip. 2009. The Ultimate Trophy: How the Impressionist Painting Conquered the World. London: Prestel.

Jonckheere, Koenraad. 2004. “‘When the cabinet from Het Loo was sold’: The auction of William III’s collection of
   paintings, 26 July 1713.” Simiolus: Netherlands Quarterly for the History of Art, 31 (3): 156-215.

Jouin, Henry. 1895. Chefs-d'œuvre: Peinture, Sculpture Architecture. URL: http://grandearte.net/great-pictures-seen-
   and-described-famous-writers/immaculate-conception.

Korteweg, Arthur, Roman Kräussl, and Patrick Verwijmeren. 2013. Does it pay to invest in art? A selection-corrected
   returns perspective. Working paper.

Lacey, Robert. 1998. Sotheby's: Bidding for Class. Boston: Little Brown & Co.

Lazzaro, Elisabetta. 2006. “Assessing quality in cultural goods: The hedonic value of originality in Rembrandt's
   prints.” Journal of Cultural Economics, 30 (1): 15-40.

Los Angeles Times. 1985. Getty Pays $10.5 Million For Painting. 19 April 1985.

Lovo, Stefano, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2014. Unique durable assets. Working paper.



                                                                                                                 21
Mandel, Benjamin R. 2009. “Art as an investment and conspicuous consumption good.” American Economic Review,
   99 (4): 1653-1663.

Marks, Denton. 2009. “Who pays brokers’ commissions? Evidence from fine wine auctions.” Oxford Economic
   Papers, 61 (4): 761-775.

Mei, Jianping, and Michael Moses. 2002. “Art as an investment and the underperformance of masterpieces.” American
   Economic Review, 92 (5): 1656-1668.

Mireur, H. 1911-1912. Dictionnaire des ventes d’art faites en France et à l’Etranger pendant les XVIII & XIX siècles.
   Volumes 1-7. Paris: Ch. de Vincenti.

Mühsam, Kurt. 1925. Internationales Lexikon der Preise von Gemälden und Handzeichnungen aller Schulen und
   Länder. Berlin: Erich Reiss Verlag.

Newman, George E., and Paul Bloom. 2012. “Art and authenticity: The importance of originals in judgments of value.”
   Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141 (3): 558-569.

Ohlsson, Henry, Jesper Roine, and Daniel Waldenström. 2008. “Long run changes in the concentration of wealth: An
   overview of recent findings.” In: James B. Davies (ed.), Personal Wealth from a Global Perspective, Oxford:
   Oxford University Press.

Pesando, James. 1993. “Art as an investment: The market for modern prints.” American Economic Review, 83 (5):
   1075-1089.

Pénasse, Julien, Luc Renneboog, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2014. “Sentiment and art prices.” Economics Letters, 70
   (2): 20-25.

Piketty, Thomas. 2013. Le capital au XXIe siècle. Paris: Seuil.

Reitlinger, Gerard. 1961. The Economics of Taste: The Rise and Fall of Picture Prices 1760-1960. London: Barrie
   and Rockliff.

Renneboog, Luc, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2013. “Buying beauty: On prices and returns in the art market.”
   Management Science, 59 (1): 36-53.

Renneboog, Luc, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2014. Investment returns and economic fundamentals in international art
   markets. Working paper.

Renneboog, Luc, and Tom Van Houtte. 2002. “The monetary appreciation of paintings: from realism to Magritte.”
   Cambridge Journal of Economics, 26 (3): 331-358.

Roberts, W. 1897. Memorials of Christie’s: A Record of Art Sales from 1766 to 1896. Volumes 1-2. London: George
   Bell and Sons.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “The economics of superstars.” American Economic Review, 71 (5): 845-858.

Rush, Richard H. 1961. Art as an Investment. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

                                                                                                                  22
Saltzman, Cynthia. 2009. Old Masters, New World: America's Raid on Europe's Great Pictures. New York: Viking
   Penguin.

Scheinkman, José A., and Wei Xiong. 2003. “Overconfidence and speculative bubbles.” Journal of Political Economy,
   111 (6): 1183-1219.

Secrest, Meryle. 2004. Duveen: A Life in Art. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.

Seinstra,     Frank      J.   2014.      A     Web       Catalogue      of     Rembrandt       Paintings.     URL:
   staff.science.uva.nl/~fjseins/RembrandtCatalogue

Shogren, Jason F., and Dermot J. Hayes. 1997. Resolving differences in willingness to pay and willingness to accept:
   Reply. American Economic Review, 87 (1): 241-244.

Smith, John. 1829-1842. A Catalogue Raisonné of the Works of the Most Eminent Dutch, Flemish and French
   Painters. Volumes 1-8 and supplement. London: Smith and Son.

Triplett, Jack. 2004. Handbook on hedonic indexes and quality adjustments in price indexes. OECD Science,
   Technology and Industry Working Papers 2004/9.




                                                                                                                 23
Table 1: Art Auction Records 1701-2014
Table 1 shows the art auctions records identified in this paper. For each record transaction, the table gives the date of
sale, price including buyer’s premium, artist name, title of the work, and location (and auction house, if applicable) of
the sale.
    Date      Price in GBP Artist          Title                                         Auction house, location
 20/04/1701             320 Dou            Interior with woman and child                 Amsterdam
 26/07/1713           1,095 Van Dyck       Rest on the flight into Egypt                 Amsterdam
 07/10/1733           1,105 Van Dyck       Rest on the flight into Egypt                 Rotterdam
 31/07/1771           1,410 Dou            Picture in three wings, forming a triptych    Amsterdam
 19/05/1798           1,522 Rembrandt      The centurion                                 Coxe, Burrell, and Foster, London
 15/11/1804           1,680 Dou            Hermit in a cave                              Paillet and Delaroche, Paris
 06/06/1808           1,750 Dou            The evening class                             Rotterdam
 12/06/1811           5,250 Rembrandt      Shipwright and his wife                       Christie's, London
 19/05/1852         24,600 Murillo         Immaculate conception                         Paris
 07/04/1910         28,250 Hals            An old woman                                  American Art Association, New York
 20/02/1912         29,500 Mantegna        Holy family enthroned                         Lepke's, Berlin
 09/06/1913         44,000 Rembrandt       David and Batsheba                            Galerie Georges Petit, Paris
 06/11/1919         54,600 Romney          The Misses Beckford                           Christie's, London
 28/07/1926         60,900 Romney          Mrs. Davenport                                Christie's, London
 24/11/1926         77,700 Lawrence        Pinkie                                        Hampton's, London
 14/06/1957        104,630 Gauguin         Apples                                        Galerie Charpentier, Paris
 15/10/1958        220,000 Cezanne         Garcon au gilet rouge                         Sotheby's, London
 24/06/1959        275,000 Rubens          The adoration of the magi                     Sotheby's, London
 15/11/1961        817,052 Rembrandt       Aristotle contemplating the bust of Homer     Parke-Bernet, New York
 27/11/1970      2,310,000 Velasquez       Portrait of Juan de Pareja                    Christie's, London
 13/05/1980      2,507,013 Van Gogh        Le jardin du poete, Arles                     Christie's, New York
 29/05/1980      2,997,403 Turner          Juliet and her nurse                          Sotheby's, New York
 03/07/1984      3,564,000 Raphael         Study of a man's head and hand                Christie's, London
 05/07/1984      7,370,000 Turner          Seascape, Folkestone                          Sotheby's, London
 18/04/1985      8,100,000 Mantegna        Adoration of the magi                         Christie's, London
 30/03/1987     24,750,000 Van Gogh        Sunflowers                                    Christie's, London
 11/11/1987     30,280,899 Van Gogh        Irises                                        Sotheby's, New York
 30/11/1989     32,934,977 Picasso         Les noces de Pierrette                        Binoche et Godeau, Paris
 15/05/1990     49,121,762 Van Gogh        Portrait du Dr. Gachet                        Christie's, New York
 10/07/2002     49,506,650 Rubens          Massacre of the innocents                     Sotheby's, London
 05/05/2004     58,223,688 Picasso         Garcon a la pipe                              Sotheby's, New York
 03/02/2010     65,001,250 Giacometti      L'homme qui marche I                          Sotheby's, London
 04/05/2010     70,452,891 Picasso         Nude, green leaves, and bust                  Christie's, New York
 02/05/2012     74,003,394 Munch           The scream                                    Sotheby's, New York
 12/11/2013     89,411,063 Bacon           Three studies of Lucian Freud                 Christie's, New York


                                                                                                                        24
Figure 1: Art Auction Records and the Macro-Economy 1700-2014
The vertical lines in Figure 1 show the timing of art auctions records over the period 1700-2014. Figure 1 also shows the record price level, an aggregate art price index,
and a U.K. equity price index, in deflated GBP terms, against the left axis, and U.K. inflation, the share of wealth held by the top percentile in the U.K., and a measure of
openness to trade, in percentage terms, against the right axis. Data on CPI come from MeasuringWorth.com. The art price index comes from Goetzmann, Renneboog, and
Spaenjers (2011). Data on equities come from Global Financial Data and Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton (2002, 2013). Wealth share data come from Ohlsson, Roine, and
Waldenström (2008) and Piketty (2013). Data on exports, imports, and GDP come from Hills, Thomas, and Dimsdale (2010).




                                                                                                                                                                          25
