                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              AGGREGATE EXTERNAL FINANCING AND SAVINGS WAVES

                                        Andrea L. Eisfeldt
                                           Tyler Muir

                                       Working Paper 20442
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20442


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




Previously circulated as "Aggregate Issuance and Savings Waves." We thank seminar participants
and discussants at Kellogg, UCLA, Yale, Columbia, University of Michigan, Stanford, NYU, the
NBER Corporate Finance Meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Financial Frictions in
Macroeconomics Conference, the UBC Winter Finance Conference, the SED Annual Meeting,
the NBER Capital Markets and the Economy Meeting, the LAEF Advances in Macro-Finance
conference, the AEA Annual Meeting, and the WFA Annual Meeting, for helpful comments.
Eisfeldt gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Fink Center for Finance &
Investments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20442.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate External Financing and Savings Waves
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 20442
September 2014
JEL No. E23,E32,E44,G01,G3,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

US data display aggregate external financing and savings waves. Firms can allocate costly
external finance to productive capital, or to liquid assets with low physical returns. If firms raise
costly external finance and accumulate liquidity, either the cost of external finance is relatively
low, or the total return to liquidity accumulation, including its shadow value as future internal
funds, is particularly high. We formalize this intuition by estimating a dynamic model of firms’
financing and savings decisions, and use our model along with firm level data to construct an
empirical estimate of the average cost of external finance from 1980-2014.


Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu

Tyler Muir
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue, Room 4516
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
tyler.muir@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20442
   US corporate sector data display a strong, positive correlation between aggregate external financing

and savings activity. As a result, we observe aggregate external financing and savings waves in US data

1980-2014. Aggregating all but the very largest firms, the correlation between external finance raised

and liquidity accumulated is a statistically significant 0.57. This high correlation is not due to some

firms raising external finance, and other firms saving. Conditioning on firms that raise external finance,

the aggregate correlation increases to 0.80. We also document that the time series of the percentage of

firms raising external finance, and, more importantly, the time series of the cross-sectional correlation

between external finance and savings, are highly correlated with traditional proxies for the cost of

external finance such as the default spread, index of lending standards, and sentiment index.

   Motivated by the stylized facts we document, we propose and implement a method for using data

on firms’ sources and uses of funds in the cross-section in order to make inferences about the aggregate

level of the cost of external finance. The basic intuition is as follows: Firms which raise costly external

finance can invest the issuance proceeds in productive capital assets, or in liquid financial assets with

a low physical rate of return. If firms raise costly external finance and allocate some of the funds to

liquid assets, either the cost of external finance is relatively low at that time, or the total return to

liquidity accumulation, including its shadow value as future internal funds, is particularly high.

   To formalize this intuition, we construct and estimate a quantitative, dynamic model economy

consisting of a panel of heterogeneous firms in partial equilibrium. Firms have identical risk-neutral

objective functions, and maximize the present value of their net payouts. They are heterogeneous ex-

post due to variation in their idiosyncratic productivity realizations. Firms choose external finance,

investment, and savings as a function of their size, savings balance, and idiosyncratic productivity

shock, and the aggregate level of productivity and of the cost of external finance. We then use

variation in firms’ investment returns and the economy’s implied cross-sectional moments in order

to quantitatively measure variation in the aggregate cost of external finance. In the model, as in

the data, firms typically finance investment with operating cash flows. However, when the cost of

external finance is low, firms in our model raise external finance, invest some of the proceeds, and save

the remainder in liquid assets. As a result, when the aggregate cost of external finance is low, firms

are more likely to both raise external finance, and to accumulate liquid assets. Consistent with this

idea, we show that in the model and in the data, cross-sectional moments describing the incidence of

firms raising external finance, and importantly, the co-incidence of firms raising external finance and



                                                    1
saving the proceeds, are informative about the aggregate level of the cost of external finance. Our

study is aimed at providing an estimate of the aggregate cost of external finance in the US time series

from 1980-2014 based on this intuition. We do so formally using the quantitative implications of our

structurally estimated model.

   We estimate the key parameters of our model using Simulated Method of Moments. We show that

in the model, variation in the aggregate average cost of external finance raised can be almost fully

explained by variation in two key moments describing firms’ financing and savings decisions. These

two moments are the fraction of firms raising external finance, and the cross-sectional correlation be-

tween aggregate net external finance raised and liquidity accumulation, which we call “excess external

finance”. Accordingly, we construct a continuous series for this average cost using a regression based

cost-of-external finance index. Specifically, we compute the index weights by running a time series

regression using model data of the cost of external finance at each date on the cross-sectional mo-

ments describing firms’ external financing and savings decisions on that date. We then use the model

implied weights, along with the empirical moments from Compustat data, to construct an estimate of

the empirical cost of external finance in US data. Figure 1 graphs the resulting series, which exhibits

substantial and intuitively appealing variation over our sample. The implied average cost of external

finance is 2.3% per dollar raised, which is close to existing empirical estimates. Moreover, it has an

economically reasonable standard deviation of 1.6% and an autocorrelation of 0.63, which is close to

that of the Baa-Aaa default spread.

   We discuss the model’s additional implications and conduct robustness checks. In particular,

we provide a formal statistical test our model featuring aggregate shocks to both productivity and

cost of external finance shocks against a nested alternative model with a constant cost of external

finance. The model with constant costs can be rejected statistically, and also performs poorly on

key empirical moments. In fact, the constant cost model at estimated parameters does not generate

aggregate external financing and savings waves. The key distinction between our model and earlier

business cycle models with costly external finance, such as Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and

Moore (1997), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), and Gomes et al. (2003) is the addition of shocks to the

cost of external finance. These shocks break the otherwise tight relationship between TFP and the

demand for external finance, and thereby allow for aggregate issuance and savings waves as well as a

significantly better overall statistical fit.



                                                  2
      1.     Related Literature
      This paper contributes to the growing literature at the intersection of finance and macroeconomics

      which studies the interaction between firm financing, savings, and investment decisions, and the

      macroeconomy. Two recent prominent papers document the cyclical behavior of firm financing. Covas

      and Den Haan (2011), and Jermann and Quadrini (2012) both document that debt issuances are highly

      procyclical, and Covas and Den Haan also report procyclical equity issuance.1 Distinct from existing

      papers, we use both cross-sectional and aggregate information not only about the source of firm

      financing, but also about its uses, to empirically uncover shocks to the cost of external finance.2 We

      argue that looking at the joint dynamics of liquidity accumulation and external finance is useful for

      examining the role of shocks to the cost of external finance, since how firms use funds may help to

      disentangle financing shocks from shocks that drive investment opportunities.

           Several recent papers develop theoretical models which employ a shock which originates in the

      financial sector to better match business cycle facts.3 We extend this line of research by using our model

      to estimate the cost of external finance in the US time series. Thus, our paper is most closely related

      to the important contribution of Jermann and Quadrini (2012), with a few key differences. First,

      Jermann and Quadrini (2012) focus on the distinction between debt vs. equity in their estimation,

      and estimate a debt financing cost shock. Instead, in our model, the key friction occurs between firm

      insiders and outsiders. We abstract from the distinction between debt and equity in order to focus

      on what is new in our paper. Whereas other studies have focused on variation in firms’ sources of

      funds, our study focuses on firms’ uses of the external finance they raise. Jermann and Quadrini

      (2012) estimate a time series for financial shocks using a clever relationship between recovery rates

      and financing needs which allows them to solve for their shocks in closed form. While we cannot solve

      our model for the cost of external finance shock in closed form, we think that the use of cross-sectional

      moments to identify a hidden aggregate state is a complementary methodology to existing methods,
    1
      Choe et al. (1993), and Korajczyk and Levy (2003) also study issuance over the business cycle. Both find that equity
issuance is procyclical. Korajczyk and Levy (2003) report countercyclical debt issuance. Huang and Ritter (2009) provides
evidence that active external financing decisions are driven by the relative cost of equity vs. debt.
    2
      Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) builds an aggregate model of internal and external finance to study the implications of
corporate liquidity demand for the observed low return on liquid assets, but does not consider shocks to the cost of external
finance. Covas and Den Haan (2011) focus on debt and equity issuance, but they do note that, empirically, firms tend to
both accumulate financial assets and invest when they issue external finance.
    3
      For example, Jermann and Quadrini (2012), Covas and Den Haan (2012), Khan and Thomas (2013), and Hugonnier et al.
(forthcoming) build on the seminal contributions of Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Carlstrom
and Fuerst (1997) on the role of financial market conditions on firm investment and business cycle dynamics.



                                                             3
       with other potential uses.4 For example, one could use the information in cross-sectional moments

       describing consumer decisions in order to uncover aggregate household financial constraints.

            Despite renewed interest, the fact that financial constraints, or shocks originating in the financial

       sector, are important for either firm level investment, or business cycle dynamics, is still not a foregone

       conclusion amongst economists. Gomes et al. (2003) point out that the shadow cost of external finance

       is procyclical in a standard business cycle model with agency costs of external finance and no financial

       shocks.5 Our study contributes to our understanding of the role of financial frictions by formally

       statistically testing a nested alternative without time varying frictions.

            Our paper also builds on papers which develop models of corporate saving.6 The main difference

       is in focus; these papers are focused on understanding firm level dynamics or making inferences about

       firm level of financial constraints. In contrast, our paper, which is focused on understanding the

       dynamics and the effects of the aggregate component of the cost of external finance connects ideas

       from this corporate finance literature to the macroeconomic literature which studies business cycles

       with financial frictions.

       2.     Stylized Facts
       Our main data set consists of annual firm level data from Compustat covering 1980-2014. Our sample

       selection follows that in Covas and Den Haan (2011). The Online Appendix gives a detailed description

       of the sources and construction of our data, as well as a discussion of alternative definitions and

       normalizations.7 We use firm level cash flow statements to track corporate flows. We define net

       external finance raised as the negative of the sum of net flows to debt and net flows to equity. We

       define flows to debt as debt reduction plus changes in current debt plus interest paid, less debt

       issuances, and flows to equity as purchases of common stock plus dividends less sale of common stock.

       We define liquidity accumulation as changes in cash and cash equivalents. We define investment (in
   4
     Building on our work, Belo et al. (2014) use a closely related measure that exploits the cross-section of firm policies to
study the asset pricing implications of a model of costly external finance.
   5
      Chari et al. (2007) use business cycle accounting to argue that shocks to the return on capital, are only of tertiary
importance for explaining US fluctuations. However, papers such as Justiniano et al. (2010), Christiano et al. (2010), Hall
(2011), Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones (2012), and Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012b), find that financial shocks explain a large
fraction of business cycle fluctuations. Baker and Wurgler (2002) attributes rare capital structure changes to firms market
timing the variation in the external finance, and Zhang (2013) studies the role of external finance in firm entry and exit.
   6
     See, for example, Kim et al. (1998), Gamba and Triantis (2008), Almeida et al. (2004), Riddick and Whited (2009),
Bolton et al. (2011), and Bolton et al. (2013). Warusawitharana and Whited (2015) is a contemporaneous paper focused on
the effect of equity misvaluation on firm level policies.
   7
     We show that our results are robust to excluding employee stock issuances. We also show there that using Flow of Funds
data to construct aggregate external financing and savings moments yields similar results, leading to an aggretate correlation
of external finance and savings of 0.55.


                                                              4
       physical capital) as capital expenditures. To compute most aggregate and firm level moments, we

       normalize firm level variables by current total book assets. To compute aggregate correlations, we

       instead normalize by the lag of book assets, to avoid inducing spurious correlations.8 We use the

       Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter to remove any remaining low frequency trends when computing

       aggregate correlations, since, for example, cash holdings have trended upwards as a share of assets

       over our sample (see Bates et al. (2009)). The HP filter ensures that the empirical series are stationary,

       consistent with the stationary business cycle model we study, and with our focus on the business cycle

       dynamics of the cost of external finance.

          As in Covas and Den Haan (2011), our main analysis drops the top 10% of firms by asset size.

       There are several reasons to do this. First, as Covas and Den Haan (2011) point out, the timing of

       external finance for the largest firms is not representative of the rest of the sample. They advocate

       dropping the top firms because they behave anomalously. This may be because the very largest firms

       face little or no financial constraints.9 Moreover, the very largest firms present unique measurement

       problems. A significant fraction of the investment for these firms falls under the accounting category

       “other investments”, which are typically comprised by long term receivables from unconsolidated

       subsidiaries. Thus, we are not able to identify accumulated liquidity vs. physical investment. Cash

       accumulation for large firms, which have larger foreign earnings, is also more influenced by tax motives

       and repatriation timing. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we note that our stationary model can

       replicate the pattern across size categories for the correlation between external finance and liquidity

       accumulation. However, the distribution of firm sizes is much less skewed than that in the data.10

       Accordingly, we show that weighting Compustat data by the distribution of firm sizes in our model

       reduces the impact of the largest firms in a way that is similar to removing the largest firms. However,

       restricting the sample imposes a less structural restriction and matches with the prior literature.

          US data from 1980 to 2014 display aggregate external financing and savings waves. Figure 2

       plots the cyclical component of aggregate net liquidity accumulation vs. the cyclical component of

       aggregate net external finance and clearly illustrates this stylized fact. Table 1 presents corresponding

       correlations for different groups of firms. For all but the largest 10% of Compustat firms, the aggregate

       correlation between liquidity accumulation and external finance is 0.57 and is statistically significant at
   8
     Book assets are slow moving and fairly acyclical and thus shouldn’t induce any cyclical variation, however our results
are robust to alternative normalizations, such as aggregate output or aggregate gross-value added from the corporate sector.
   9
     See Eberly et al. (2012).
  10
     The bottom panel of Table 3 displays this correlation in the model and Compustat data across size bins.


                                                             5
       the 5% level.11 When one includes the largest firms, the correlation drops to 0.08 because, empirically,

       large firms’ size implies weights much larger than those in the model. Accordingly, the equally weighted

       correlation is 0.50, and weighting by our model’s size distribution the correlation is 0.52.

            The aggregate correlation is higher (0.80) if one conditions on firms that are currently raising

       external finance. Thus, the positive aggregate correlation does not seem to be driven by some firms

       saving, and other firms issuing external finance, nor is it driven by the behavior of payouts.12 The

       aggregate correlation is also higher when one excludes more of the largest firms. For the smallest half

       of firms, the correlation between aggregate external finance raised and liquidity accumulated is 0.82.

       This is higher than the correlation conditioning on other measures of financial constraints, such as

       whether a firm pays no dividends, or has no credit rating, in which case we find correlations close

       to that for the larger sample (0.58 and 0.56 respectively). This could be due to the importance of

       fixed costs in accessing external financial markets, or it could be that size is simply a better proxy for

       financial constraints.

            The first column in Table 3 presents additional aggregate moments for comparison. We note in

       particular that savings are more correlated with external finance than investment is. By contrast,

       investment is more correlated with GDP than savings are. We argue that this is indicative of the fact

       that information about firms’ uses of funds, and in particular firms’ external financing and savings

       activity, can help to disentangle shocks to the cost of external finance from TFP shocks.

       3.     Model
       A.     Model Description:
       We study a continuum of risk neutral firms in partial equilibrium. To model firm behavior, we use

       a parsimonious version of the model featured in Hennessy and Whited (2005), Hennessy and Whited

       (2007), and Riddick and Whited (2009), which is based on the important early structural contribution

       by Gomes (2001). All firms have access to the same production and financing technologies, and are

       subject to common aggregate shocks. However, firms experience different idiosyncratic productivity

       realizations and as a result choose heterogeneous stocks for their physical capital and liquid assets.

       Thus, we study a panel of heterogeneous firms which experience both idiosyncratic and aggregate

       shocks. We begin by describing the model, and the implied investment returns, and then turn to its
  11
      This result robust to alternative measures of external finance that remove employee stock options from gross equity
issuance.
   12
      See the Online Appendix for the analogous correlations for debt and equity separately.



                                                           6
estimation and policy function analysis.

   Firms produce output or cash flows using physical capital k according to:


                                                    y = zk θ


where z is the level of the firm’s productivity and θ ∈ (0, 1). Each firm’s productivity z is the product

of an idiosyncratic shock zi , and an aggregate shock zagg . The aggregate productivity level, and each

idiosyncratic productivity level, follow AR(1) processes in logs with identical persistence parameters,

however, we allow for the idiosyncratic and aggregate processes to have different volatilities. These

assumptions allow us to construct each firm’s productivity shock z = zi zagg as follows:

                                         ln(zi′ ) = ρ ln(zi ) + ǫ′i                                       (1)
                                         ′
                                     ln(zagg ) = ρ ln(zagg ) + ǫ′agg                                      (2)

                                         ln(z ′ ) = ρ ln(z) + ǫ′i + ǫ′agg .                               (3)


Both ǫ shocks are normally distributed with zero mean and standard deviations given by σ i and σ agg ,

respectively. Capital evolves according to the standard law of motion k ′ = (1 − δ)k + ik , where ik is

investment and δ ∈ (0, 1) is the depreciation rate. Investment in physical capital is subject to convex

adjustment costs φi (ik , k) given by:

                                                                     2
                                                         a       ik
                                           φi (ik , k) =                   k.                             (4)
                                                         2       k


where a determines the slope of the marginal adjustment cost. Liquid assets l evolve according to

l′ = (l + il )(1 + r(1 − τ )) where il is investment in liquid assets and r is the risk free rate. Thus, taken

literally, corporate payouts are motivated by the tax wedge, τ > 0. However, because actual payout

policy is also driven by agency and information considerations, τ is effectively a stand-in for all of

these payout motivations.

   Because financing costs will be paid only if payouts gross of financing costs are negative, it is

convenient to define a firm’s pre-financing payout e as internal cash flows minus investment in physical

capital and liquidity accumulation, less investment adjustment costs:


                                    e ≡ zk θ (1 − τ ) − il − ik − φi (ik , k).                            (5)



                                                        7
       If e > 0 the firm is paying out funds and if e < 0 the firm is raising external finance. Intuitively,

       the firm raises external finance if after tax operating profits do not cover the firms’ total investment

       in physical and liquid assets, net of physical adjustment costs. Firms maximize this payout, net of

       financing costs. Following Gomes (2001), and in order to facilitate estimation, we parameterize the

       cost of external finance exogenously as follows:


                                                                         ξ
                                              φe (e, ξ) =   {e<0} (λ1   + λ2 e2 ),                                 (6)
                                                                         2


       where λ1 , λ2 > 0,   {e<0}   is an indicator that takes the value 1 when e < 0 and 0 otherwise, and ξ > 0

       denotes the aggregate level of external financing costs. Note that even though the shock ξ only affects

       the marginal cost of external finance, it will affect firms’ propensity to pay the fixed cost because

       a high marginal cost lowers the value of paying the fixed cost. See Figure 3 in Gomes (2001) for a

       discussion of interpreting fixed and variable costs in the context of microfounded financing costs. Our

       preferred specification, in which only the marginal cost varies with the ξ shock is, perhaps, closest to

       what is implied by existing models of the microfoundations of time varying costs of external finance,

       although no exogenous specification captures the endogenous effects in these models perfectly.13 We

       discuss and compare results for alternative, more complex, specifications in Section 4.B., and find a

       very high degree of robustness across specifications. The aggregate state of external financing costs,

       ξ, follows an AR(1) in logs.

                                                  ln(ξ ′ ) = c + γ ln(ξ) + η ′                                     (7)


       where η ′ is a normal i.i.d. shock with mean zero and standard deviation σ η . We choose the value c so

       that ξ, is on average equal to one. The average level of the marginal cost of external finance is then

       given by λ2 .

          We denote the firm’s value function by V and write the firm’s problem in recursive form, using the

       constraints and laws of motion given in equations (1)-(7). Each firm’s state is given by its size, k, its

       liquid asset balance, l, its productivity z (the product of an aggregate and idiosyncratic shock), and

       the aggregate level of the marginal cost of external finance, ξ. We define s ≡ {k, l, z, ξ} to summarize

       an individual firm’s state vector. We use the standard “prime” notation to denote next period values
  13
    Microfoundations of a time varying marginal cost include agency frictions that vary over time, along the lines of Bernanke
and Gertler (1989) and Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), collateral constraints which vary with asset values as in Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997), and endogenously time varying adverse selection problems as in Eisfeldt (2004), Kurlat (2013), and Bigio
(2015). Note that bankruptcy costs would also make firms averse to low payout states.


                                                               8
for the state, and a subscript s to denote expectations conditional on the current state.

     Each firm then solves the Bellman Equation:

                                                                                                           
                                                                   ξ           1
                                                    e − {e<0} (λ1 + λ2 e2 ) +     Es V (s′ )
                                                                                            
              V (s) =           max                                                                                              (8)
                          k′ ∈[0,∞),l′ ∈[0,∞)                      2          1+r


        subject to:
                                                                                                                      2
                                        l′                                                           k ′ − (1 − δ)k
                                                                                                 
                                                                        a
                  e = (1 − τ )zk −    θ
                                                 + l − k ′ + (1 − δ)k −                                                    k.
                                   1 + (1 − τ )r                        2                                   k


B.     Firm Policies
In our partial equilibrium dynamic model, firms adjust their policy functions for investment and

liquidity accumulation, and the implied policy for external finance (or payouts), in order to set the

marginal returns to investment and liquidity accumulation, and the marginal cost of external finance,

equal to the gross interest rate. We provide an analytical solution to a simple two-date model in the

Online Appendix, to provide additional intuition for our dynamic model.

     For the dynamic model, we provide analytical intuition by extending the production returns from

Cochrane (1991) and Cochrane (1996) to include the effects of financial constraints, closely following

Gomes et al. (2003) and Gomes et al. (2006), while also adding stochastic financing costs. We addi-

tionally account for firms’ investment in more than one asset type, in order to provide intuition for

our use of excess external finance as a measure of financing costs. Details on computing the returns

are collected in the Online Appendix.

     The Euler equations which set the discounted expected return on investment in physical capital

and liquid assets equal to the value of a dollar payout today are, respectively:
                                                                                                           
                                                                               ai′          ′
                                                                                         1 ik
                       !
                         1 + ψ ′e             θ(1 − τ )z ′ k ′θ−1 + (1 − δ) + k′k               + (1 − δ)
                                  
                                                                                         2 k′
           1 + r = Es                                                                                         and            (9)
                        (1 + ψ e )                                     1 + aikk


                                                      1 + ψ ′e + ψ l
                                                                                         
                                1 + r = Es                             (1 + (1 − τ )r) .                                        (10)
                                                        1 + ψe

where ψ e and ψ l account for financing costs and the binding non-negativity constraint on liquidity

accumulation, respectively. These Euler equations highlight how the costs of external finance changes

the firm’s discounting, and capture the variation in the shadow value of internal funds over time.



                                                                9
Moreover, by comparing the two equations it is clear that financing costs can be quantitatively very

important for liquidity accumulation, since the productivity shocks enter only indirectly, whereas the

ξ shocks affect liquidity accumulation directly through ψ e .

   Next, we describe the policy functions graphically, using the numerical solution to the model at

estimated parameters, in order to provide intuition for our results and to describe firms’ decisions.

Section 4.A. describes the model estimation and the parameters used, but results for policy functions

are similar for a wide range of parameter values. Firms construct policies as a function of their four

state variables: size k, liquid assets il , productivity z and external finance cost level ξ. In the Online

Appendix we present complete graphs of the policy functions as a function of the state variables. In

Figure 4, we condition on the state for the level of the cost of external finance (left panel is low cost,

right panel is high cost), and graph policies as a function of either productivity, z, or size k. Thus, to

present firm policies in two dimensions, we average over the other state variables, and this eliminates

some of the heterogeneity which leads to the variation in the cross-section we exploit empirically. It

is important to keep this averaging in mind, for example when interpreting the levels of the variables

plotted in Figure 4. However, the main intuition can be illustrated in two dimensions, which are easier

to view.

   The top panel of Figure 4 plots the percentage of firms raising external finance as a function of

firm level productivity from low to high across the six model states, averaging in each state over

size and liquid assets. In both the low external finance cost state (left panel) and high external

finance cost state (right panel), the fraction of firms raising external finance exhibits a hump-shaped

pattern in productivity. The intuition is as follows. Low productivity firms have poor investment

opportunities, both currently and likely in the near future due to persistent productivity, so they

do not need additional sources of funds. By contrast, high productivity firms potentially have good

current and future investment opportunities, however they will also tend to have abundant internal

funds from high operating cash flows and are likely to be large and therefore experiencing greater

decreasing returns to scale. Medium productivity firms, depending on their histories, can be growing

and can thus have good investment opportunities relative to their supply of internal funds. In fact

the “high medium productivity” firms are the most likely to raise external finance, and, as can be

seen by comparing the left and right panels, medium productivity firms’ decisions to raise external

finance are also the most sensitive to the cost of external finance. The variation in the marginal



                                                    10
       cost of external finance as ξ varies has the most important effect on the value of paying the fixed

       cost of raising funds for these firms. Moreover, these firms are important in the economy in terms of

       probability mass. Because productivity shocks are normally distributed, most firm year observations

       will have realizations near the mean level.

          Comparing the left hand panel to the right hand panel illustrates why %raise serves as a useful

       proxy for the level of the cost of external finance, since the area under the curve in the left panel

       is clearly larger than that in the right panel. When the cost of external finance is low, the cutoff

       productivity above which firms raise external finance is lower than when the cost of external finance

       is high, leading to a larger fraction of firms raising. We note that while the decision to raise external

       finance exhibits important variation with productivity, as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 4,

       most of the variation in productivity in our model, as well as in the data, comes from idiosyncratic,

       firm level shocks rather than aggregate fluctuations in TFP. That said, the cross-sectional moment

       describing %raise is positively correlated with aggregate TFP to a similar extent in both the model

       and the data, as we will show and discuss below. Higher aggregate TFP, all else equal, implies that

       firm level TFP will be above average and hence more firms will raise external finance. However, in the

       model and in the data, and consistent with the top panel of Figure 4, %raise is even more positively

       correlated with the aggregate state for the level of the cost of external finance.

          The middle panel of Figure 4 graphs liquidity accumulation and net external finance (−e), also

       as a function of firm level productivity.14 The policies for the level of net external finance raised

       illustrate two things: First, −e is negative on average meaning that firms in the model, as in the

       data, are on average making payouts. However, as the top panel of Figure 4 shows, the average masks

       important heterogeneity and many firms do raise funds. Second, the shape for the amount of net

       external finance raised in the middle panel mimics that for %raise in the top panel, and has the same

       intuition. Comparing the left and right panels shows that the average net external finance raised is

       higher when the cost of external finance is low. This shift arises due to an increase in external finance

       raised rather than a reduction in payouts, since payouts fall, all else equal, in the high cost state when

       funds are worth more internally than in the low cost state. The policy for liquidity accumulation

       shows that on average, firms tend to invest in physical capital, with its higher rate of return, although

       the averages again mask individual variation. However, when the cost of external finance is low,
  14
    A plot of only external financed raised that does not include payouts looks similar in shape but is shifted upwards. We
choose to plot the net measure as this variable is most comparable to the main moments we analyze in the data.



                                                            11
high-medium productivity firms raise external finance, and on average save some of the proceeds in

liquid assets. These medium productivity firms are also important in terms of their contribution to

the overall distribution of firms. Finally, we note that in the low cost of external finance state, the

cross-sectional pattern across all productivity states for external finance and liquidity accumulation

mimic each other closely. In contrast, in the right panel this correlation is low. This tight relationship

is why ρxs
        il ,e serves as a sharp proxy for the cost of external finance.

   The bottom panel of Figure 4 plots investment for high and low productivity firms, defined as

having above and below the average level of productivity at each date, as a function of firm size for

the two external finance cost states. Comparing the left and right panels, high productivity firms

always invest more than low productivity firms so that the red line is positive, but this difference is

larger when the cost of external finance is low and investment is relatively unconstrained. Intuitively,

if costs of external finance were zero, there would be no wedge between the shadow values of internal

and external funds, so investment would be determined only by the marginal product of capital. In

this case differences in investment would be large as productivity varied. In contrast, the more costly

external finance is, the more constrained investment will be for high productivity firms and this will

tend to narrow the difference in investment. In particular, smaller firms with high marginal products

of capital invest up to twice as much in the low cost of external finance state relative to the high

cost state. These results motivate an additional test of our model and our method for identifying the

hidden cost of external finance state. The model makes the prediction that the difference in differences

in investment will be both positive on average and the effect will be largest for smaller firms who tend

to have a higher marginal product of capital. Both of these results are supported in the data, as

we show in the Online Appendix. Thus, our model explains why investment dispersion increases as

financing costs decrease.

   The intuition in our model for why firms’ use of the external finance they raise provides information

about the cost of those funds is as follows: The marginal benefit of investing in physical capital is

high at low levels, but decreases with the level of investment. Liquidity accumulation displays less

decreasing returns to scale, but has a marginal benefit that is on average lower than the marginal

benefit of investment in physical capital. As a result, firms will only invest in liquid assets once they

have invested enough in physical capital to push the marginal return below that on liquid assets, but

will typically invest a positive amount in physical capital. Importantly, the lower the cost of external



                                                    12
       finance is, the more likely it is that the marginal return to physical capital investment will be pushed

       down to the marginal return to cash because a lower cost of funds increases investment. This is simple

       to show analytically in the simple, two-date model in the Online Appendix, and the dynamic intuition

       is similar. In our dynamic model, physical capital investment has decreasing marginal returns due

       to both decreasing returns to scale, as well as to convex adjustment costs. The physical return to

       liquid assets is fixed at a rate lower than the discount rate, and thus positive liquidity accumulation

       only arises when the total return is endogenously pushed above the discount rate due to the benefit

       of liquid assets’ use as future internal funds for investment.

       4.     Estimation and Results
       A.     Estimation
       We simultaneously estimate as many of the key structural parameters of the model we found to be

       computationally feasible using Simulated Method of Moments (SMM). The remainder of parameters

       are either estimated independently, or specified based on estimates from the literature. SMM esti-

       mation, like the Generalized Method of Moments, estimates parameters by choosing values which

       minimize the weighted sum of squared errors between model moments and their empirical counter-

       parts.15 SMM is well suited to a model like ours which features substantial non-linearities and for

       which moments cannot be solved in closed form.

            Table 2 displays our estimated and calibrated parameters. We set the risk free rate to four percent

       as in the real business cycle (RBC) literature.16 We also use a standard RBC value for depreciation,

       8%. We note that 8% also matches the average rate of investment we observe in the Compustat data,

       and can thus be thought of as having been estimated independently. For the production function

       curvature parameter, we specify 0.65, which is consistent with the estimate in Cooper and Haltiwanger

       (2006). We found that higher curvature parameters, i.e. production functions closer to linear, imply

       too large investment volatilities and disinvestment frequencies. We calibrate the persistence of both

       idiosyncratic and aggregate productivity shocks to be 0.66, which allows us to consolidate idiosyncratic

       and aggregate productivity into a single state variable. Khan and Thomas (2008), page 407, contains

       a detailed discussion of the disagreement in the literature about this parameter, however based on our
  15
    See Lee and Ingram (1991), Hansen (1982), and Hansen and Singleton (1982).
  16
    The Online Appendix provides robustness checks for alternative values of the risk free rate and discusses having a
stochastic interest rate. We find that our main results are not substantially affected for values of the risk free rate between
2-6%, with the biggest effect being larger average cash balances for lower levels of the risk free rate.




                                                              13
reading 0.66 is a modal value from prior studies. Moreover, we also estimated the average industry

level persistence in the data from Basu et al. (2006) to be 0.65. Similarly, we estimate an aggregate

persistence of about 0.62, using two trend breaks as advocated in Fernald (2007) and using the data

from Fernald (2014). We set the total volatility of firm level productivity equal to the firm level

estimate from Hennessy and Whited (2007), which is also near the value used by Khan and Thomas

(2013). We then specify that aggregate volatility is about one fourth of total volatility as in Khan

and Thomas (2008) and Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). There are six productivity states, which

govern both idiosyncratic and aggregate productivity, and two aggregate states for ξ. We assume that

the stochastic cost is uncorrelated with the aggregate productivity shock, an assumption consistent

with our empirical estimates. The empirical correlation between innovations in the default spread and

TFP shocks is -0.2 and is not statistically significantly different from zero. Similarly, the empirical

correlation between innovations to the expected default adjusted excess bond spread from Gilchrist

and Zakrajsek (2012a) and TFP shocks is -0.1 and is again not statistically significantly different from

zero. This is not so surprising considering that financial markets and real activity are not highly

correlated in general. Moreover, because lower financing costs result in more efficient allocations,

the cost and TFP shocks do not have to be correlated for financing costs to be correlated with real

activity, a fact also highlighted in Khan and Thomas (2013). Finally, we set τ , the tax rate to 10%. In

our model, liquid assets are only accumulated in order to ultimately hedge investment opportunities

in physical capital. Moreover, firms can simply over-accumulate physical capital and hedge via the

additional cash flows that capital produces. Thus, if the tax rate is too high, liquidity can become

a dominated asset, in particular in the nested model we describe below in which the cost of external

finance is constant. Furthermore, in our model, and others like it, the only force for payouts is the

tax wedge, whereas in practice monitoring and information considerations will also influence payout

policies. Taking into account these considerations, we choose a rate of 10%, which leads to positive

liquidity accumulation in both the full and restricted models we estimate.

   Given these calibrated parameters, we estimate the remaining, key, parameters simultaneously

using SMM. Specifically, we estimate: the fixed cost of raising external finance λ1 , the quadratic cost

λ2 , the persistence of the stochastic cost γ, the volatility of the cost shocks σ η , and the marginal

investment adjustment cost parameter a, via Simulated Method of Moments (SMM). The SMM algo-

rithm solves the model and constructs data for a large set of parameter combinations, and efficiently



                                                  14
       searches for the set of parameters which imply moments with the lowest weighted sum of squared er-

       rors relative to their empirical counterparts. We use a bootstrapping technique to construct standard

       errors by computing the distributions over the estimates which result from estimating the parameters

       on samples of limited size.

          We use the following seven moments to estimate the vector of parameters b: the pairwise cor-

       relations and the volatilities of investment, liquid asset accumulation, and external finance, and the

       average level of liquid assets to total assets. We target these correlations because our main focus

       is the co-movement between corporate external financing, savings and investment. Targeting both

       correlations and volatilities also implies that co-variances will be close to their empirical counterparts.

          Identification of our estimation parameters requires that the moments respond to changes in pa-

       rameter values. In the Online Appendix, we discuss which moments are primarily affected by which

       parameters by performing comparative statics on the model moments for changes in each of the es-

       timated parameters. We find that the fixed cost of external finance is important in matching the

       level of cash holdings, and the quadratic cost is helpful in matching the volatility of external finance.

       The persistence and volatility of the stochastic cost help to match the correlations between liquidity

       accumulation and external finance as well as between investment and external finance. Without the

       stochastic cost, the correlation between external finance and investment is very large for any rea-

       sonable parameter values because firms only raise external finance when there are good productivity

       shocks and hence good investment opportunities. The stochastic cost breaks this high correlation and

       simultaneously generates the strong correlation between external finance and liquid assets through

       market timing by firms.

          We report the empirical moments and their counterparts in model data at estimated parameter

       values in Table 3. We also report a large number of additional moments which our estimation procedure

       was not explicitly targeted to match. We report parameter estimates and standard errors in the middle

       panel of Table 2. The standard errors show that all parameter values are significant. Intuitively, the

       fairly small standard errors mean that the moments chosen are highly sensitive to changes in parameter

       values, so that the moments could not easily be generated by significantly different parameter values.

       Our estimation implies an average percentage external financing cost of 2.3%, which is well within

       empirical estimates.17 Our estimated parameters support an important role for the fixed cost of
  17
   For example, Asquith and Mullins (1986) find that abnormal stock returns around secondary equity offerings are about
3% and Hennessy and Whited (2007) estimate that firms face an external financing cost of 8.3% on the first million dollars



                                                           15
      raising external funds. The importance of a fixed financing cost is consistent with the evidence

      regarding the importance of the variation in the extensive margin of external finance over the business

      cycle presented in Figure 3.18 Finally, we find an average investment adjustment cost paid of 1.4%

      per dollar of investment.

         We estimate the volatility of the ξ shock to be around 2. Recall that, given this volatility, we
                                                2
                                                   
      choose the mean of the ξ shock (exp µ − σ2 ) to generate an average credit shock of one. This is

      without loss of generality, but makes the cost parameter λ2 more easily interpretable as the average

      marginal cost, and enables comparison to estimates in prior work. We estimate the persistence of the

      stochastic cost to be 0.22. The annual persistence of the Baa-Aaa default spread and innovations to

      the expected default adjusted excess bond spread from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012a), not targeted

      in our estimation, are 0.4 and 0.35, respectively.

      B.     Results
      Table 3 presents a comparison of aggregate external financing, savings, and investment moments in the

      data and in the model. We report firm level moments in the model and data in the Online Appendix.

      The top panel presents a comparison of the moments targeted in the estimation. The model generates

      a strong, positive correlation between liquidity accumulation and external finance, with an implied

      correlation of 0.70, similar to the empirical correlation of 0.57. Moreover, the correlation between

      liquidity accumulation and external finance is higher, as it is in the data, when one conditions on

      firms raising external finance. The model also does fairly well on matching the other cross correlations,

      however it overshoots on the correlation between external finance and investment. This is because the

      only ultimate use for funds is for investment. Still, we note that the ranking of the cross-correlations

      matches the empirical one. Finally, the estimated model produces realistic levels of volatility for

      investment, savings, and external finance, though the volatility of investment is slightly higher than

      in the data. The model undershoots on average liquidity accumulation, a moment which does not

      receive a high weight in the estimation since it is a mean, whereas the other moments are related to

      variances. In general, because we use the efficient weighting matrix in our estimation, the weights

      are based on the statistical precision with which the empirical moments are estimated. These weights
raised.
  18
     Bazdresch (2013) and Cummins and Nyman (2004) both emphasize importance of lumpy external finance, and provide
complementary evidence to ours regarding the importance of fixed external financing costs. Finally, strong empirical evidence
for the important role of fixed financing costs is also provided by Welch (2004) and Leary and Roberts (2005), which document
a very high level of persistence in corporate capital structures, and emphasize rare active capital structure changes, although
Baker and Wurgler (2002) attribute such rare changes to market timing.


                                                              16
       assist in a good statistical fit of the model overall.

          The bottom four panels of Table 3 present a comparison of the estimated model’s implied mo-

       ments relative to their empirical counterparts for thirteen additional aggregate moments. Considering

       that none of these additional moments were targeted in the estimation, the model does a good job

       of matching them. In particular, the model matches the empirical autocorrelation of aggregate in-

       vestment of 0.40, with an implied estimate of 0.34. This autocorrelation is sensitive to the convex

       adjustment cost parameter, and the match between these moments supports the ability of our model

       to match the persistence of aggregate investment. In the model, as in the data, the correlation of

       liquidity accumulation and external finance increases when we condition only on firms raising ex-

       ternal finance, highlighting that the correlation isn’t driven by some firms saving while others are

       raising. Investment and liquidity accumulation also become more correlated when conditioning on

       raising firms. The model generates business cycle correlations which match the ranking from Compu-

       stat data: investment tracks the business cycle most closely, followed by external finance, and then

       liquidity accumulation. The magnitudes of the correlations are, not surprisingly, higher in the model

       as it features only two shocks. Importantly, the model also generates the observed, highly positive,

       correlations between ξ, excess external finance ρxs
                                                        il ,e , and the percentage of firms raising external fi-

       nance. As illustrated by the firm policy functions in Figure 4, only when the cost of external finance

       is low do firms find it optimal to issue costly external finance and save the proceeds. We also note

       that the correlation between TFP and these cross-sectional moments describing financing and savings

       by firms are lower than the correlations with ξ, as is true empirically. When computing TFP in the

       model, we estimate TFP with a log linear production function, treating financial and investment costs

       as deadweight costs, which matches the empirical estimation of TFP used in the data. In the model,

       the correlation between ρxs
                                il ,e and TFP is slightly positive due to the positive effect of better resource

       allocation when ξ is low.

          As discussed above, we present results for several richer alternative specifications of the cost of

       external finance in Table 4, including those with a stochastic fixed cost, a linear financing cost, and a

       stochastic discount factor which is correlated with TFP and financing shocks.19
  19
    Additional results appear in the Online Appendix. In particular, we show that changing the firm’s discounting to
account for systematic risk reduces the required volatility and magnitude of ξ, without significantly altering other results.
This supports our partial equilibrium approach.




                                                             17
5.     Estimating The Cost of External Finance
In this section, we use the relationship in the model between financing and savings activity in the

cross-section, and the aggregate cost of external finance, to estimate the average cost of external

finance per dollar raised in the US time series 1980-2014. Specifically, we construct an aggregate cost

of external finance index in the model, in which the cost at each date is predicted to be a weighted

average of cross-sectional moments describing firms’ external financing and savings on that date. We

then use the coefficients from this index, along with the empirical cross-sectional moments at each

date, to construct our estimates for the US time series. When the cost of external finance is low,

firms are both more likely to raise external finance, and also to have large, positive, deviations from

the average amount that they raise and the amount that they save. Figure 4 shows these changes in

policy functions in the dynamic model as a function of the aggregate cost. Thus, we use the following

two main cross-sectional moments to estimate the aggregate cost of external finance at each date:

the fraction of firms raising external finance, and the cross-sectional correlation between liquidity

accumulation and external finance. These two moments capture the extensive margin of the external

financing decision, and the intensive margin of what firms do with the finance they raise. Accordingly,

in our model, they are able to explain about ninety-four percent of the variation in the cost of external

finance. As can be seen by comparing Figures 2 and 3, other moments such as the aggregate amount

of finance raised, and liquidity accumulated, contain similar information to these moments but do not

add to the variation explained once controlling for them.

     In the model, we can express the average cost of a unit of external finance per dollar raised as
E[φe (e,ξ)]
E[e|e<0] .    This is the average cost of external finance paid across firms at any given date, divided

by the average amount raised. We compute this expression at each point in time in the model. The

statistical properties of this series appear in Table 5. The average cost appears to have quite reasonable

properties, with an average value of 2.3%, a standard deviation of 1.6%, and an autocorrelation of

0.63. Similarly, the average marginal cost is 0.9% with a standard deviation of 0.8%. We use the

average cost of a unit of external finance per dollar raised series as the dependent variable in the

following time series regression estimated on model data:


                               E[φe (e, ξ)]
                                            = α + β 1 %raiset + β 2 ρxs
                                                                     il ,e,t + εt ,
                               E[e|e < 0] t




                                                       18
where we normalize the independent variables, %raiset and ρxs
                                                           il ,e,t , to have mean zero and unit standard

deviation. We report the regression results in Table 5. We find that both of the coefficients, β 1 , β 2 are

negative, as expected. The coefficient on ρxs
                                           il ,e,t is -1.3% in magnitude. This implies that a standard

deviation increase in ρxs
                       il ,e,t is associated with a 1% decrease in the average cost paid per dollar raised.

The coefficient on %raiset is smaller at -0.3%. The constant term, α, is 2.3% and represents the

average cost of external finance paid per dollar raised in the model. Thus, each of these two cross-

sectional moments is economically important for explaining variation in external financing costs in

the model data. Moreover, the R2 in this regression is around 94%, and thus just these two variables

alone do a very good job explaining variation in the cost paid by firms in the model economy. In

Table 5, we also document that these variables also effectively capture variation in ξ t , the stochastic

cost of external finance “level” shock series, in the model.

   We then apply the estimated regression coefficients, α̂, β̂ 1 , β̂ 2 , to the analogous empirical moments

to form a time series of estimates of the cost of external finance paid per dollar raised for each year from

1980 to 2014. We plot this series in the top panel of Figure 1. Our estimated cost of external finance

series has very intuitively appealing properties. The estimated cost is high in the deep recession of

the early 1980’s, the early 1990’s credit crunch and Savings and Loan Crisis, around the 2001 dot com

stock market crash and recession, and in the recent financial crisis and Great Recession. Moreover,

each spike in this cost is associated with a recession. Economically, the cost per dollar raised varies

from essentially zero in the mid to late 1990’s, up to over 4% during the recent financial crisis. This

is a full 75% larger than the overall average cost of 2.3%. This value seems economically large too,

considering the impact of the implied average 170 basis point increase on the required return for a firm

debating whether to take on an investment project for which it must raise external finance. Note that

the variation in our estimated cost is strongly robust to the alternative cost specifications discussed

above. The last row of Table 4 shows that our estimated cost series is highly correlated (0.96-0.99)

across all alternative specifications that feature a stochastic external financing cost.

   Table 6 gives correlations of our estimated cost with three proxies for the cost of external finance:

the default spread, the index of lending standards, and the consumer sentiment survey. The default

spread provides a market based measure of debt financing costs, while the index of lending standards

picks up a measure of banks’ willingness to lend, and the sentiment index is interesting if one thinks

the cost is potentially driven by mispricing. We find that our estimated cost has a correlation of 0.66



                                                    19
with the default spread, 0.48 with the index of tightening lending standards, 0.69 with sentiment, and

0.71 with an equal weighted average of the three (the average is taken after standardizing each series

to have zero mean and unit variance). Thus the estimated cost clearly picks up important common

variation in these measures. Finally, it is worth noting that the estimated cost is typically more

correlated with these variables than either %raiset or ρxs
                                                        il ,e,t alone, meaning that, consistent with the

model, combining the information from both moments appears to improve our measure’s ability to

capture the relevant variation in the cost of external finance. We also note that the existing measures

are each aimed at capturing the either the cost of equity or debt finance, but not the overall cost of

external, vs. internal, funds. If firms can minimize overall financing costs by optimally using debt and

equity, then it is this minimized overall cost which matters for external funds.

   Figure 3 illustrates the strong relationship between ρxs
                                                         il ,e , as well as the percentage of firms raising

external finance, with these traditional proxies for the cost of external finance by plotting the time

series for ρxs
            il ,e and the percent of firms raising external finance (top panel) along with the negative of

the default spread, lending standards, and consumer sentiment (bottom panel). Although all the series

are highly correlated, there is independent information in ρxs                             xs
                                                            il ,e . For example, the high ρil ,e indicates

a low cost of external finance in the boom of 1986, however the default spread was not particularly

low then. The tech bust of 2001 is also more apparent in the drop in ρxs
                                                                      il ,e than it is in the relatively

small increase in the default spread, potentially suggesting that firms faced an increase in the cost of

equity external financing at that time which is not captured by the default spread.

   In the Online Appendix, we also describe and implement a rolling SMM procedure to provide a

structural estimate of the two-state ξ time series which best matches the time series for the moments

included in our regression index. This procedure yields roughly similar results to the regression based

measure shown in the main text. Both of our estimation procedures appear to pick up events that our

priors suggest should be associated with costly external finance, such as the recession of the early 80’s,

the crash of the tech boom in 2001, and the recent financial crisis. We take this finding to be additional

evidence which supports using moments implied by our model to identify times when the cost of

external finance is high or low. Thus, we argue that our model and moment implied cost estimates

provide a structurally motivated measure of the cost of external finance which is complementary to

the existing list of empirical proxies. Moreover, our strategy of using cross-sectional moments along

with a structural model to uncover hidden aggregate states may have other useful applications.



                                                   20
6.     Statistical Rejection of the Constant Cost Model
In this section, we show that a nested, restricted version of the model, with constant costs, is rejected

in favor of the full model with stochastic costs. In the Online Appendix, we also show that a unique

additional prediction of the stochastic cost model which distinguishes it from the constant cost model

is supported by empirical evidence. Specifically, we exploit the heterogeneous effect of a high cost

of external finance on high productivity vs. low productivity firms. We show that the difference in

investment between high productivity firms and low productivity firms will be smaller when the cost of

external finance is high, a fact we show is strongly supported empirically. Finally, we highlight again

the high correlation between our estimated series and traditional measures of the cost of external

finance, despite the fact that we did not target any of these traditional proxies in our estimation.

By contrast, we show in the Online Appendix that the correlation between an analogous cost series

estimated using a nested model with constant external financing costs, and the default spread, SLOOS

lending stanadard series, and consumer sentiment index are only 0.33, 0.11, and 0.58, respectively.

     We show that stochastic costs are statistically justified by the improvement in model fit, relative

to this nested alternative model in which the cost of external finance is constant and the only shock

firms face is to their (aggregate and idiosyncratic) productivity. Specifically, we test the improvement

that the full model offers over a restricted version in which the volatility of the stochastic cost shock is

restricted to be zero (in which case the persistence parameter is no longer identified). The difference in

the minimized objective function for the unrestricted version of the model will clearly be smaller, but

the J-test evaluates whether the difference in model errors more than justifies the addition of the cost

persistence and volatility parameters. The difference between the objective functions, Jrestr − Junrestr ,

is distributed χ2 with degrees of freedom equal to 2 (the number of restrictions). We are able to reject

the the null hypothesis that the improvement in fit by the full model, relative to the restricted model,

does not justify the addition of two additional parameters, at well below the 1% level. Thus, the data

strongly prefer the full model with stochastic costs. We present a full comparison of the parameter

estimates and implied moments from the full and restricted models in the Online Appendix. Finally,

we also note that the estimate of the volatility of the shock to the cost of external finance in the full

model is highly significant.

     We can also analyze the individual moments from the nested, restricted model in order to un-

derstand its failures economically. The last column of Table 4 shows that a model with constant


                                                    21
costs has several important shortcomings. The first is that it has difficulty generating positive cash

balances, with liquid assets only making up 1% of total assets. The second is that the only time the

firm will want to raise external finance is when it also has a good shock to investment opportunities.

Thus, the correlation between investment and external finance in this model is essentially 1, whereas

it is 0.46 in the data. Indeed, the relatively low empirical correlation between external finance and

investment provides some model-independent support that these two flows are partially driven by dif-

ferent shocks. Finally, and importantly, at estimated parameter values the constant cost model does

not generate aggregate external financing and savings waves in line with the data. The estimation

procedure has trouble matching the empirical moments with the restricted model, and is forced to

compromise amongst all the moments it aims to match. As a result, at estimated parameters, the

correlation between liquidity accumulation and external finance is only weakly positive, with an im-

plied value of 0.28. The model also implies a volatility for liquidity accumulation near zero. In short,

in the restricted model liquid assets play very little role as they are low on average and don’t vary

meaningfully. This means that investment is overly correlated with external finance.

7.     Conclusion
We document the empirical regularity of aggregate external financing and savings waves, and show

that cross-sectional moments describing firms’ external financing and savings behavior are informative

about the aggregate cost of external finance. We document that, empirically, the time series of the

cross-sectional correlation between external finance and liquidity accumulation, or “excess external

finance”, and the time series of the percentage of firms raising external finance, are highly correlated

with standard measures of the aggregate state of the cost of external finance, such as the default

spread and the fraction of banks tightening lending standards.

     We argue that both “excess external finance”, or the observed realization of the correlation between

external finance and liquidity accumulation in the cross-section, and our model implied estimate of

the level of the cost of external finance in the US time series 1980-2014, are useful measures of the

state of the aggregate level of the cost of external finance. Using firms’ actual decisions about how

much external finance to raise and how they use the proceeds from external finance provides a method

of making inferences about the true cost of external finance which exploits firms’ relative investment

returns and financing costs. A quantitative measure which is based on data describing corporate

financing, saving, and investment decisions seems useful for measurement, and for policy guidance.



                                                   22
References
Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach. The cash flow sensitivity of cash. The
  Journal of Finance, 59(4):1777–1804, 2004.
Paul Asquith and David Mullins. Equity issues and offering dilution. Journal of Financial Economics,
  15(1-2):61–89, 1986.
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. Market timing and capital structure. The Journal of Finance,
  57(1):1–32, 2002.
Susanto Basu, John G. Fernald, and Miles Kimball. Are technology improvements contractionary?
  American Economic Review, 96(5):1418–1448, 2006.
Thomas W. Bates, Kathleen M. Kahle, and Rene Stulz. Why Do U.S. Firms Hold so Much More
  Cash than They Used to? Journal of Finance, 64(5):1985–2021, 2009.
Santiago Bazdresch. The role of non-convex costs in firms’ investment and financial dynamics. Journal
  of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2013.
Frederico Belo, Xiaoji Lin, and Fan Yang. External equity financing shocks, financial flows, and asset
  prices. Working Paper, 2014.
Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. The American
  Economic Review, 79(1):pp. 14–31, 1989.
Saki Bigio. Endogenous liquidity and the business cycle. American Economic Review, 105(6):1883–
  1927, 2015.
Patrick Bolton, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang. A unified theory of tobin’s q, corporate investment,
  financing, and risk management. Journal of Finance, 66:1545–1578, 2011.
Patrick Bolton, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang. Market timing, investment, and risk management. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 109(1):40 – 62, 2013.
Charles T. Carlstrom and Timothy S. Fuerst. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations:
  A computable general equilibrium analysis. The American Economic Review, 87(5):pp. 893–910,
  1997.
V. V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. Business cycle accounting. Econometrica,
  75(3):781–836, 2007.
Hyuk Choe, Ronald W. Masulis, and Vikram Nanda. Common stock offerings across the business
  cycle: Theory and evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance, 1(1):3 – 31, 1993.
Lawrence J. Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. Financial Factors in Economic
  Fluctuations. Working Paper, 2010.
John H Cochrane. Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and economic
  fluctuations. Journal of Finance, 46(1):209–37, March 1991.
John H Cochrane. A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model. Journal of
  Political Economy, 104(3):572–621, June 1996.
Russell W. Cooper and John C. Haltiwanger. On the nature of capital adjustment costs. Review of
  Economic Studies, 73(3):611–633, 2006.
Francisco Covas and Wouter J. Den Haan. The cyclical behavior of debt and equity finance. The
  American Economic Review, 101(2):877–899, 2011.
Francisco Covas and Wouter J. Den Haan. The role of debt and equity finance over the business cycle.
  The Economic Journal, 122(565):1262–1286, 2012.
Jason G. Cummins and Ingmar Nyman. Optimal investment with fixed financing costs. Finance
  Research Letters, 1(4):226 – 235, 2004.
Janice Eberly, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent. What explains the lagged investment effect?
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(4):370–380, 2012.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Adriano A. Rampini. Financing Shortfalls and the Value of Aggregate Liq-
  uidity. Working Paper, 2009.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt. Endogenous liquidity in asset markets. The Journal of Finance, 2004.
John G. Fernald. Trend breaks, long-run restrictions, and contractionary technology improvements.
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2467 – 2485, 2007.
John G. Fernald. A quarterly utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Working Paper,
  2014.
Andrea Gamba and Alexander Triantis. The value of financial flexibility. The Journal of Finance,
  63(5):2263–2296, 2008.
Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. American

                                                 23
  Economic Review, 2012.
Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek. Credit supply shocks and economic activity in a financial
  accelerator model. In Rethinking the Financial Crisis. Russell Sage Foundation, 2012.
Joao F. Gomes, Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang. Asset prices and business cycles with costly external
  finance. Review of Economic Dynamics, 2003.
Joao F. Gomes, Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang. Asset pricing implications of firms’ financing constraints.
  Review of Financial Studies, 19(4):1321–1356, 2006.
Joao F. Gomes. Financing investment. The American Economic Review, 91(5):pp. 1263–1285, 2001.
Robert E. Hall. The high sensitivity of economic activity to financial frictions. The Economic Journal,
  121:351–378, 2011.
Lars Peter Hansen and Kenneth J. Singleton. General instrumental variables estimation of nonlinear
  rational expectations models. Econometrica, 50:1269–1286, 1982.
Lars Peter Hansen. Large sample properties of genegeneral method of moments estimators. Econo-
  metrica, 50:1029–1054, 1982.
Christopher A. Hennessy and Toni M. Whited. Debt dynamics. The Journal of Finance, 60(3):1129–
  1165, 2005.
Christopher A. Hennessy and Toni M. Whited. How costly is external financing? evidence from a
  structural estimation. The Journal of Finance, 62(4):1705–1745, 2007.
Robert J. Hodrick and Edward C. Prescott. Postwar u.s. business cycles: An empirical investigation.
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29(1):pp. 1–16, 1997.
Rongbing Huang and Jay R. Ritter. Testing theories of capital structure and estimating the speed of
  adjustment. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44:237–271, 2009.
Julien N. Hugonnier, Semyon Malamud, and Erwan Morellec. Capital supply uncertainty, cash hold-
  ings, and investment. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini. Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 102:238–271, 2012.
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. Investment shocks and business
  cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2):132 – 145, 2010.
Aubhik Khan and Julia K. Thomas. Idiosyncratic shocks and the role of nonconvexities in plant and
  aggregate investment dynamics. Econometrica, 76(2):395–436, 2008.
Aubhik Khan and Julia K. Thomas. Credit shocks and aggregate fluctuations in an economy with
  production heterogeneity. Journal of Political Economy, 121(6):1055–1107, 2013.
Chang-Soo Kim, David C. Mauer, and Ann E. Sherman. The determinants of corporate liquidity:
  Theory and evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 33(03):335–359, 1998.
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):pp. 211–248,
  1997.
Robert A Korajczyk and Amnon Levy. Capital structure choice: macroeconomic conditions and
  financial constraints. Journal of Financial Economics, 68(1):75 – 109, 2003.
Pablo Kurlat. Lemons markets and the transmission of aggregate shocks. American Economic Review,
  103(4):1463–89, 2013.
Mark Leary and Michael R. Roberts. Do firms rebalance their capital structures? The Journal of
  Finance, 60:2575–2619, 2005.
Bong-Soo Lee and Beth Fisher Ingram. Simulation estimation of time series models. Journal of
  Econometrics, 47:197–205, 1991.
Leigh A. Riddick and Toni M. Whited. The corporate propensity to save. The Journal of Finance,
  64(4):1729–1766, 2009.
Ali Shourideh and Ariel Zetlin-Jones. External financing and the role of financial frictions over the
  business cycle: Measurement and theory. Working Paper, 2012.
Missaka Warusawitharana and Toni M Whited. Equity market misvaluation and firm financial policies.
  Review of Financial Studies, 2015.
Ivo Welch. Capital structure and stock returns. Journal of Political Economy, 112:106–131, 2004.
Lei Zhang. Entry, exit, and capital structure over the business cycle. Working Paper, 2013.




                                                  24
Figure 1: Estimated average cost of external finance paid per dollar of external finance raised using cross-sectional
moments at each date.

                  6.00%                                                                                                                                  0.00


                                                                                                                                                         0.10
                  5.00%
                                                                                                                                                         0.20

                  4.00%                                                                                                                                  0.30


                                                                                                                                                         0.40
                  3.00%

                                                                                                                                                         0.50

                  2.00%
                                                                                                                                                         0.60


                  1.00%                                                                                                                                  0.70


                                                                                                                                                         0.80
                  0.00%
                          1980

                                 1982

                                        1984

                                               1986

                                                      1988

                                                             1990

                                                                    1992

                                                                           1994

                                                                                  1996

                                                                                         1998

                                                                                                 2000

                                                                                                        2002

                                                                                                               2004

                                                                                                                      2006

                                                                                                                             2008

                                                                                                                                    2010

                                                                                                                                           2012

                                                                                                                                                  2014
                                                                                                                                                         0.90


                 -1.00%                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                        Share of Quarters in Recession                          Average Cost per Dollar Raised




                                                                                   25
Figure 2: Aggregate accumulation of liquid assets against aggregate external finance. Plotted data are normalized
by lagged assets, HP-filtered, and then scaled to have unit variance. Gray bars indicate fraction of quarters economy
is in a recession in the given year (right axis). The correlation between liquidity accumulation and external finance
is 0.6. A univariate regression of liquidity accumulation on external finance yields an R2 of 0.36 and a regression
coefficient estimate of 0.19.
                 &#                                                                                      !"!!#



                                                                                                         !"$!#

                 %#
                                                                                                         !"%!#



                                                                                                         !"&!#
                 $#

                                                                                                         !"'!#



                 !#                                                                                      !"(!#
                       $,+$#




                       $,+(#




                       $,,$#




                       $,,(#




                       %!!$#




                       %!!(#




                       %!$$#
                       $,+!#

                       $,+%#
                       $,+&#
                       $,+'#

                       $,+)#
                       $,+*#
                       $,++#
                       $,+,#
                       $,,!#

                       $,,%#
                       $,,&#
                       $,,'#

                       $,,)#
                       $,,*#
                       $,,+#
                       $,,,#
                       %!!!#

                       %!!%#
                       %!!&#
                       %!!'#

                       %!!)#
                       %!!*#
                       %!!+#
                       %!!,#
                       %!$!#

                       %!$%#
                       %!$&#
                       %!$'#
                                                                                                         !")!#

                 -$#
                                                                                                         !"*!#



                                                                                                         !"+!#
                 -%#

                                                                                                         !",!#



                 -&#                                                                                     $"!!#

                          ./012#34#56017218#9:#;2<28893:#   =>721:0?#@9:0:<2#   A9B69C97D#E<<6F6?0G3:#




                                                            26
Figure 3: We plot the the cross-sectional correlation between liquidity accumulation and external finance and
% of firms raising external finance in the top panel. These moments are highly correlated with the shock to the
cost of external finance in our quantitative model. The bottom panel plots the negative of the default spread, the
net % of banks tightening lending standards, and the sentiment index. Gray bars indicate fraction of quarters
economy is in a recession in the given year (right axis). All series are standardized to have mean zero and unit
variance.

                      %#                                                                                                    !"!!#



                                                                                                                            !"$!#
                 $"(#


                                                                                                                            !"%!#

                      $#

                                                                                                                            !"&!#


                 !"(#
                                                                                                                            !"'!#



                      !#                                                                                                    !"(!#
                           $,+$#



                           $,+(#




                           $,,$#



                           $,,(#




                           %!!$#



                           %!!(#




                           %!$$#
                           $,+!#

                           $,+%#
                           $,+&#
                           $,+'#

                           $,+)#
                           $,+*#
                           $,++#
                           $,+,#
                           $,,!#

                           $,,%#
                           $,,&#
                           $,,'#

                           $,,)#
                           $,,*#
                           $,,+#
                           $,,,#
                           %!!!#

                           %!!%#
                           %!!&#
                           %!!'#

                           %!!)#
                           %!!*#
                           %!!+#
                           %!!,#
                           %!$!#

                           %!$%#
                           %!$&#
                           %!$'#
                                                                                                                            !")!#
                -!"(#


                                                                                                                            !"*!#

                  -$#

                                                                                                                            !"+!#


                -$"(#
                                                                                                                            !",!#



                  -%#                                                                                                       $"!!#


                               ./012#34#5617#89#12:277839#            ;21:296#<0872#            =.#1/3>?85#0::@2A6#B9C#
                &#                                                                                                          !"!!#


                                                                                                                            !"$!#
                %#

                                                                                                                            !"%!#
                $#
                                                                                                                            !"&!#

                !#
                           $,+!#
                           $,+$#
                           $,+%#
                           $,+&#
                           $,+'#
                           $,+(#
                           $,+)#
                           $,+*#
                           $,++#
                           $,+,#
                           $,,!#
                           $,,$#
                           $,,%#
                           $,,&#
                           $,,'#
                           $,,(#
                           $,,)#
                           $,,*#
                           $,,+#
                           $,,,#
                           %!!!#
                           %!!$#
                           %!!%#
                           %!!&#
                           %!!'#
                           %!!(#
                           %!!)#
                           %!!*#
                           %!!+#
                           %!!,#
                           %!$!#
                           %!$$#
                           %!$%#
                           %!$&#
                           %!$'#




                                                                                                                            !"'!#


                -$#                                                                                                         !"(!#


                                                                                                                            !")!#
                -%#

                                                                                                                            !"*!#
                -&#
                                                                                                                            !"+!#

                -'#
                                                                                                                            !",!#


                -(#                                                                                                         $"!!#


                           ./012#34#5617#89#12:277839#       ;-<#=240>?6#.@120A#       ;-<#B29A89C#.6A7#        .29DE296#




                                                                      27
Figure 4: This figure plots firm policy functions across low vs. high cost of external finance states in the left and
right panels, respectively. The top panel plots the percentage of firms raising external finance (or the probability
of raising for a given firm) conditional on firm level productivity. The middle panel plots external finance (blue
line) and investment in liquid assets (green line) as a function of productivity. The bottom panel plots investment
in physical capital as a function of both productivity and firm size. The blue line plots investment for high
productivity firms as a function of firm size while the green plots investment for low productivity firms. The red
triangle line indicates the difference in investment across high and low productivity firms.




                                                         28
Table 1: This table describes aggregate external finance and savings waves. Specifically, we document the
correlation between external finance and liquidity accumulation for different levels of aggregation and different
firm categories. * indicates significance at 5% level. [0, x]% represents aggregation of firms at or below the xth
percentile based on total assets. Equal Weighted uses all firms but equal weights them so as not to only emphasize
the largest firms. Weighted with Model Size Distribution uses simulated data from our model (described later)
to value weight firms based on their total assets. No Dividends and No Rating represent firms which do not pay
dividends and which do not have a credit rating, respectively.
                                           Aggregate External Financing and Savings
                                                                       
                                                         Σ(−e)t   Σil,t
                                                      ρ ΣT      ,
                                                           At−1 ΣT At−1

                                         [0,90]%                                 0.57∗
                                         [0,50]%                                 0.82∗
                                         [0,100]%                                0.08
                                         Equal Weighted                          0.52∗
                                         Weighted with Model Size Distribution   0.50∗
                                         Conditional on Raising funds: e<0       0.80∗
                                         No Dividends                            0.58∗
                                         No Rating                               0.56∗




Table 2: Calibrated and estimated parameters. The label e.c.f. denotes external cost of finance. The lower
panel gives the implied average percentage costs of external financing and investment firms pay with the given
parameters.
                                 Calibrated and Separately Estimated Parameters
                        Symbol        Description              Value
                        τ             tax rate                 0.10
                        δ             depreciation             0.08
                        θ             curvature                0.65
                        ρ             persistence              0.66
                        σ             total vol of prod        0.121
                        σi            idiosyncratic vol        0.11
                        σ agg         aggregate vol            0.03
                        r             risk-free rate           0.04
                                                Estimated Parameters
                        Symbol        Description              Estimate Standard Error
                        a             invest adj cost          0.26     0.02
                        λ1            e.c.f. fixed             0.16     0.01
                        λ2            e.c.f. quadratic         0.0004   0.00006
                        ση            vol cost of funds        1.97     0.22
                        γ             persistence              0.22     0.06
                                             Implied Average Costs Paid
                        Symbol        Description              Model
                           h     i
                        E φee(e)      implied average          0.023
                           h       i external financing cost
                            φi (ik ,k)
                        E       ik
                                         implied average             0.014
                                         investment cost




                                                             29
Table 3: This table displays aggregate moments from the model using a simulated panel of firms. We compare
these moments with those from annual Compustat data, 1980-2014. For correlations, we normalize each      series by     
                                                                                                                  i
lagged assets and apply the hp-filter. All other series are normalized by current assets. ρil ,e,t is ρt T−eAii , T l,i
                                                                                             xs
                                                                                                                    Ai .
TFP are TFP level shocks. We use the average of the Baa-Aaa default spread, the index of lending standards,
and the sentiment index as an empirical proxy for ξ after first normalizing each of these series to have zero mean
and unit variance. * indicates significance at 5% level. We use notation from the model: −e represents external
finance (negative of payouts), il liquidity accumulation, ik investment in physical capital, and l liquid balances.
We normalize each series by total assets except investment which is normalized by physical capital k.


                                                   Estimation Moments
                                          Moment                 Data Model
                                          E[l]                   0.11 0.03
                                          σ(il )                 0.01 0.01
                                          σ(ik )                 0.02 0.02
                                          σ(−e)                  0.03 0.03
                                          ρ(il , −e)             0.57∗ 0.70
                                          ρ(il , ik )            0.16 0.18
                                          ρ(−e, ik )             0.42∗ 0.84
                                                   Additional Moments
                                          Moment                 Data Model
                                          E[ik ]                 0.07 0.08
                                          ρ(ik,t , ik,t−1 )      0.40∗ 0.34
                                          E[−e]                  -0.01 -0.10
                                          prob(−e > 0)           0.04 0.02
                                           Moments Conditional on e<0
                                          Moment                 Data Model
                                          ρ (il , −e)            0.80∗ 0.96
                                          ρ (il , ik )           0.32∗ 0.39
                                             Business Cycle Correlations
                                          Moment                 Data Model
                                          ρ(il , gdp)            0.06 0.06
                                          ρ(−e, gdp)             0.27∗ 0.71
                                          ρ(ik , gdp)            0.47∗ 0.94
                                                    TFP vs. ξ Moments
                                                                 Data Model
                                              XS
                                          ρ(ρil ,e , ξ)          0.64∗ 0.92
                                          ρ(%raise, ξ)           0.71∗ 0.47
                                              XS
                                          ρ(ρil ,e , T F P )     0.45∗ 0.04
                                          ρ(%raise,
                                                       T F P ) 0.24 0.32
                                              Σ(−e)t   Σil,t
                                          ρ          ,
                                              ΣT At−1 ΣT At−1
                                                                 by Size Bin
                                          Size Bin              Data    Model
                                          [0, 50]               0.86∗   0.85
                                          [0, 75]               0.78∗   0.71
                                          [0, 90]               0.57∗   0.70
                                          [90, 100]             -0.09   0.38



                                                           30
Table 4: Robustness of alternative model choices. We provide robustness to different model choices in each
column. Stochastic fixed costs applies the cost shock ξ to the fixed cost as well as the quadratic cost. The linear
cost model adds a linear cost λ = 0.09 where the value and parameterization is from Hennessy and Whited (2007).
The model with lower tax rate, τ = 0.012 is chosen to match average liquid balances, l. The last column, SDF,
uses an exogenous SDF following the specification in Belo, Lin, and Yang (2014). We compare our main moments
across these specifications. Additional details appear in the appendix


                                     Estimation Moments
       Moment        Data    Model   Stochastic Fixed Linear Cost       Lower τ     SDF    Constant Cost
       E[l]          0.11    0.03    0.06             0.05              0.12        0.03   0.01
       σ(il )        0.01    0.01    0.02             0.004             0.01        0.02   0.00
       σ(ik )        0.02    0.02    0.03             0.02              0.03        0.03   0.03
       σ(−e)         0.03    0.03    0.04             0.02              0.03        0.04   0.03
       ρ(il , −e)    0.57∗   0.70    0.81             0.47              0.50        0.61   0.28
       ρ(il , ik )   0.16    0.18    0.32             0.29              0.11        0.22   0.34
       ρ(−e, ik )    0.42∗   0.84    0.81             0.96              0.90        0.90   0.99

       Correlation of Regression Implied Cost of External Finance Across Models
                         Model Stochastic Fixed Linear Cost Lower τ SDF                    Constant Cost
                         1        0.99              0.96         0.98     0.97             0.37




                                                        31
Table 5: Estimates of the cost of external finance in the model using regressions of cost measures on ρxs  il ,e and
%raise.
   h i  We measure  the cost of external  finance as  the average cost paid per dollar of external finance  raised,
    φe
EN e , and as the level of the stochastic cost series ξ. We also report the average marginal cost per dollar.
                           Infering the Cost of External Finance via Regression Index
                           y h i        Constant ρxs il ,e    %raise      R2
                                φe
                           EN    e
                                         0.023∗∗∗    -0.013∗∗∗   -0.004∗∗∗    93.6%
                           ξ             0.00        -0.98∗∗∗    -0.24∗∗∗     94.1%

                                            Properties of cost   measures
                           Measure       Mean       Std           Auto Corr
                           Avg Cost      2.3%       1.6%          0.63
                           Marg Cost     0.9%       0.8%          0.55
                           ρxs
                            il ,e        0.15       0.07          0.50
                           %raise        0.47       0.08          0.85

Table 6: Correlations of our estimated cost of external finance estimated using the cross-section of firm policies,
ξ, with existing empirical proxies for the cost of external finance. The final row in each panel gives the correlation
with an average of the three proxies after normalizing each series to have zero mean and unit variance.
                                Correlation of estimated cost with:
                                Moody’s BaaAaa Default spread                   0.66∗
                                SLOOS Index of lending standards, C&I           0.48∗
                                Sentiment index                                 0.69∗
                                Average of three                                0.71∗

                                Correlation of ρxs
                                                il ,e with:
                                Default spread                                  0.63∗
                                SLOOS Index of lending standards, C&I           0.46∗
                                Sentiment index                                 0.48∗
                                Average of three                                0.64∗

                                Correlation of % raise with:
                                Default spread                                  0.58∗
                                SLOOS Index of lending standards, C&I           0.38∗
                                Sentiment index                                 0.74∗
                                Average of three                                0.71∗




                                                         32
