                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EFFECTS OF MORTALITY ON FERTILITY:
                POPULATION DYNAMICS AFTER A NATURAL DISASTER

                                           Jenna Nobles
                                      Elizabeth Frankenberg
                                         Duncan Thomas

                                       Working Paper 20448
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20448


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




The authors are grateful for comments from David Lam and Jim Walker. This work is supported by
the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (R01HD052762, R01HD051970,
R03HD071131), the National Institute on Aging (R01AG031266), the National Science Foundation
(CMS-0527763), the Hewlett Foundation, the World Bank and the MacArthur Foundation (05-85158-000).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jenna Nobles, Elizabeth Frankenberg, and Duncan Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Mortality on Fertility: Population Dynamics after a Natural Disaster
Jenna Nobles, Elizabeth Frankenberg, and Duncan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 20448
September 2014
JEL No. J11,J13,O1

                                             ABSTRACT

Understanding how mortality and fertility are linked is essential to the study of population dynamics.
We investigate the fertility response to an unanticipated mortality shock that resulted from the 2004
Indian Ocean tsunami, which killed large shares of the residents of some Indonesian communities
but caused no deaths in neighboring communities. Using population-representative multilevel longitudinal
data, we identify a behavioral fertility response to mortality exposure, both at the level of a couple
and in the broader community. We observe a sustained fertility increase at the aggregate level following
the tsunami, which is driven by two behavioral responses to mortality exposure. First, mothers who
lost one or more children in the disaster are significantly more likely to bear additional children after
the tsunami. This response explains about 13 percent of the aggregate increase in fertility. Second,
women without children before the tsunami initiated family-building earlier in communities where
tsunami-related mortality rates were higher, indicating that the fertility of these women is an important
route to rebuilding the population in the aftermath of a mortality shock. Such community-level effects
have received little attention in demographic scholarship.


Jenna Nobles                                        Duncan Thomas
University of Wisconsin, Madison                    Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Drive                              Duke University
Madison, WI 53706                                   Box 90097
jnobles@ssc.wisc.edu                                Durham, NC 27708
                                                    and NBER
Elizabeth Frankenberg                               d.thomas@duke.edu
Sanford School
Duke University
e.frankenberg@duke.edu
INTRODUCTION


A central line of inquiry in population research assesses whether, when and why fertility changes

in concert with mortality. Investigators have hypothesized that exposure to mortality shapes

fertility intentions and behaviors of an individual or couple through its impact on expectations

about the survival prospects of children. A mortality effect may arise because the death of a child

causes replacement of the child, or because expectations about future mortality cause hoarding

(Preston 1978; Rosenzweig and Schultz 1983; Montgomery and Cohen 1998; Palloni and

Rafilamanana 1999).

       Demographic theory is less well-suited to describe fertility responses to large-scale

mortality events such as war and natural disasters (Hill 2004). To the extent that a one-time

event does not change expectations about future child survival, a fertility response to a temporary

mortality increase cannot be attributed a hoarding motive.

       Instead, it may be that the replacement motive extends beyond those women whose

children die and operates through social groups, such as extended families, networks or ethnic

groups. When mortality shocks are location-specific, the local community is likely to be a salient

group in which a broader replacement and rebuilding motive may operate.

       To provide empirical evidence on the extent of both individual and community-level

mechanisms, we study the effects of mortality exposure on fertility after a large-scale

unanticipated natural disaster, the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, which killed over 170,000 people

in the coastal areas of Aceh and North Sumatra, Indonesia. This work builds on previous studies

that document fertility shifts after earthquakes, hurricanes and famines, economic crises, terrorist

attacks, war and genocide (e.g., Heuveline and Poch 2007; Agadjanian and Prata 2002;

Lindstrom and Berhanu 1999; Caldwell 2004; Finlay 2005 and the review in Lee, 1997).

       Using a sample representative of the pre-tsunami population, we document a positive

association between exposure to the 2004 tsunami and subsequent fertility at the aggregate level.

We provide evidence that the fertility increase can be attributed to tsunami mortality and that it


                                                  1
is driven primarily by two groups of women. First, mothers who lost a child in the tsunami were

significantly more likely to give birth again after the tsunami, relative to mothers whose children

survived. These births account for about 13% of the aggregate increase in fertility due to the

tsunami. Second, where local area mortality was higher, women who had not borne children

before the disaster were also significantly more likely to give birth after the disaster relative to

similar women in communities with lower tsunami mortality.

       Several features of the disaster provide leverage to address these questions. First, because

the force of the water on land varied with topographical and hydrological features, the tsunami’s

impact on mortality was idiosyncratic even within small areas (Frankenberg et al. 2011; McAdoo

et al. 2007; Umitsu et al. 2007). Second, in contrast to deaths from war or famine, tsunami-

related mortality occurred almost entirely within a few hours of the precipitating earthquake,

making it possible to pinpoint timing. Third, the tsunami was completely unanticipated. Thus,

tsunami-related mortality can legitimately be treated as a mortality shock at the local area level.

       It has been a challenge to establish a causal link between mortality and fertility in previous

research, largely because of data constraints. We use data from a rich longitudinal survey

conducted in coastal Indonesia that was designed to address this question. The baseline survey of

the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery (STAR) was collected 10 months before the

tsunami and follow-ups were conducted annually for five years after the tsunami. The survey

includes detailed pregnancy and birth histories, combined with information about the disaster

collected at the individual and community levels. The survey encompasses heavily damaged

communities with high mortality (on average about 30% of residents perished in these

communities) as well as nearby communities where the direct effects were much more muted.

Data from STAR allow us to relate the experience of mortality within the local area to the fertility

of women who were living in that area at the time of the tsunami. This empirical approach is more

powerful than relying on temporal variation alone.

       The research advances understanding of both replacement fertility of individual women

and population rebuilding in the context of high-mortality disasters. In recent years, similarly

                                                   2
sudden large-scale events have generated significant mortality shocks in Haiti, Myanmar, Japan,

China, and India, among others, and are likely to recur given rising population densities in areas

increasingly vulnerable to environmental crises (Marshall and Picou 2008; Vos et al. 2010). By

drawing direct comparisons between estimated effects at the community level and estimates of

replacement at the individual level, the research provides new evidence on the relative

importance of these two effects in population dynamics following disaster.

       The study proceeds as follows. We begin by describing theoretical and empirical

approaches to establishing links between mortality (or events that cause mortality) and fertility.

After documenting aggregate trends in mortality and fertility before and after the 2004 tsunami

to provide context for the research, we describe the individual-level data in STAR, our methods

and empirical results. A discussion concludes.



FERTILITY IN RESPONSE TO MACRO SHOCKS: EVIDENCE

Population scientists have long studied the demographic consequences of large-scale macro

shocks. Effects on fertility have been observed at both the aggregate and individual level. War

has received the most systematic attention. Several studies have documented significant declines

in fertility, either overall or for more- relative to less-affected subgroups during conflicts

accompanied by major social upheaval (Lindstrom and Berhanu 1999; Caldwell 2004; Agadjanian

and Prata 2002; Blanc 2004; Heuveline and Poch 2007). In some instances the end of the conflict

is accompanied by a fertility increase. Caldwell (2004), for example, documents a fall followed by

a rise in fertility for Russia, Spain, and Germany in the context of major disruptions before the

1960s. Famines are characterized by a similar temporal fertility pattern, as evidenced by studies

from the Netherlands, China, and Bangladesh (Stein and Susser 1975; Ashton et al. 1984; Watkins

and Menken 1985). Isolating proximate mechanisms and disentangling whether fertility increases

represent fundamental shifts in fertility desires or simply the realization of deferred reproduction

are complicated when the precipitating events occur over multiple years and involve shifting

spatial boundaries.

                                                   3
       Other research considers spatially and temporally more discreet events such as natural

disasters and terrorist attacks. Results are mixed. Using a theoretical framework guided by work

in psychology on stress and attachment, Cohan and Cole (2002) analyze rates of marriage, birth,

and divorce before and after Hurricane Hugo, in affected and unaffected South Carolina counties.

Rates for each of these outcomes rise and then fall, leading the authors to suggest that exposure to

a life-threatening event prompted significant actions and measurable changes with respect to

close relationships. A similar approach and conclusion is reached with respect to fertility in and

around Oklahoma City in conjunction with the 1995 bombing of the federal building (Rodgers et

al. 2005). By contrast, despite predictions of a post-September 11th baby boom in the United

States (Morin 2002, Scelfo 2002), natality data indicated no such increase (Martin et al. 2003). It

is important to note that none of these events have caused large-scale loss of life, and so may

provide only limited insights into behavioral responses to the death of a substantial fraction of the

population.

       Relatively few studies have sought to isolate the impact of large-scale mortality on

subsequent fertility. The most comprehensive involves the long-term impact on fertility of excess

mortality in Cambodia during the years of Khmer Rouge control (1975-78), when some 25% of the

population died as a result of war-related violence and disease (Heuveline 1998; Heuveline and

Poch 2007). Using retrospective birth histories collected in 2000 for women (age 15-74) the

authors document a sharp decline in the total fertility rate between 1975 and 1978, a near

doubling between 1978 and 1980 to levels above the pre-war rate, and then a decline. The period

of most dramatic increase occurs shortly after Vietnam took control of the country and the Khmer

Rouge-imposed genocide was abruptly halted, leading the authors to conclude that the fertility

increase was a response to the high levels of mortality.

       Two other studies explore fertility in the aftermath of high-mortality disasters. Finlay

(2009), using cross-sectional surveys, considers fertility for three earthquakes, each with death

tolls of 15,000 or more. Comparing fertility before and after the earthquake for residents of areas

affected by the earthquake with fertility of residents of areas that were not affected reveals greater

                                                  4
post-disaster increases in fertility in affected areas. The same approach is adopted, with census

data, to examine the impact of the 2003 Bam earthquake in Iran. The authors document a fertility

decline in 2004, followed by a rise in 2005-2007 (Hosseini-Chavoshi and Abassi-Shavazi 2013).



FERTILITY IN RESPONSE TO MORTALITY: THEORY

A considerable body of theoretical work posits that fertility levels are in part a response to

mortality levels in the broader community and to couples’ own experience of child mortality.

These ideas have roots in demographic transition theory, as well as in theories from psychology,

sociology and economics.

Fertility in Response to Mortality Outside of the Family
         The most explicit theoretical link between child mortality occurring outside of the family

and fertility decisions—or what Preston (1978) referred to as “extrafamilial effects”—involves the

concept of “insurance” fertility, whereby parents bear more children than they ultimately want to

have in anticipation that some will not survive (Preston 1978; Cain, 1981; Montgomery and Cohen

1998; Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1983). A few studies have linked fertility timing to declines in

child mortality at the level of the village (Atella and Rosati 2000; LeGrand et al. 2003) or the

social network (Sandberg 2006). Of course, insurance effects are irrelevant for disasters unless

the event shifts expectations about child survival over the longer term and causes parents to

produce “extra” children.1

         Mortality outside the family might affect fertility through other avenues as well. One

mechanism may work through risk-sharing at the level of the community or ethnic group, as has

been described in some agricultural settings (see Geertz 1968, Townsend 1994, Grimard 1997,

Suri 2003, Conning and Udry 2007). If community members benefit from the next generation of

children, a collective fertility increase might arise in response to child mortality at the community

level.


1 As an example of a shift in perceptions occurring in the context of mortality increase, Trinitapoli and Yeatman (2011)
observe an association between uncertainty about survival driven by the AIDS epidemic in Malawi and the desired
timing of fertility initiation among adolescents.
                                                            5
       Though demographers have emphasized ties between child mortality and fertility, the

literature on resilience in psychology suggests a different motivation for the links between fertility

and mortality more generally. Specifically, the experience of mortality may shift preferences

towards goals with intrinsic meaning, such as interpersonal connection and community

development rather than extrinsic goals, such as amassing wealth and status (Vail et al. 2012).

The logic suggests that, among other things, a renewed investment in family will emerge in

response to an awareness of human frailty (Fritsche et al. 2007, Nakonezny, Reddick, and

Rodgers 2004).

       Related research views fertility as taking on symbolic meaning in the aftermath of

population trauma. When crises disrupt individuals’ perceptions of the world as ordered and

reliable, births represent renewal and a “return to normal” (e.g. Carta et al. 2012; Rodgers et al.

2005; Norris et al. 2002). Other scholarship describes the pronatalist sentiment emerging from

mortality shocks that disproportionately affect (or target) certain ethnic groups (Borneman 2002;

Jansen and Helms 2009) or hypothesize its existence in settings where a substantial fraction of

the population has perished (Heuveline and Poch 2007).

       Behavioral fertility responses to contextual mortality shocks are likely to vary by women’s

fertility goals, parity, and the age composition of surviving children. Women who are childless or

at lower parities will on average desire more children, and ceteris paribus, will exhibit stronger

behavioral fertility response to mortality shocks.

       Of course, births in the months following a macro shock may be reduced because of

miscarriage. A mortality shock may lower population fertility over the longer term through other

avenues as well. Witnessing the deaths of family and friends may induce psychopathologies

(Norris et al. 2002; Neria, Nandi, & Galea 2008). These may reduce the desire for children, coital

frequency, relationship quality, and women’s physiological capacity to carry a child to term

(Segraves 1998; Parker and Douglas 2010; Nakamura, Sheps, and Arck 2008). How and when

the psychological response to mortality produces family building rather than family disruption is

not well understood (Cohan 2010).

                                                     6
Fertility in Response to Mortality of own Children
       Though theory supports a role for contextual effects of mortality, many studies have

focused on whether the event of an “own child” death prompts a couple to conceive again, so that

the child who died is “replaced” by one that would not otherwise have been born. Preston (1978)

lays out the pathways of individual replacement behavior. Replacement may arise as an artifact of

physiology: a child death can increase fertility simply because a woman stops breastfeeding and

resumes menstruating. Alternatively, after the death of a child, couples may intentionally try to

conceive.

       Micro-level research documents these phenomena, finding that both physiologically-

induced and volitional replacement operate in various contexts, but that neither exhibits large

population-level impacts on fertility (Montgomery and Cohen 1988; Frankenberg 1998; Kuate

Defo 1998; Grummer-Strawn, Stupp and Mei 1998; Rosero-Bixby 1998; Palloni and

Rafalimanana 1999; Hossain et al. 2007). This literature considers settings where child mortality

levels are relatively stable and volitional replacement is a response to an event about which

parents can form reasonable expectations—an orientation with origins in demographic transition

theory. As a result, bias from omitted variables or endogeneity is an oft-referenced issue (Palloni

and Rafalimanana 1999).

       Studies of unanticipated disasters help put these concerns aside, but for relatively few

high-mortality disasters are individual-level studies possible. The 2008 Wenchuan earthquake in

Sichuan, China is an exception. Thousands of parents lost their only child. In response, the state

sponsored fertility programs, which helped a number of women to explicitly “replace” the child

that perished (Qin et al. 2009; Pinghui 2013).

       The Indian Ocean tsunami provides a similarly powerful context in which to study both

“replacement” fertility and a potential response to mortality within the community. The

longitudinal data supports estimation of whether a woman who lost a child in the tsunami

subsequently bore another child, which speaks directly to the question of an individual response.

                                                 7
Moreover, STAR provides evidence on the relationship local area tsunami mortality and

subsequent fertility among residents of the area at the time of the tsunami, and thereby allows us

to contrast the relative importance of extra- and intra-family responses to a large-scale mortality

shock.



MORTALITY AND FERTILITY DURING THE 2004 TSUNAMI

The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami was exceptional in magnitude and scope. On the 26th of

December an earthquake measuring 9.3 on the Richter scale displaced a trillion tons of water. The

resulting tsunami slammed into the Indonesian coastline, reaching some areas as little as 15

minutes after the earthquake. Aceh and North Sumatra were the provinces hardest hit. In some

areas of Aceh, water heights exceeded 15 meters (Umitsu 2011, pp 54,58) and the water travelled

inland via riverbeds for as much as 6 kilometers. About 170,000 people died and over 500,000

were displaced, losing their homes and livelihoods (Doocy et al. 2007, Athukorala and

Resosudarmo 2005, Gray et al, 2014).

         The magnitude of the tsunami’s overall impact masks considerable spatial variation,

arising from the idiosyncrasies of coastal topography that shaped variation in the waves’ force and

extent of inundation (McAdoo et al. 2007; Ramakrishnan 2005; Umitsu et al. 2007).

Neighboring communities experienced markedly different degrees of damage as a function of

elevation and orientation relative to the shoreline. STAR is designed to capture this heterogeneity.

         For the purposes of assessing the impact of mortality on subsequent fertility, we analyze

data from communities that experienced substantial tsunami mortality and communities from

the same districts (kabupaten) that did not. Communities are excluded from our sample if no
area in the district was affected by tsunami mortality, yielding a sample in which comparison

areas (no tsunami-related mortality) are close enough geographically to be similar to areas that

sustained tsunami-related mortality.

         Data from the first follow up wave of STAR regarding survival status of survey

respondents provides our primary source of information for classifying communities. Survival

                                                  8
status was ascertained by identifying an individual who was a household member at the baseline

survey and could confirm other members’ survival statuses. If no original household member

could be located, death information was derived from interviews with multiple people who were

living in the community at baseline and by cross-checking rosters of the dead maintained in the

community. Mortality status was determined for 97.4 of the STAR sample. Other sources of

information are used to cross-validate community classifications, including questions to

community leaders on tsunami deaths, water inundation, and destruction, damage observations

of survey supervisors, and levels of exposure to the tsunami reported by residents. A community

is classified as mortality-affected if one or more STAR respondents died because of the tsunami,

unless the number of deaths is very small and no other corroborating evidence suggests that the

tsunami acted with any force on the community.2

           Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on the tsunami’s impact, estimated separately for

communities directly affected by tsunami mortality and for comparison communities from the

same districts. As they should be, differences in the mortality rates are stark. In mortality-affected

communities the tsunami killed 29% of the population. In the communities with no tsunami-

related mortality, about half a percent died. Within the mortality-affected communities rates vary

by demographic group. About one-third of children under five and one-third of reproductive age

women perished, whereas among prime-age men the rate is 19%.

           The next rows focus on destruction to the built and natural environment, using two

approaches. The first is based on satellite imagery before and after the disaster. Gillespie et al

(2007), using images from NASA’s MODIS sensor taken on December 17, 2004 and December 29,

2004, developed a measure of destruction to ground cover for a small area surrounding each of

the center points of the communities surveyed in STAR (based on GPS). In the mortality-affected

communities, the average number of pixels indicating complete destruction of ground cover is 5

(out of 9), but it is less than one in communities not affected by mortality. Our second approach

relies on reports by village leaders about particular types of destruction. Damage to roads,


2
    In these cases, deaths are thought to have arisen as a result of residents having been elsewhere during the tsunami.
                                                              9
contaminated water, and problems with debris are all more common in mortality-affected

communities (affecting about two thirds of the communities), but they occur in non-mortality

communities as well, where rates range from 12-21% across the indicators.

        Finally, community leaders were asked how life had changed in the year after the tsunami.

For the mortality-affected communities 73% of leaders report a downturn in quality of life, and

fully 21% of them explicitly mention population loss as a problem (price increases and reductions

in economic opportunity are other common responses). In the communities unaffected by

mortality, about one third of leaders felt that life became worse. Population loss is not the

problem, but rising food prices and fewer jobs and business opportunities are.

        In combination, these indicators capture an important aspect of the tsunami. Although

mortality and the most devastating physical destruction were concentrated in a subset of

communities along the west coast, the geographical reach of disruption is much broader. Our

comparison communities are affected by the disaster, but not by the mortality it caused.

        We turn now to macro-level evidence of fertility change. To document patterns of fertility

before and after the disaster, we calculate age-specific probabilities of live birth for each quarter-

year between 2000 and 2009 for reproductive-age women interviewed in the baseline survey.3

The rates pertain to the period before the tsunami, January 2000-December 2004, and to the

period after the tsunami, January 2006-December 2009. We exclude births in 2005 because

fertility during most of that year will not be attributable to behavioral decisions made in response

to the disaster (and was complicated by miscarriages after the tsunami) (Hamoudi et al. 2014).

        Figure 1 displays these rates, stratified by period and mortality zone (dashed red lines

indicate communities experiencing tsunami mortality). For the 2000-2004 period the estimated

total fertility rates are 2.18 and 2.74 in the areas with and without tsunami-related mortality,

respectively. After the tsunami, fertility rates by zone change in opposite directions. In the

mortality-affected communities, fertility increases, particularly for women 20-34, and the overall


3 For each quarter-year, each woman who is alive and aged 15-49 contributes an observation; the pooled data include

176,862 observations for 6,363 women. The sample includes all age-eligible women who were interviewed in the pre-
tsunami baseline survey and therefore represent the pre-tsunami population.
                                                         10
rates in 2006-2009 are 2.67 and 2.52 in the mortality-affected versus comparison communities.

The difference between the increase in the mortality-affected communities and the decrease in

communities that did not experience tsunami-related mortality is 0.71 which is statistically

significant at 5% size of test. (The bootstrapped standard error is 0.21.4) The “difference-in-

difference” for the underlying ages (displayed in the inset table) confirms that the largest changes

in mortality-affected communities occur for women between the ages of 20 and 34.

           At the population level, a 0.7 increase in TFR for the four year period after the tsunami

constitutes a large effect. Similar magnitudes are reported by Finlay (2009), who identifies an

effect of roughly a fifth of a child ever-born per woman, observed one year and four years after

major earthquakes in Pakistan and Turkey, respectively. By comparison, the birth increase

attributed to the Oklahoma City bombing was less than one birth per thousand women over the

three years after the event (Rodgers et al. 2005).

           To what extent can the change in fertility be attributed to a response to mortality? Couples

who lost children may want to replace them. But mortality outside the family may also influence

reproductive choices. Theory suggests the strongest response to mortality is likely to occur within

units of social salience for respondents. Because the impact of the tsunami was location-specific

and because the community (desa or kelurahan) is highly salient in Indonesian society, we focus

on responses to community-level mortality.



METHODS

Empirical issues in linking mortality and fertility
           Establishing a causal effect of mortality on fertility poses several challenges. Detailed data

on the timing and locations of births and deaths of children are essential, but may not be

sufficient to disentangle associations that reflect micro- versus macro-level forces (Guha-Sapir

and Below 2006; Montgomery and Cohen 1998; Palloni and Rafalimanana 1999; Sandberg

2006). Perhaps most problematic, deaths are typically not random events. The antecedents of


4
    Standard errors are estimated by bootstrapping the sample using 10,000 replications (Efron and Tibshirani 1994).
                                                            11
mortality–economic conditions, health endowments, and the health-service environment–are

also typically correlated with fertility (Olsen 1980). Moreover, reverse causality poses difficulties

because birth spacing and parity affect infant mortality (e.g., Palloni and Tienda 1986). Without

adjustments for these processes, associations between mortality and fertility are likely upwardly

biased.

          Some of these challenges can be addressed by examining fertility in the context of

mortality shocks. The timing, location, and magnitude of some disasters are unexpected and can

be located precisely in time and space. As a result, the behavior preceding and following the

disaster is easier to distinguish and attribute to unexpected mortality. Some disasters occur

idiosyncratically, which reduces the likelihood that child deaths are correlated with factors

associated with prior fertility choices and outcomes. When the precipitating event is unexpected

and short-lived, fertility changes are unlikely to reflect tempo effects of fertility delays.

          Apart from Heuveline and Poch (2007; studying the Khmer Rouge), no other analysis of

fertility in the wake of humanitarian crisis explicitly ascribe fertility changes to the mortality

generated by these events. Several difficulties hamper doing so. In the context of disaster, facets

of family and community life other than mortality change rapidly as well. Because these may also

influence fertility, it is difficult to attribute a fertility response to the death of a child rather than

some other contemporaneous process such as loss of livelihoods, dependence on government aid

or reduced contraceptive access (Hapsari et al. 2009, Hill 2004). In addition, data on the same

population before and after exposure to the disaster are rare.

          Our study develops an empirical strategy that capitalizes on the longitudinal and multi-

level nature of the STAR data. We analyze the fertility of individual women in STAR with

information collected in both the pre-tsunami baseline and five annual post-tsunami survey

rounds. Each post-tsunami survey provides detailed information about the mortality of household

members since the pre-tsunami baseline. The most detailed information on fertility comes from

complete pregnancy histories asked of reproductive-age women in the second follow-up round,

with updates in each subsequent round. For pregnancies ending in live births, each child’s

                                                     12
survival status is updated at the time of the interview. Information on date and age of death is

available for each child who died, along with whether the death was related to the tsunami.

         Recontact rates in STAR are high. Among reproductive-age women who survived the

tsunami, 93% were surveyed in the 2010-2011 follow-up (STARF), and the rates are similar for

women regardless of whether or not their community was affected by tsunami mortality in spite

of the high level of devastation and dislocation caused by the tsunami.



Response to death of own children.
         We begin with the question of how the death of a child affects the mother’s fertility.

Detailed fertility histories collected in the second post-tsunami follow-up along with any updates

collected in each of the three subsequent waves are used to create a dichotomous indicator, Bic,

for whether a mother i who was living in community c at the time of the tsunami had at least one

live birth between January 1, 2006 and December 31, 2009.5 In order to compare the post-

tsunami fertility of mothers who lost a child with the fertility of mothers who did not, the model

includes an indicator variable Mic which takes the value 1 if the mother lost at least one child in

the tsunami and zero otherwise.

         Bic   J 0  J 1M ic  J 2 X ic Q c                                     [1]

         In each model, the woman’s characteristics, Xic, include factors likely to predict both

fertility and vulnerability to child mortality in the context of the disaster. These are measured

before the disaster using the baseline, pre-tsunami survey and include women’s parity, age
(specified with a piecewise linear spline with knots at 5 year intervals), and education (measured

with dichotomous indicators capturing completion of junior high and completion of high school).

To control for individual experiences in the disaster, we include an indicator of whether the

respondent was swept up in the water or saw family or friends struggle or disappear in the water.




5
 While the data are designed to support analysis of fertility timing using, for example, an event-history approach, the
main goal of this research is to measure the extent to which there has been successful population rebuilding five years
after the tsunami which is provided by an estimate of J1 in model [1].
                                                          13
       As in many societies, fertility in the region is patterned by socioeconomic status. For this

reason, we also include household per capita expenditure and indicators of home ownership and

land ownership (all measured in 2004, before the disaster).

       Means of the key variables related to fertility, child mortality, and exposure to the tsunami

are provided in Panel A of Table 2. The first column aggregates women regardless of child

mortality experience. Subsequent columns present the differences in these variables for women

who lost a child relative to those who did not. Overall, among the 2,301 women who were mothers

at the time of the tsunami, just over 5% lost a child during the disaster and just over 10% of

women were exposed to the tsunami waves. Exposure rates are much higher for women who lost a

child in the tsunami than for those who did not. Overall a little less than a third of women gave

birth to another child after the tsunami. While the rate is higher for those who lost a child, relative

to those who did not, the difference is not statistically significant. With respect to other

demographic and socioeconomic features (prior fertility, age, and education), women who lost a

child are no different from women whose children survived. These results are consistent with the

idea that, apart from losing a child as a result of the disaster, our two groups of women are largely

similar.

       Some community-level aspects of the tsunami such as loss of natural resources and

sources of livelihood have the potential to affect subsequent fertility. If these factors are also

correlated with whether women lost children, failure to include them will bias estimates of Mic. To

address this concern, we estimate a model taking into account all community-level characteristics

that are fixed during the post-tsunami study period, 2006-2009, and affect post-tsunami fertility

in a linear and additive way:

           Bic   J 0  J 1M ic  J 2 X ic  P c  Xic                  [2]

In this specification, ǋc is a community-level fixed effect that absorbs community-level tsunami

impacts and pre-tsunami resources.

       A concern that has received considerable attention in the literature is whether an observed

fertility response after a child’s death arises because of a conscious (a volitional effect) or

                                                        14
inadvertently via increased fecundability after breastfeeding stops (a physiological effect). To

investigate this question we consider two additional pieces of evidence.

         First, we assess whether deaths of children who have aged out of the period when children

are typically breastfed predicts subsequent fertility. The median duration of any breastfeeding is

about 20 months, but supplements are typically introduced within a few months of birth (CBS

2008). Children two and older are not breastfed enough to prevent ovulation in their mothers.

We extend Model [2] by replacing the indicator of child death (Mic) with two indicator variables

that capture, first, the loss of a child who was under the age of two (<1% of women) and, second,

the loss only of children two and older (4% of women). A positive coefficient on the indicator of at

least one death to a child under two may arise either because of a physiological response to the

cessation of breastfeeding or intentional behaviors to increase family size. By contrast, a positive

coefficient on the indicator of death(s) of only older children is almost certainly not working

through breastfeeding behavior.

         Our second approach adds an interaction between the loss of a child and an indicator that

a woman’s parity exceeded two children at the time of the disaster. Previous research predicts a

more muted response to child death among higher parity women who may have already exceeded

their desired family size.

         Finally, to explore variation by socioeconomic status, we interact loss of a child with

whether the mother completed high school. In all the empirical models, standard errors take into

account clustering at the community level (as well as arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity, Huber,

1967).



Relationship between community-level mortality and post-tsunami fertility
         We turn next to the association between post-tsunami fertility and community-level

mortality. An association between fertility and exposure to mortality at the community level is

likely to mask substantial heterogeneity in responses across women. As noted above, the

relationship may differ for mothers who experienced at least one child death relative to those

                                                   15
mothers who did not. In addition, the fertility-mortality relationship likely varies with parity. Our

model is specified as follows:

         B ic   E 0  E 1 M c D ic  E 2 M c N ic  E 3 X ic  P c  ] ic                      [3]

As before, M indicates exposure to mortality, but here Mc is a community mortality rate,

measured as the percentage of STAR respondents killed by the tsunami. Dic is an indicator

variable for women who experienced the death of at least one child in the tsunami and Nic is an

indicator for women who had not borne a child at the time of the tsunami. Estimates of E1 and E2

measure the differential effect of variation in community-level mortality on each of these two

groups of women relative to the excluded group, women whose children survived the tsunami.

Assuming there are no unmeasured characteristics that are correlated with unobserved

heterogeneity, ] ic , estimates in [3] can be given a causal interpretation.

        In the model, comparisons are drawn between women who were living in the same

community at the time of the tsunami and so the women are likely to have much in common.

However, their own experience of the tsunami differed, at least for those who lost a child. Our

estimates attempt to take this into account and we interpret E1 as measuring the difference

between the impact of a higher level of community mortality and a lower level of community

mortality on the post-tsunami fertility of mothers who lost a child relative to those who did not. A

parallel comparison is drawn for E2 which measures the impact of different exposures to

community-level mortality between women who had not yet borne a child at the time of the

tsunami and women who were already mothers but did not lose a child.

        For these models, the sample of mothers is supplemented with women with no previous

births at the time of the tsunami (total N=3,936 women). Characteristics of the sample are

summarized in Panel B of Table 2.6 Overall, about 4% of the population was killed in the tsunami.

The sample of all women is similar to the sample of mothers with respect to exposure to the

tsunami and post-tsunami fertility. Parity at the tsunami and exposure to child mortality before


6
  The number of communities is smaller than shown in Table 1 because the analysis is conditioned on women of
reproductive age surviving the disaster and being in interviewed in follow-up surveys.
                                                                  16
the tsunami are a little lower, and the sample is younger and a little better educated, as one would

expect with the addition of woman who had not yet had children. With respect to the differences

in women from mortality-affected versus mortality-unaffected communities, women in the

mortality-affected communities were more likely to have been exposed to the tsunami, and are

more likely to have completed a high school education (for which we will control), but are

otherwise similar.



RESULTS

The Effect of Own-Child Death on Maternal Fertility
        Evidence of a behavioral fertility response to the death of a child is explored with models

[1] and [2]. Table 3 displays linear probability estimates of a birth between 2006 and 2009 for

women with at least one pre-tsunami birth. The first column presents OLS results; column 2

provides estimates from a model that includes community fixed effects. Conceptually, the fixed

effects model comparisons are drawn between mothers who were living in the same community at

the tsunami, one of whom lost a child and the other did not (controlling the characteristics Xic in

the table).

        As shown in column [1], mothers who lost at least one child are 6 percentage points more

likely to have an additional birth in the post-tsunami period. The effect is not statistically

significant. With inclusion of community fixed effects, mothers who lost at least one child are 14

percentage points more likely to have an additional birth in the post-tsunami period—an effect

that is statistically significant. A Hausman test rejects the hypothesis that the OLS and FE models

are equivalent (F2=34.54, p value<0.01). Given that 27 percent of women in the sample had an

additional birth, the 0.10 effect represents about a 37% increase in the probability of an additional

birth associated with death of one’s own child. If one measures own child mortality as the number

of children that died (column 3), the effect, 0.07, is further evidence of a strong fertility response

to child death.



                                                   17
       Interpreting these results with respect to theory or women’s welfare depends in part on

whether the pattern represents volitional behavior. Column 4 presents the results from a

specification that includes indicators distinguishing death of a young child from deaths only of

children two and older. The coefficient for losing only older children, at a statistically significant

0.098, is nearly as large as the result for losing any children in Column 2. For women who lost a

child under two, the coefficient is 0.094 and is not statistically significant. Given these results,

breastfeeding cessation cannot be the sole explanation for the pattern in column 2 suggesting that

intentional replacement plays a role.

       Comparisons are also drawn between lower parity (3 or less) and higher parity (>3)

mothers (column 5). Women at lower parities are 11 percentage points more likely to have an

additional birth after losing a child than women who did not lose a child. The gap for higher parity

mothers is just over half the size (6.6 percentage points) and not statistically significant. All

evidence, then, indicates volitional replacement behavior by mothers whose child(ren) died

during the tsunami.

       The last column in the table considers whether the strength of the response to own child

death varies by womens’ educational level—specifically whether women completed high school.

The coefficients on death of a child are 0.153 for women who did not graduate and 0.086 for

women who did. The former is statistically significant; the difference between the estimates is not.



The Fertility Effects of Mortality in the Community
       We turn now to the models for response to the level of tsunami mortality within the

community. Because this question is relevant for women with and without children, we add

childless women to the sample. Our models distinguish both women without children and

mothers who lost a child, relative to the omitted group of mothers whose children all survived the

tsunami.

       Results from model [3] using a linear probability specification are presented in Table 4.

Estimates of the coefficient on mortality at the community-level for mothers who lost at least one

                                                   18
child are reported in the first row of the table. Estimates for women with no children before the

tsunami are in the second row of the table. As before, standard errors take into account clustering

of the sample and heteroskedasticity of arbitrary form; all models include the individual controls

listed in the table.

        Both for women who lost a child and for women without children at the time of tsunami,

the effects of the level of community mortality on bearing a child after the tsunami are strong and

positive, and they are identical in size. For each additional one percentage point increase in the

population killed, mothers who lost at least one child are 0.460 percentage points more likely to

have a birth after the tsunami than other mothers. For women who had not borne a child at the

time of the tsunami the estimate is 0.468 relative to mothers who did not lose a child.

        The results are striking. In the absence of community mortality, women without children

before the tsunami are significantly less likely to have a child between 2006-2009 than are

mothers whose children survived, and mothers who lost a child are no more likely to reproduce

than women whose children survived. But in communities with higher levels of mortality, both

groups of women have appreciably higher fertility.

        Additional columns explore whether the community mortality effects are stronger for

particular subgroups of women. Results are stratified by parity in columns 2 and 3. For mothers

who lost at least one child, a strong fertility response is observed only among those with fewer

than three children. For these women the coefficient is 0.578, versus 0.056 for women of parity

three and higher. Column 4 presents estimates for women who were age 25 to 34 at the time of

the tsunami. Women in this age range who were childless pre-tsunami have an especially strong

fertility response to higher rates of mortality in the community. Each one percentage-point

increase in mortality is accompanied by an increase of 1.2 percentage points in the probability of a

birth. Finally, by schooling attainment, women who completed high school have a stronger

fertility response to community mortality than women with less education, particularly for

women who lost a child. For these women the coefficient is 1.077 for high school graduates,

relative to 0.204 for those without a degree.

                                                 19
        The final column tests the sensitivity of the central result to substituting the fraction of the

community’s children that perished for the fraction of the total population that died. Results do

not change substantially, which is not surprising given that the correlation in child and total death

rates is over 0.9.



DISCUSSION

Mortality shocks arising from natural disasters are not unusual. Worldwide, between 2000 and

2010, 1 in 28 people were affected by some form of mortality-inducing disaster arising from

natural hazards (Guha-Sapir and Hoyois 2012). Studying fertility in the wake of these events

sheds light on fundamental aspects of population rebuilding and provides a new lens through

which to consider the relationship between mortality and fertility.

        We document a large increase in fertility after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami that is

concentrated in communities where mortality from the tsunami was high. In these areas, during

the second half of the 2000-2009 decade, total fertility was nearly half of a birth higher per

woman than would have been expected in the absence of the tsunami.

        We find evidence of a statistically significant increase in fertility among women who lost

one or more children. The results are consistent with a volitional effort to increase fertility in

response to the deaths of one’s children. However, the effect is estimated to be only about 0.10

additional births, which does not come close to replacing the children these mothers lost, let alone

accounting for the large increase in the total fertility rate after the tsunami. What explains these

additional births?

        Over and above evidence of partial replacement after the death of one’s own child, we also

find a powerful effect of mortality at the community level on subsequent fertility. These effects are

largest among mothers who lost a child in the tsunami and among women who had not borne a

child at the time of the tsunami, and are very similar in magnitude for both groups of women,

amounting to almost 0.5 additional births for each additional one percentage point increase in

mortality in the community. For women who lost a child, the estimate reflects both the impact of

                                                   20
that death and the death of children in the community. For women who had not borne a child, the

0.5 additional births reflects the impact of community-level mortality. With additional waves of

STAR it will be possible to determine whether this pattern reflects accelerated timing of births or

results in larger completed family sizes.

       Based on the fixed effects estimates in column 1 of Table 4, we estimate there were 9,500

more births between 2006 and 2009 in the study area than would have occurred in the absence of

tsunami-related mortality. Of those births, 13% occur to mothers who lost at least one child in the

tsunami and 87% occur to women who had not borne a child prior to the tsunami.

       The estimated effects are not likely to reflect a motivation of “hoarding” or “insurance” as

traditionally theorized in demographic transition literature. A tsunami of this magnitude had not

affected mainland Aceh for five centuries, and it is unlikely that most women expected an event of

this magnitude to occur again.

       Instead, the disaster may have increased broad pronatalist sentiment and a desire to

“rebuild” communities. Women without children at the time of the disaster would be expected to

respond more readily to this kind of sentiment, and the response might be magnified in closely-

knit communities that share strong kin ties. In that case, community members may have sped up

family building to replace the villages’ lost children.

       Entrance into new unions is also part of the story. Marriage is nearly universal in Aceh

and marriage and childbearing are tightly connected. Births outside of marriage are nearly non-

existent. Because men were more likely to survive the disaster and more likely to re-partner in its

wake, some new unions with younger women were formed (Burrows et al. 2011). But it does not

follow that that the new births are an accidental afterthought of the new unions. Instead, these

new unions were almost certainly generated with the intent of childbearing. In this context,

intentions related to union formation and childbearing cannot be cleanly separated.

       Thus, the fertility increases observed after the disaster likely arose from multiple

mechanisms operating simultaneously. For childless women, a desire to contribute to rebuilding

families and communities through reproduction may have increased fertility. For mothers who

                                                   21
suffered the death of children, the desire to have another child in the aftermath of a child loss

raised fertility.

         Our study provides a complementary lens on questions central to the study of population

dynamics. Importantly, we do not directly address some of the hypotheses in the earlier

demographic transition literature linking mortality and fertility decline. The fertility effects of

mortality increase and mortality decrease are likely asymmetric for a number of reasons,

including differences in how increases and decreases in mortality are perceived (e.g., Montgomery

2000).

         Instead, the contributions of this study include the use of several design elements to

ensure that the measured fertility changes arise at least partially in response to the loss of

children and to the loss of community members. Using data from a population-representative

sample established before the disaster and following those respondents, including movers, over

time mitigates legitimate concerns about sample-selection bias. In addition to taking into account

individual and community attributes measured before the disaster that likely capture pre-existing

vulnerability to mortality (and may be correlated with fertility behavior), we estimate models that

include community fixed effects and draw comparisons between women living in the same

community. We thereby reduce the chance that our estimates are contaminated by unobserved

heterogeneity. Adjusting for exposure and including community fixed effects reduces the

likelihood that we are measuring a fertility response to other changes occurring in the context of

the disaster—and are instead measuring a response to the loss of a child and exposure to

mortality in communities.

         The disaster effects observed here (Figure 1) are quite large in comparison with events like

Hurricane Hugo, the September 11th attacks, and the Oklahoma City bombing. Instead they more

closely align with the events such as the high mortality earthquakes in Iran (Finlay 2009;

Hosseini-Chavoshi and Abbasi-Shavazi 2013). One clear difference between events in the United

States and earthquakes is the magnitude of the accompanying mortality increase. This

explanation is consistent with the evidence presented here that the mortality shock itself had a

                                                  22
sizeable influence on fertility in damaged communities. By contrast, the aggregate effect on

fertility is substantially smaller than observed after the mortality increases accompanying the

reign of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia (Heuveline and Poch 2007), or after World War II in

Western Europe. Among other things, war-related crises tend to last longer; it may be that

periods of conflict often generate delayed fertility, whereas natural hazards support a much

smaller tempo effect.

       Evidence from the Cambodian population suggests that a tempo effect may have been

operating in tandem with some of the other contextual mechanisms we have identified as

potentially relevant for the post-tsunami Acehnese. As in Aceh, part of the fertility boom in

Cambodia is attributable to women who were young and likely nulliparous at the time of the

Cambodian genocide (Heuveline and Poch 2007).

       A further distinguishing factor of the 2004 tsunami for the Indonesian population is the

differential mortality for adult women relative to men (Frankenberg et al. 2011). If the fertility

response to death emerges in part through family building—a phenomenon noted as early as

Eversley’s (1957) study of 18th century England—the effects observed here will be more relevant to

mortality shocks that, through direct or indirect means, influence entrance into new unions.

       Looking ahead, it will be important to understand the long-term impact of the tsunami on

Indonesian families. A five-year follow-up post-disaster is unusually long in length. It is possible

to assess the extent to which families of older women look markedly different as they age out of

their reproductive years than they did prior to the disaster. For younger women, we cannot yet

assess whether the increase in fertility observed from 2006-2009 translates into larger completed

family sizes or simply reflects a shift in fertility timing, but answers to this question will emerge as

additional data are collected.




                                                   23
REFERENCES

Agadjanian, V. & N. Prata. (2002). War, peace, and fertility in Angola. Demography 39(2): 215-231.
Ashton, B., K. Hill, A. Piazza, & R. Zeitz. (1984). Famine in China, 1958-61. Population and Development
        Review 10(4):613-645.
Athukorala, P-C. & B.P. Resosudarmo. The Indian Ocean Tsunami: economic impact, disaster
        management, and lessons. Asian Economic Papers 4(1):1-39.
Atella, V. & Rosati, F.C. (2000). Uncertainty about children’s survival and fertility: a test using Indian
        microdata. Journal of Population Economics 13:263-278.
Blanc A. (2004). The Role of Conflict in the Rapid Fertility Decline in Eritrea and Prospects for the Future.
        Studies in Family Planning 35(4):236-245.
Borneman, J. (2002). Reconciliation after Ethnic Cleansing: Listening, Retribution, Affiliation. Public
        Culture 14(2): 281-384.
Burrows, M., E. Frankenberg, P. Katz, B. Sikoki, & D. Thomas. (2012). Family formation in Indonesia after
        the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami. Population Association of America Meetings.
Cain, M. (1981). “Risk and insurance: Perspectives on fertility and agrarian change in India and
        Bangladesh.” Population and Development Review, 9.4:688-702.
Caldwell, J.C. (2004). Social upheaval and fertility decline. Journal of Family History 29(4):382-406.
Carta, G., A. D’Alfonso, I. Colagrande, P. Catana, M. Casacchia, F. Patacchiola. (2012). Post-earthquake
        birth-rate evaluation using the brief cope. Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine
        25(11):2411-2414.
Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) [Indonesia] and State Ministry of Population/National Family Planning
        Coordinating Board (NFPCB) and Ministry of Health (MOH) and Macro Intemational Inc. (MI).
        2008. Indonesia Demographic and Health Survey 2007. Calverton, Maryland: CBS and MI.
Cohan, C.L. & S.W. Cole. (2002). Life Course Transitions and Natural Disaster: Marriage, Birth, and
        Divorce Following Hurricane Hugo. Journal of Family Psychology 16(1): 14-25.
Cohan, C.L. (2010). Family transitions following natural and terrorist disaster: Hurricane Hugo and the
        September 11 terrorist attack. Pp. 149-164 in Handbook of Stressful Transitions Across the
        Lifespan. (T.W. Miller, ed.). New York: Springer.
Conning, J. & C. Udry. (2007). Rural financial markets in developing countries. Pages 2857-2908 in
        Agricultural Development: Farmers, Farm Production and Farm Markets.
Doocy, Shannon, Yuri Gorokhovich, Gilbert Burnham, Deborah Balk, & Courtland Robinson. (2007).
        Tsunami Mortality Estimates and Vulnerability Mapping in Aceh, Indonesia. American Journal of
        Public Health 97(S1):S146-S151.
Efron, B. & R.J. Tibshirani. (1994). An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Boca Raton: Taylor and Hall.
Eversley, D.E.C. (1957). A survey of population in an area of Worcestershire from 1660-1850 on the basis of
        parish records. Population Studies 10(3):253-279.
Finlay, J. (2009). Fertility Response to Natural Disasters: The Case of Three High Mortality Earthquakes.
        Policy Research Working Paper #4338. World Bank.
Frankenberg, E. (1998). The Relationship Between Infant and Child Mortality and Subsequent Fertility in

                                                       24
        Indonesia. Pp. 316-338 in From Death to Birth (Montgomery and Cohen, eds). Washington DC:
        National Academy Press.
Frankenberg, E., T. Gillespie, S. Preston, B. Sikoki, & D. Thomas. 2011. Mortality, the Family, and the
        Indian Ocean Tsunami. The Economic Journal 121:F162-182.
Fritsche, I., E. Jonas, P. Fischer, N. Koranyi, N. Berger, B. Fleischmann. (2007). Mortality salience and the
        desire for offspring. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 43(5):753-762.
Finlay, J.E. (2009). Fertility Response to Natural Disasters: The Case of Three High Mortality Earthquakes.
        Policy Research Working Paper #4338. World Bank.
Geertz, C. (1968). Agricultural Involution. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gillespie, T., J Chu, E. Frankenberg, & D. Thomas. (2007). Assessment and prediction of natural harzards
        from satellite imagery. Progress in Physical Geography 31.5:459-70.
Gray, C., E. Frankenberg, T. Gillespie, C. Sumantri, & D. Thomas. (2014). Studying displacement after a
        disaster using large scale survey methods: Sumatra after the 2004 Tsunami. Annals of the
        Association of American Geographers. 104.3:594-612.
Grimard, F. (1997). Household consumption smoothing through ethnic ties: evidence from Cote d’Ivoire.
        Journal of Development Economics 53(2): 391-422.
Grummer-Strawn, L.M., P. W. Stupp, & Z. Mei. (1998). Effect of a child’s death on birth spacing: a cross-
        national analysis. Pp. 39-73 in From Death to Birth (Montgomery and Cohen, eds). Washington
        DC: National Academy Press.
Guha-Sapir D. & Below R. (2006). Collecting Data on Disaster: Easier Said than Done. Center for Research
        on the Epidemiology of Disasters Research Paper #221.
Guha-Sapir, D. & P. Hoyois. (2012). Measuring the human and economic impact of disasters. Center for
        Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters.
Hamoudi, A., E. Frankenberg, C. Sumantri, & D. Thomas. (2014). Impact of the December 2004 Tsunami
        on Birth Outcomes in Aceh, Indonesia.
Hapsari, E.D., Widyawati, W.A. Nisman, L. Lusmilasari, R. Siswishanto, & H. Matsuo. (2009). “Change in
        contraceptive methods following the Yogyakarta earthquake and its association with the prevalence
        of unplanned pregnancy.” Contraception 79(4): 316-322.
Heuveline, P. (2008). ‘Between one and three million’: Toward demographic reconstruction of a decade of
        Cambodian history (1970-79). Population Studies 52(1):49-65.
Heuveline, P. & B. Poch (2007). The Phoenix Population: Demographic Crisis and Rebound in Cambodia.
          Demography 44(2): 405-426.
Hill, K. (2004). War, Humanitarian Crises, Population Displacement, and Fertility: A Review of
          Evidence. Washington D.C.: National Resource Council.
Hossain, M.B., J.F. Phillips, & T.K. LeGrand. (2007). The Impact of Childhood Mortality on Fertility in Six
        Rural Thanas of Bangladesh. Demography 44(4):771-784.
Hosseini-Chavoshi, M. & M.J. Abbasi-Shavazi. (2013). Demographic consequences of the 2003 Bam
        earthquake. International Conference on the Demography of Disasters. Australian National
        University.


                                                      25
Huber, P. (1967). The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates under Nonstandard Conditions.
        Proceedings of the Firth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1:221-
        33.
Jansen, S. & E. Helms. (2009). The White Plague: National-Demographic Rhetoric and its Resonance after
        the Yugoslav Wars. Pp 219-244 in Gender Dynamics and Post-Conflict Reconstruction (Eifler and
        Seifert, eds). Frankfurt: Peter Land.
Kuate Defo, B. (1998). Fertility Response to Infant and Child Mortality in Africa with Special Reference to
        Cameroon. Pp 254-315 in From Death to Birth (Montgomery and Cohen, eds). Washington DC:
        National Academy Press.
Lee, R. (1997). Population dynamics: Equilibrium, disequilibrium, and consequences of fluctuations in M.
        R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark (eds), Handbook of Population Economics Volume 1B, Cap 19, 1063-
        115. Amsterdam: North Holland.
LeGrand, T., T. Koppenhaver, N. Mondain, & S. Randall. (2003). Reassessing the Insurance Effect: A
        Qualitative Analysis of Fertility Behavior in Senegal and Zimbabwe. Population and Development
        Review. 29(3):375-403.
Lindstrom, D. P. & B. Berhanu. (1999). The Impact of War, Famine, and Economic Decline of Marital
        Fertility in Ethiopia. Demography 36(2):247-261.
Lindstrom, D. P. & Kiros, G-E. (2007). The Impact of Infant and Child Death on Subsequent Fertility in
        Ethiopia. Population Research and Policy Review 26:31-49.
Marshall, B.K. & J.S. Picou. (2008). Postnormal science, precautionary principle, and worst cases: the
        challenge of twenty-first century catastrophes. Sociological Inquiry 78(2):230-247.
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Sutton PD, Ventura SJ, Menacker F, & Monson ML. (2003). Births: Final Data for
        2002. National Vital Statistics Report 52(10). National Center for Health Statistics.
McAdoo, B.G., N. Richardson, & J. Borrero. (2007). Inundation Distances and Run-Up Measurements from
        ASTER, QuickBird and SRTM Data, Aceh Coast, Indonesia.”International Journal of Remote
      Sensing 28(13-14, July 2007):2961-2975.
Montgomery, M. R. & Cohen B., eds. (1998). From Death to Birth: Mortality Decline and Reproductive
      Change. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Montgomery, M. (2000). Perceiving mortality decline. Population and Development Review 26(4):695-
        819.
Morin, R. (2002). “A 9/11 Baby Boom?” The Washington Post 31 March.
Nakamura, K., S. Sheps, & P.C. Arck. (2008). Stress and reproductive failure: past notions, present insights,
        and future directions. Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics 25(2-3):47-62.
Nakonezny, P.A., Reddick, R., & Rodgers, J.L. (2004). Did Divorces Decline After the Oklahoma City
        Bombing? Journal of Marriage and Family 66(1):90-100.
Neria Y, Nandi A, Galea S. 2008. “Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Following Disasters: A Systematic
        Review.” Psychological Medicine 38:467-480.
Norris. F.H., M.J. Friedman, P.J. Watson, C.M. Byrne, E. Diaz, & K. Kaniasty (2002). 60,000
        Disaster Victims Speak: Part I. An Empirical Review of the Empirical Literature, 1981–2001.
        Psychiatry 65(3):207–39.
                                                     26
Olsen, R.J. (1980). Estimating the Effect of Child Mortality on the Number of Births. Demography
        17(4):429-443.
Palloni, A. & Rafalimanana, H. (1999). The Effects of Infant Mortality on Fertility Revisited: New Evidence
        from Latin America. Demography 36(1):41-58.
Palloni, A. & Tienda, M. (1986). The Effects of Breastfeeding and Pace of Fertility on Mortality at Early
        Ages. Demography 23(1):31-52.
Parker, V. J. & A. J. Douglas (2010). Stress in early pregnancy: Maternal neuro-endocrine-immune
        responses and effects. Journal of Reproductive Immunology 85(2010), 86–92.
Pinghui, Z. (2013). New births help Sichuan quake victims overcome loss of children. South China
        Morning Post. 7 May.
Portner, C. (2007). Gone with the Wind? Hurricane Risk, Fertility and Education, mimeo.
Preston, S. H. (1978). The Effects of Infant and Child Mortality on Fertility. New York: Academic Press.
Qin, L., S. Luo, X. Li, Y. Wang. & S. Li. (2009). Fertility assistance program following the Sichuan
        earthquake in China. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics 104(3):182-183.
Ramakrishnan, D., S. Ghosh, V. Raja, R. Chandran, & A. Jeyram. (2005). Trails of the killer tsunami: a
        preliminary assessment using satellite remote sensing technique. Current Science 88(5):709-711.
Rindfuss, R.R. & Sweet, J.A. (1978). The Pervasiveness of Postwar Fertility Trends in the United States. In
        K.E. Taeuber, L.L. Bumpass, and J.A. Sweet, (eds): Social Demography. New York: Academic
        Press, 1978.
Rodgers, J.L., C.A. St. John, & R. Coleman. 2005. “Did Fertility Go up after the Oklahoma City Bombing?
        An Analysis of Births in Metropolitan Counties in Oklahoma. Demography 42(4):675-692.
Rosenzweig, M. R. and T. P. Schultz. (1983). Consumer Demand and Household Production: The
        Relationship between Fertility and Child Mortality. American Economic Review, 73.2:38-42.
Rosero-Bixby, L. (1998). Child mortality and the fertility transition: aggregated and multilevel evidence
        from Costa Rica. Pp. 384-410 in From Death to Birth (Montgomery and Cohen, eds). Washington
        DC: National Academy Press.
Sandberg, J. (2006). Infant mortality, social networks, and subsequent fertility. American Sociological
        Review 71(2):288-309.
Segraves RT. 1998. “Psychiatric Illness and Sexual Function.” International Journal of Impotence
        Research 10: S131-33.
Scelfo, J. 2002 “A 9-11 Baby Boomlet.” Newsweek. 3 June.
Smith, S.K. & C. McCarty. 1996. Demographic Effects of Natural Disasters: A Case Study of Hurricane
        Andrew. Demography 33(2):265-275.
Solomon, S., J. Greenberg, & T. Pyszczynski. 2000. Pride and Prejudice: Fear of Death and Social Behavior.
        Current Directions in Psychological Research 9:200-204.
Stein, Z. & M. Susser. (1975). Fertility, fecundity, famine: food rations in the Dutch Famine 1944/5 have a
        causal relation to fertility, and probably to fecundity. Human Biology 47(1):131-154.
Suri, T. (2003). “Spillovers in village consumption: Testing the extent of partial insurance”,
        Department of Economics, Yale University.
Townsend, R.M. (1994). Risk and Insurance in Village India. Econometrica 62(3): 539-591.
                                                      27
Trinitapoli, J. & S. Yeatman. (2011). Uncertainty and fertility in a generalized AIDS epidemic. American
        Sociological Review 76(7):935-954.
Umitsu, Masatomo, Charlchai Tanavud, & Boonrak Patanakanog. (2007). Effects of Landforms on Tsunami
        Flow in the Plains of Banda Aceh, Indonesia, and Nam Khem, Thailand. Marine Geology
        242(2007):141-153.
Umitsu, M. (2011). The geoenvironment and the giant tsunami disaster in the Northern part of Sumatra
        Island, Indonesia. Pp 51-64 in The Indian Ocean Tsunami (P.P.Karan & S.P.Subbiah, Eds).
        Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
Vail, K.E., Juhl, J., Arndt, J., Vess, M., Routledge, C., Rutjens, B.T. (2012). When Death is Good for Life:
        Considering the Positive Trajectories of Terror Management. Personality and Social Psychology
        Review 16(4):303-329.
Vos, Femke, Jose Rodriguez, Regina Below, & D. Guha-Supir. (2010). Annual Disaster Statistical Review
        2009”. Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED).
Watkins, S. & J. Menken. (1985). Famines in historical perspective. Population and Development Review
       11(4):647-675.




                                                      28
Figure 1. ASFR and TFR Differences by Period and Presence of Tsunami Mortality in the Community



                    2000-2004                                                   2006-2009
 0.045
                                                                                                                                   Mortality in
                    TFR difference                                              TFR difference
                                                                                                                                   community:           Some    None     Difference
   0.04                     -0.56                                                       + 0.15
                                                                                                                                   TFR
                                                                                                                                          2000-2004     2.18     2.74      -0.56
 0.035                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                          2006-2009     2.67     2.52       0.15

   0.03                                                                                                                                   Difference    0.49    -0.22       0.71


 0.025                                                                                                                             ASFR (post- minus pre-tsunami)
                                                                                                                                          15-19         0.001   0.000      0.001
   0.02                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                          20-24         0.011   -0.001     0.013
                                                                                                                                          25-34         0.004   -0.004     0.009
  0.015
                                                                                                                                          35-49         0.002   0.001      0.002
   0.01
                                                                                                                                   No. of communities    92      191

 0.005

      0




            15-19
                                                                        15-19




                                                35-39
                                                                                                           35-39




                             25-29
                                                                                           25-29




                                                                45-49
                                                                                                                           45-49




                                        30-34
                                                                                                   30-34




                    20-24
                                                                                20-24




                                                        40-44
                                                                                                                   40-44




                                     Some tsunami mortality                No tsunami mortality


Notes: Average quarter-year age-specific probabilities of live birth presented for the pre-tsunami period: 1 January 2000—31 December 2004, and the post-
tsunami period: 1 January 2006—31 December 2009, for women in 283 communities. In each quarter-year, women from the baseline survey who are alive and
aged 15-49 contribute an observation. Pooled data contain 176,862 observations for 6,363 women. Average annual total fertility rates estimated as
TFR = 5 x 4 x Σi(ASFRi), where i indexes 5-year age intervals.
Table 1. Tsunami Impacts by whether the Community was Mortality-Affected

                                                                                Mortality Zone

                                                                          Community       Community not
                                                                          affected by       affected by
                                                                       tsunami mortality tsunami mortality
A. % dead as a result of the tsunami
   All ages                                                                 29.0%             0.5%
       Children less than 5                                                 33.0%             1.0%
       Children 5-14                                                        30.0%             0.4%
       Women 15-49                                                          33.0%             0.7%
       Men 15-19                                                            19.0%             0.3%

B. Measures of physical damage
   Satellite-based: number of pixels indicating a post-tsunami
                                                                             5.1               0.8
   change to bare earth (mean, range 0-9)
   Village leader reports:
       Water contaminated                                                    69%               12%
       Damage to roads                                                       68%               21%
       Problem with debris                                                   69%               13%



C. Subjective measures of tsunami impacts
   Village leader reports that life in the community changed for the         73%               34%
   worse
   Reported reasons
      Loss of population                                                     21%                1%
      Increases in price of rice                                             41%               30%
      Increases in other food prices                                         50%               39%
      Fewer business opportunities                                           43%               26%
      Fewer jobs                                                             45%               26%

Number of communities                                                         96               195
Table 2. Sample characteristics of mothers at time of tsunami and all women age 15-49

                                                      Mothers at time of tsunami                    All women age 15-49
                                                                         Difference:                                Difference:
                                               Mean       Std Err   Mother experienced      Mean      Std Err    Mortality affected -
                                                                    child death - did not                        other communities
                                                                      Diff      Std Err                            Diff      Std Err
Tsunami-related deaths
   % mothers lost >1 child in tsunami          5.5           0.47
     Number of children died | >1 died         1.4           0.06
   % community population died                                                               4.2          0.19
    % died in mortality-affected communities                                                14.7          0.67
Tsunami-exposure: saw waves                    10.4          0.64     43.0         5.8      11.0          0.50     22.5        3.1
Post- tsunami fertility
   % women had birth post tsunami              27.1          0.93      7.1         5.1      31.2          0.74     4.5         2.3
Characteristics of women: Pre-tsunami
   Number of children born pre-tsunami         2.8           0.03      0.2         0.2      1.6           0.03     -0.1        0.1
   % who lost >1 child pre-tsunami             7.4           0.54     -3.1         1.8      6.7           0.49     -4.4        1.4
Characteristics of women at time of tsunami
   Age                                         34.4          0.16      0.9         1.0      29.2          0.15     -0.6        0.4
   Education - % completed
     < high school                             13.4          0.71      8.7         5.3       9.3          0.46     -3.0        2.0
     some high school                          49.6          1.04     -0.1         6.3      53.0          0.80     -7.2        3.2
     > high school                             37.0          1.01     -8.6         6.3      37.7          0.77     10.2        4.0
Sample size                                           2301                                         3936
Table 3. Effect of death of own child in tsunami on subsequent birth probabilities
        Dependent variable: Indicator variable for birth post-tsunami
                             Model:                 Child died       # children           Child died interacted with
Covariates                                     OLS           FE         died         Child age      Parity     Education
                                                [1]          [2]         [3]            [4]           [5]          [6]
Mother lost >1 child in tsunami                0.050        0.099
                                              [0.031]      [0.036]
Number of children lost in tsunami                                      0.069
                                                                       [0.023]
(1) if mother lost >1 child interacted with
    age of children at tsunami
        all age >2                                                                     0.098
                                                                                      [0.045]
        some <2                                                                        0.094
                                                                                      [0.231]
    mother parity at tsunami
       <3                                                                                           0.114
                                                                                                   [0.044]
        >3                                                                                          0.066
                                                                                                   [0.056]
    mother completed high school?
       yes                                                                                                       0.086
                                                                                                                [0.037]
        no                                                                                                       0.153
                                                                                                                [0.103]

Mother's parity at tsunami                    -0.001      -0.009       -0.010         -0.010       -0.014       -0.009
                                              [0.005]     [0.006]      [0.006]        [0.006]      [0.009]      [0.006]
Mother parity >3 at tsunami                                                                         0.024
                                                                                                   [0.028]
Mother exposed to tsunami waves                0.016       0.065        0.065          0.065        0.064        0.063
                                              [0.024]     [0.032]      [0.032]        [0.033]      [0.032]      [0.031]
Mother completed junior high                   0.030       0.037        0.037          0.035        0.038        0.037
                                              [0.019]     [0.024]      [0.024]        [0.025]      [0.024]      [0.024]
Mother completed high school                   0.062       0.073        0.072          0.070        0.074        0.070
                                              [0.025]     [0.034]      [0.034]        [0.034]      [0.034]      [0.034]

Sample size                                2301          2301           2301           2301          2301        2301
R2                                         0.21          0.22           0.22           0.22          0.22        0.22
Community fixed effects                     No            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
Number of communities                       276           276           276            276            276        276
Notes: Linear probability models for all mothers at time of tsunami living in mortality-affected districts.
       Community fixed effects measured for community of residence at time of pre-tsunami survey.
       All models include controls for age of mother splines, ln(per capita expenditure), indicator variables
       for household ownership of land and ownership of house, all measured prior to the tsunami.
       Standard errors take into account clustering at the community level and robust to heteroskedasticity.
       Difference between OLS and FE estimate of impact of child death = 0.049 (s.e.=0.020).
Table 4: Effect of community mortality on probabiliy of a post-tsunami birth
                                                                Fraction of total population in community that died                               Fraction of
             Woman's characteristics                                     Parity                  Age                Completed high school          children
                    at time of tsunami                           <3                >3            25-34               No            Yes             that died
Covariates                                     [1]               [2]               [3]             [4]               [5]             [6]                 [7]
Fraction died in tsunami interacted with
A. Mother lost at least one child             0.460             0.578           0.056             0.279             0.204           1.077               0.315
                                             [0.184]           [0.231]         [0.325]           [0.372]           [0.220]         [0.311]             [0.146]
B. Woman childless pre-tsunami                0.468             0.488             .               1.238             0.400           0.565               0.341
                                             [0.181]           [0.190]                           [0.421]           [0.231]         [0.345]             [0.153]

Mother lost >1 child in tsunami               0.012             0.004           0.088             0.204             0.029          -0.024               0.026
                                             [0.043]           [0.053]         [0.077]           [0.106]           [0.046]         [0.110]             [0.041]
Woman childless pre-tsunami                  -0.150             -0.167             .             -0.224            -0.155          -0.153               -0.146
                                             [0.025]           [0.030]                           [0.051]           [0.032]         [0.046]             [0.025]

Woman's parity at tsunami                    -0.008             -0.022          0.013            -0.008            -0.010          -0.001               -0.008
                                             [0.005]           [0.011]         [0.012]           [0.016]           [0.006]         [0.013]             [0.005]
Woman exposed to tsunami waves                0.028             0.026           -0.022           -0.013             0.023           0.049               0.028
                                             [0.026]           [0.029]         [0.039]           [0.062]           [0.033]         [0.043]             [0.026]
Woman completed junior high                   0.029             0.021           0.071             0.118             0.034              .                0.028
                                             [0.023]           [0.029]         [0.044]           [0.077]           [0.024]                             [0.023]
Woman completed high school                   0.092             0.091            0.112            0.162                .              .                 0.090
                                             [0.028]           [0.034]         [0.067]           [0.080]                                               [0.028]
Sample size                                   3,936             3347              589             1264              2675            1261                3931
Number of communities                          283               283              226             268               272             233                  280
R2                                            0.16              0.13              0.19            0.07              0.15            0.17                0.16
F test (p value)
    Row A = Row B                             0.970             0.707                            0.020              0.489           0.193              0.882
    Rows
       ow A and B = 0                         0.008             0.010             0.863          0.011              0.191           0.002              0.025
Notes: Linear probability models with community fixed effects for all women age 15-49 and living in mortality-affected districts at time of tsunami.
       See notes to Table 3.
