                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TURNOUT ACROSS DEMOCRACIES

                                          Helios Herrera
                                         Massimo Morelli
                                         Salvatore Nunnari

                                       Working Paper 20451
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20451


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




We are grateful to Gary Cox, Navin Kartik, and Santiago Sanchez-Page for helpful comments and
interesting discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, and Salvatore Nunnari. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Turnout Across Democracies
Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, and Salvatore Nunnari
NBER Working Paper No. 20451
September 2014
JEL No. D02,D72

                                               ABSTRACT

World democracies widely differ in electoral rules, as well as in legislative, executive or legal institutions.
Different institutional environments induce different mappings from electoral outcomes to the distribution
of power. We explore how these mappings affect voters' participation to an election. We show that
the effect of such institutional differences on turnout depends on the distribution of voters' preferences
for the competing parties. In particular, we uncover a novel contest effect: given the distribution of
preferences, turnout increases and then decreases when we move from a more proportional to a less
proportional system; turnout is maximized for an intermediate degree of proportionality. Moreover,
we generalize the competition effect, common to models of endogenous turnout: given the institutional
environment, turnout increases in the ex-ante closeness of the election and peaks when the population
is evenly split between the two parties. These results are robust to a wide range of modeling approaches,
including ethical voter models, voter mobilization models, and rational voter models.


Helios Herrera                                         Salvatore Nunnari
HEC Montreal                                           Columbia University
3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine               Department of Political Science
Montréal (Québec)                                      420 West 118th Street, 718 IAB
Canada H3T 2A7                                         New York, NY 10027
helios.herrera@hec.ca                                  snunnari@columbia.edu

Massimo Morelli
Columbia University
Department of Economics
420 West 118th Street, 720 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mm3331@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
Electoral participation is considered as an indication of the health of a democracy
(Rose 1980, Powell 1982) and a pillar of the democratic ideal of political equality
(Lijphart 1997). The historical average turnout rate as a percentage of voting age
population displays a large variance across world democracies: New Zealand, Por-
tugal, Indonesia, Italy, and Albania have an average turnout rate above 85%, while
Senegal, Colombia, Ecuador, Ghana, and the U.S. all have average turnout rates
below 50%.1 A number of empirical papers have attempted to account for cross-
national variations in turnout (Powell 1980, 1982, 1986; Crewe 1981; Jackman 1986;
Jackman and Miller 1995; Blais and Carty 1990; Black 1991; Franklin 1996; Blais
and Dobrzynska 1998). These studies highlighted that political institutions, not only
electoral rules but also party systems, are an important factor affecting turnout.
    This raises an important question: How do political institutions, that is, elec-
toral rules, bicameralism, judicial review, federalism, separation of powers, commit-
tee chair assignments, and all other institutions determining the power of majority
and minorities, affect electoral participation in a democracy? A recent theoretical
literature in economics and political science has compared turnout in first-past-the-
post (FPTP) and proportional representation (PR) electoral systems (Herrera et al.
2014, Kartal, forthcoming, Faravelli and Sanchez-Pages, forthcoming) and has shown
that what system promotes higher turnout crucially depends on the closeness of the
election. However, this is unsatisfactory as most electoral systems in use around the
world are de jure or de facto rather somewhere in between FPTP and PR. Many
countries adopt explicitly mixed systems, where two electoral systems using differ-
ent formulae run alongside each other. These systems are likely to give results the
proportionality of which falls somewhere between that of a FPTP and that of a PR
system.2 Moreover, even when the electoral rule is not mixed, formal and informal
institutions in the legislative, executive or judicial branches (for example, the veto
power of a “qualified minority” in the U.S., the way margins of victory translate into
    1
     Pintor et al. 2012, based on electoral data from all parliamentary elections since 1945.
    2
     Usually, one of the two systems is a plurality system, often a single-member district system, and
the other a list PR system. We observe two forms of mixed system. When seat allocations at the PR
level is dependent on what happens in the SMD seats and compensates for any disproportionality
that arises there, the system is called a Mixed Member Proportional (MMP) system (this is the
case, for instance, in Germany, New Zealand, Hungary, Bolivia, Venezuela, Scotland, Wales and
in Italy between 1994 and 2001). When the two sets of elections are not dependent on each other
for seat allocations, the system is called a Parallel or Mixed Member Majoritarian (MMM) system
(this is the case, for instance, in Japan, South Korea, Russia, Ukraine, Lithuania, and Croatia). A
comparative analysis of these systems is presented in Moser and Scheiner (2004).



                                                  2
committee assignments or guarantee a more powerful mandate) induce a different
mapping from electoral outcomes to the distribution of power. This means that,
in order to assess the effect of political institutions on turnout it is important to
consider the finer details of the electoral rule, as well as the political institutions me-
diating between seat shares and actual distribution of power, well beyond the crude
distinction between majoritarian and proportional elections.

    This is exactly what we try to do in this paper. In particular, we develop a for-
mal approach in order to provide a rigorous foundations for the study of the complex
relationship between proportionality and turnout. We present a theoretical analysis
of the fundamental causes of the variation in turnout based on differences in insti-
tutions for political power sharing, or proportionality. Instead of exploring all the
formal and informal political institutions mentioned above, we consider all possi-
ble determinants of the degree of proportionality in a reduced form, considering as
equally important all the different institutional systems impacting the mapping from
vote shares to the relative weight of different parties in policy making (henceforth
power shares). We use the “contest success function”3 and introduce a power sharing,
or proportionality, parameter, γ, that allows us to embed a wide array of electoral
systems or power sharing regimes, ranging from a fully proportional power sharing
system (γ = 1) to a pure winner-take-all system (γ = ∞). This modeling innovation
allows us to span continuously across all electoral systems and to analyze them. We
study the role of these institutions on electoral participation by characterizing how
that vote-shares-to-power-shares mapping affects voters’ incentives to vote and par-
ties’ campaign efforts. We try to develop a theory that is as robust and general as
possible. First, we take into account the distribution of political preferences in the
population, a contextual factor that has proven to be crucial in models of endogenous
turnout (see, for example, Herrera et al. 2014 and Kartal, forthcoming). Second, we
allow for multiple alternative behavioral assumptions about the turnout mechanics,
rather than limiting our analysis to one single approach.

    We show that the effect of the institutional differences on turnout depends on
the distribution of voters’ preferences for the competing parties or the “closeness”
of the election in a non obvious way.4 In particular, we uncover a novel contest
   3
     See Tullock 1980. This function is extensively used in several economic contexts, especially in
the contest literature (see among many others Skaperdas 2006) typically as a mapping from efforts
or resources to the chance of victory.
   4
     Cox (1999), as summary of the analysis of the elite mobilization section, says that “...the
argument following Key (1949) says that closeness will (a) boost mobilizational effort and (b)
correlate positively with turnout.” Our model will qualify these statements for each degree of


                                                 3
effect: given any asymmetric distribution of preferences, as we move from a relatively
more proportional to a more majoritarian system, turnout increases first and then
decreases. Therefore, turnout is highest for an intermediate degree of proportionality
of the electoral system. The particular degree of proportionality depends on the
distribution of preferences, but it is always intermediate for any ex-ante uneven
election. The intuition is as follows. When γ grows large, the electoral system
becomes more and more similar to a winner-take-all system. Hence, turnout drops
for any lopsided preference distribution because the underdog side has no chance
of winning, and winning is all that matters. When γ is low, the electoral system
becomes similar to a proportional system with moderate turnout for all preference
distributions, as the incentives to turnout remain even in a very lopsided election:
there is always a proportional power gain for turning out more. Finally and crucially,
for intermediate γ turnout is the highest. To understand the intuition for this result,
imagine that the preference split is 40-60 and think which institutional system would
grant the largest turnout in this case. Intuitively, such a system would be one that
grants significant power gains around an election outcome close to 40-60. Namely, an
intermediate system whose vote-shares-to-power-shares mapping is very steep around
a qualified minority of 40%, so that the marginal gain from extra votes can make a
significant difference in the powers granted de jure or de facto.5
    In addition to this, we generalize to all institutional environments the competition
effect, already well-documented in several models of endogenous turnout: given the
institutional environment, turnout increases in the ex-ante closeness of the election
and peaks when the population is evenly split between the two parties. Several
experimental work has confirmed this theoretical prediction (see Levine and Palfrey
2007, Kartal 2014, Herrera et al. 2014 ).
    We derive our results for the ethical voter model and then show that these results
are preserved in other costly voting models. These models are the voter mobilization
model, which we fully characterize and the rational voter model, for which we provide
numerical simulations supporting the qualitative results of the previous two models.
Unlike the rational voter model, the ethical voter model, for which we conduct the
core of our analysis, assumes that voters on the two sides overcome the free-rider
problem so that each side turns out at the optimal level. This guarantees that turnout
remains large in a large election, a desirable property. On the technical side, the
decreasing generalized reversed hazard rate (DGRHR) property of the cost function,
proportionality and hence comparatively. We do this not only for the mobilization logic but also
from the instrumental and ethical voting perspectives.
   5
     So for instance, leadership in committees, ministerial appointments, power to appoint or veto
nominations, veto power on some types of legislation, etc.


                                                4
a regularity condition on probability distributions, turns out to be they key sufficient
condition to obtain all the results in all group models. The equilibria from all models
feature another well documented property (see, among others, Castanheira 2003), the
underdog effect. We show that, in all the models we present and for all institutional
systems, the underdog effect is non-full, which means that the side which enjoys the
majority of ex-ante support also obtains the majority of the votes in equilibrium for
all γ. This property drives all comparative statics results we obtain, namely, the
competition effect and, most importantly, the contest effect described above.

1.1    Related Literature
Our modeling strategy is related to a body of literature that studies voters’ turnout in
large elections. Our main model is the ethical voting model (Coate and Conlin 2004,
Feddersen and Sandroni 2006). We also show the same results hold for mobilization
models (Morton 1987, 1991; Cox and Munger 1989, Uhlaner 1989, Shachar and
Nalebuff 1999).
    Razin (2000) studies the effect of vote shares on policy platforms. He shows that
vote shares communicate information to the candidates, who consequently have an
incentive to moderate their policy when their margin of victory shrinks. Castanheira
(2003) is, to our knowledge, the first paper to consider the effect of “mandates” on
turnout in large elections. Its focus is not on comparing the size of mandates per se,
but on showing that mandates have in general the effect of dramatically increasing
turnout relative to winner-take-all elections.
    A recent strand of literature—including, among others, Herrera et al. (2014) and
Kartal (forthcoming, 2014)—studies strategic voting in a rational voter framework
and analyzes how turnout varies in two extreme electoral systems (fully proportional
and fully majoritarian) for all levels of preference splits. These papers cannot say
much about intermediate systems. Kartal (forthcoming) focuses more on compar-
ative welfare results than on comparing turnouts. As far as turnout is concerned,
Kartal (see also Herrera et al. 2014) shows that full underdog compensation, and
hence a close high-turnout election, can occur when the distribution of voting costs
is degenerate (see also Goeree and Grosser 2007, Taylor and Yildirim 2010), or is
bounded below by a strictly positive minimum voting cost (see also Krasa and Pol-
born 2009), but not otherwise. Faravelli and Sanchez-Pages (2014) is the first paper
comparing turnout and welfare across a wider range of power sharing rules, in the
same spirit as we do here. They obtain results in a neighborhood of perfectly even
elections (q = 1/2) or perfectly biased elections (q = 1), the only tractable cases in
a rational voter model. Ours is the first paper that studies a continuum of electoral


                                           5
systems for a general distribution of preferences in the population.
    Finally, Faravelli, Man and Walsch (2014) study the effect of mandate together
with “paternalism”. They show, under very general conditions, that the combination
of these two factors guarantees positive turnout even in a large elections and in a
rational voter framework. In addition, they provide evidence of a mandate effect
from U.S. congress elections.
    The article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the general model setup.
Section 3 contains the analysis of group voting models—that is, the ethical voter
model (Section 3.1) and the mobilization voter model (Section 3.3)— and compares
turnout across different institutional environments and preferences distribution. Sec-
tion 4 shows that the similar results hold if we consider, instead, a rational voter
framework. Section 5 offers some concluding remarks and describes potential paths
of future research.


2       General Setup
We introduce here a setup common to all models we consider. Consider two parties,
A and B, competing for power. Citizens have strict political preferences for one or
the other. We denote by q ∈ (0, 1) the preference split, that is, the chance that
any citizen is assigned (by Nature) a preference for party A (thus, 1 − q is the
expected fraction of citizens that prefer party B). Beside partisan preferences, the
second dimension along which citizens differ from one another is their cost of voting:
each citizen’s cost of voting, c, is drawn from a distribution with twice differentiable
cumulative distribution function F (c) over the support c ∈ [0, c] , with c > 0. The
cost of voting and the partisan preferences are two independent dimensions that
determine the type of a voter.
    For any vote share V obtained by party A, an institutional system γ determines
the mapping to the respective power shares PγA (V ) ∈ [0, 1] and PγB (V ) = 1 − PγA (V ).
For normalization purposes, we let the utility from “full power to party i” equal
1 for type i citizens and 0 for the remaining citizens.6 . Hence the power shares
are the reduced form “benefit” components of parties’ (respectively, voters’) utility
functions that will determine the incentives to campaign (respectively, vote) in a
given institutional system γ. In a γ−system, payoffs as a function of the vote share
are represented by a standard “contest success function”7 , where γ ranges from 1 to
∞:
    6
    This normalization will allow us to match party utility and voters’ utilities in a simple way
under all the models that will be considered.
  7
    See, for instance, Hirshleifer (1989). When nobody votes (α = β = 0) assume equal shares

                                               6
                               Vγ                               (1 − V )γ
                PγA (V   )= γ            ,        PγB (V   )= γ                            (1)
                           V + (1 − V )γ                     V + (1 − V )γ
    This representation can accommodate a wide range of intermediate power sharing
rules between pure proportional systems (P) and winner-take-all systems (M) using a
single parameter in the payoff function. The two extreme cases correspond to γ = 1
(P) and γ = ∞ (M).8

    As we discussed in the Introduction, intermediate systems which are a mixture
of proportional representation and majoritarian systems are very common and have
plenty of institutional details we do not model.9 Intuitively, we just want to capture
the fact that the larger γ is the more majoritarian is the system.
    Even in a winner-take-all-system like the U.S. Presidential race, a large winning
margin carries with it added benefits to the winner due to a “mandate” effect, and
larger winning margins for the President can carry over to a larger majority in one
or both houses of Congress, via “coattails” effect.10 Also, the fact that the legislative
branch in a M system has leverage over the executive branch and the presidency
will tend to smooth out the winner-take-all payoff function in the direction of a pro-
portional system. Similarly, an increase in vote shares might have a disproportional
impact on payoffs also in political systems with proportional representation. For
example, in parliamentary systems that require the formation of a coalition govern-
ment, a party that is fortunate to win a clear majority of seats outright has much
less incentive (or in some cases none at all) to compromise with other parties in order
to govern effectively.

    Figure 1 illustrates the power share payoff PγA as a function of the vote share V
for three power sharing parameters γ, namely: γ = 1 (i.e. the P system, dashed line),
γ = 5 (i.e. an intermediate power sharing system, continuous line), and γ → ∞ (i.e.
a pure M system, dotted line).
(V = 1/2).
   8
     There are other ways to introduce a proportionality parameter. Faravelli and Sanchez-Pages
(2014) model it as a linear combination of proportional representation and winner-take-all.
   9
     For example, in Germany, voters express two preferences, one for a candidate and one for a
party: 299 members of parliament’s lower house are directly elected in single member districts;
another 299 members are elected from candidate lists until each party’s seat share matches the
proportion of party votes that it won.
  10
     For an empirical analysis of such effects, see Ferejohn and Calvert (1984) and Calvert and
Ferejohn (1983). See also Golder (2006).




                                              7
             Figure 1: Power sharing function for different values of γ.




   Citizens choose whether to vote for party A, party B, or abstain. If a share α of
A types vote for A and a share β of B types vote for B, the expected turnout for
party A and B and total turnout are, respectively:

                   TA := qα,     TB := (1 − q)β,         T := TA + TB
while the expected vote shares for party A and B are respectively:
                                qα              (1 − q) β
                           V =     , 1−V =
                                T                   T
   Without loss of generality, in the remainder we assume party A is the ex-ante
underdog, namely, q ∈ [0, 1/2] where applicable. We also define the preference ratio
Q and the turnout ratio R as:
                                       q                 TA
                               Q :=       ,       R :=
                                      1−q                TB
   We look for symmetric equilibria. These equilibria can be characterized by a
voting cost threshold for each side (cα , cβ ) below which supporters turn out and
above which they abstain, hence the share of A (B) supporters that turn out can be
expressed by α = F (cα ) (β = F (cβ )). Henceforth, we denote as f (c) = F 0 (c) the
probability density function of the cumulative cost distribution function F (c) , and
we call G its inverse, namely G (α) := F −1 (α) = cα . Moreover, we denote partial
derivatives of any function Z with respect to q or γ (our main comparative statics
parameters) with the compact notation: Zq := ∂Z   ∂q
                                                     .

                                              8
3      Group Voting Models
The basic idea behind these models is that the positive externality of voting among
supporters of the same party is internalized, leading to higher turnout. The ratio-
nale behind the solution to this collective action problem may differ across group
voting models, but the end result is that, contrary to the instrumental voting model
(discussed in Section 4 below), the share of voters turning out is high regardless
of the size of the population. In group voter models, the two sides compete in an
election by turning out their supporters, which have a voting cost to turn out. The
population is a continuum of measure one, divided into q A supporters and (1 − q)
B supporters. In a γ−power sharing system, the marginal group benefits to the two
sides, with respect to (cα , cβ ), can be derived from (??) and are, respectively:

         dPγA   dPγA                                        dPγA    dPγB  qα 
                                      
                           (1 − q) β
              =                            qf (cα ) ,            =−             (1 − q) f (cβ )   (2)
         dcα     dV           T2                            dcβ      dV T 2
where:                                                   γ
                                                      V
                        dPγA    dPγB       γ         1−V
                             =−      =
                         dV      dV    V (1 − V ) 1 + V γ 2
                                                           
                                                                        1−V


3.1      Ethical Voter Model
Our main approach to study turnout in elections, which is grounded in group-oriented
behavior, is the ethical voter model (Coate and Conlin 2004, Feddersen and Sandroni
2006). This model assumes that citizens are “rule utilitarian” which means that they
overcome the free-riding problem and manage to act as one cohesive group. Since
the ethical voter model assumes that citizens are “rule utilitarian” all citizens of
one group act as one agent. As a consequence, this model involves an equilibrium
between two party-planners on each side, A and B. In the solution, each planner
looks at the total benefit from the outcome of the election considering the total cost
of voting incurred by the supporters of his side, taking the other planner’s turnout
strategy as given.11 The cost of turning out the voters for the social planner on side
A is the total cost suffered by all the citizens on side A that vote, namely,
                                             Z cα
                                C (cα ) := q      cf (c) dc
                                                            0
  11
    We assume “collectivism”, so the planner on each side, A and B, only looks at the total cost
of voting of the voters on his side. The results would not change if we assumed “altruism” as in
Feddersen and Sandroni (2006): each planner takes into account the cost of voting of all citizens
that vote regardless of their side.

                                                        9
The citizens with cost below the planner-chosen cost threshold, cα , vote because
ethical voter models assume citizens get an exogenous benefit D (larger than their
private voting cost c ≤ cα ) for “doing their part” in following the optimal rule
established by the planner.
    Defining the generalized reversed hazard rate as cf   (c)
                                                        F (c)
                                                              , we introduce the following
definition: a distribution satisfies the decreasing generalized reversed hazard rate
(DGRHR) property if and only if cf    (c)
                                    F (c)
                                          is decreasing. We call it DGRHR by analogy
with the known increasing generalized failure rate (IGFR, see, for instance, Lariviere
                                       cf 12
2006), which refers to the function 1−F   .

Lemma 1 If a distribution function satisfies DGRHR, then its inverse satisfies the
increasing generalized reversed hazard rate (IGRHR) and vice versa.

Proof. See Appendix.
   The above lemma helps to prove that, if the cost distribution satisfies the DGRHR
property, we have the following result for all q ∈ [0, 1/2] .

Proposition 1 The equilibrium exists and it is unique and has the following proper-
ties: (1) Partial Underdog Compensation: α > β, qα < (1 − q) β, hence R < 1. (2)
Competition Effect: given γ, turnout, T , and turnout ratio, R, increase in q. (3) Con-
test Effect: given q < 1/2, turnout increases and then decreases with γ; it achieves
its maximum for intermediate γ. (4) As γ goes to infinity (winner-take-all), turnout
goes to one when q = 1/2 and goes to zero otherwise.

Proof. See Appendix.
   The solution for the ethical voter model for a general γ is not straightforward
to derive, because the underdog compensation is strictly partial (rather than zero),
so α 6= β, and the two equations of the system of FOCs do not decouple. It is
convenient for the analysis to rewrite the two FOCs compactly as:

                               W = qαG (α) = (1 − q) βG (β)

       where:
                                                   Rγ
                                       W := γ
                                                [1 + Rγ ]2
  12
    The DGRHR is also used in Che, Dessein and Kartik (2013), which in their Appendix G verify
that a variety of familiar classes of distributions, including Pareto distributions, power function
distributions (which subsume uniform distributions), Weibull distributions (which subsume expo-
nential distributions), and gamma distributions, satisfy this condition.


                                                10
    The DGRHR property turns out to be key for several reasons, not only to guaran-
tee existence, but also for the competition effect and for the contest effect. It is easy
to show non existence if DGRHR is violated, at least in certain parameter ranges.
Even when existence is granted, a violation of DGRHR can cause the competition
effect to fail, that is, higher equilibrium turnout in more lopsided elections, as we
show later in an example. The DGRHR property guarantees some regularity in the
cost distribution function, so that, for instance, if the ratio of the proportion of vot-
ers turning out from each side—α/β—increases as parameters change, then also the
cost threshold ratio—cα /cβ —increases. The latter implies, among other things, that
there is monotonicity between the relative support ex-ante and the relative support
ex-post: if q, the relative ex-ante support for A, increases, then the relative turnout
for A, R = TA /TB , does too in equilibrium. For instance if 1 out of 4 citizens pre-
fer A and 1 out of 3 voters actually voted for A (see the partial underdog effect
described below), then it cannot be that increasing the former reduces the latter,
under DGRHR. We now discuss the properties we derived in order.
    (1) What seems to be a common feature across several costly voting models
is the underdog effect (see Castanheira 2003 and Levine and Palfrey 2007, among
others). Namely, voting models have the general property that the supporters for the
underdog side have higher incentive to turn out than leader’s supporters. Hence, in
equilibrium they vote proportionally more than the leader’s supporters. We call this
feature “compensation” as it reduces the leader’s initial advantage. Moreover, we
call this compensation “partial” when the larger turnout of the underdog supporters
is not enough to overturn the leader’s initial advantage in preferences. In rational
voter models, partial compensation seems to be a general feature when voting costs
are heterogenous (see also Herrera et al. 2014 and Kartal Forthcoming), the reason
being that while the underdog side has higher benefits from turning out, it also
bears higher costs, as it needs to turn out more supporters, and hence will only
find more supporters with higher costs. In the ethical model analyzed here, though,
the compensation effect comes from the cost side not from the benefit side, as in
rational voter models. More specifically, the benefit side is in fact identical for the
two competing sides. First, because it is a zero sum game so there is a symmetry
between the incentives of one side and the incentives of the other. Second, because the
left and right derivatives are identical in a continuous model. This means that, from
any starting turnout profile, increasing marginally the turnout of one side increases
the benefit to that side as much as increasing marginally turnout for the opposite
side increases the benefit to the opposite side. Hence, the difference lies on the costs
sides alone, namely, for any given cost threshold cα the underdog party has lower
additional cost to turn out those additional voters. In other words, the marginal cost


                                           11
is
                                       qcα f (cα )
and it is lower for the underdog (q < 1/2). This compensation, however, is partial
so the ex-ante leader remains the ex-post leader, albeit by a lower margin. This
happens because of the term cα in the marginal cost, which means that it costs more
to turn out additional agents. This is the same logic described above for the rational
voter model.
    (2) We show that the competition effect is general for the ethical voter model
regardless of the electoral system: the closer the ex-ante preference split, the larger
the turnout. While the competition effect seems like a very intuitive property, it is
in fact not generally true in rational voter models even with a majoritarian system.
    (3) We believe the contest effect is novel: previous work has not compared turnout
across different electoral systems for all preference splits q (for extreme values of
q,see Faravelli and Sanchez-Pages 2014). The intuition is as follows: take any value
of the preference split, say for instance a 40-60 preference split (q = 40%). When
γ is large the electoral system becomes similar to a winner-take-all system. Hence,
turnout should be low because, despite the underdog compensation, the underdog
side has a very small chance of winning. When γ is low, the electoral system becomes
similar to a proportional system with moderate turnout for all preference splits. For
intermediate γ, the marginal gain from extra votes can make the most difference
and this is where turnout is highest. For instance, an intermediate γ could model
in reduced form an electoral system (and possibly several other institutional details)
where extra votes for the underdog around a 40-60 outcome could mean leadership
in more committees and/or obtaining veto or filibuster powers for some decisions.
Having partial (rather than full) underdog effect is crucial for the contest effect: an
election that is not a toss up ex-ante needs to remain such ex-post. If, in equilibrium,
we had a 50-50 electoral outcome, then turnout would always be increasing in γ. This
is because the slope of the power function is steepest around a 50-50 outcome in all
electoral systems (for all γ > 1).
    (4) Lastly, in a winner-take-all system turnout is high and positive only in a
very close election, because due to the partial underdog compensation, the underdog
side has no chance of winning an ex-ante lopsided election. Hence, the underdog
supporters will not turn out significantly in such an election.

3.2    Examples
We provide first a simple example which satisfies DGRHR. Second, to show that
DGRHR is a tight condition we provide an example that violates it and violates the

                                           12
competition effect.

Closed Form Example Assume the cdf comes from the family (which satisfies
weakly DGRHR):
                         c 1/k
              F (c) =                   , c ∈ [0, c] , k > 0    ⇐⇒            G (α) = cαk
                            c
   The FOCs are
                                    qcα1+k = (1 − q) cβ 1+k = W
   where:                                                                     
                                                                      k
                                                                   γ 1+k
                                         k                     Q
                        R = Q 1+k ,            W = γ 
                                                                               
                                                                        k
                                                                             2 
                                                                     γ 1+k
                                                          1+Q
   Hence turnouts for each side are:
                                 1
                               1+k                                                               1
                                                                                                 1+k
                               k                                                       k
                            γ 1+k                                                   γ 1+k
          γ            Q                                        γ              Q
        α=                                    ,   β=
                                                                                               
                                        2                                                   2 
           qc                                                (1 − q) c
                                   k
                                                                                        k
                                γ 1+k                                                 γ 1+k
                      1+Q                                                     1+Q

    Figure 2 shows T as a function of both q and γ for the uniform distribution case
(k = 1) with c = 5.
    This picture summarizes the main insights. For any electoral/institutional sys-
tem γ, the competition effect is apparent: turnout increases the closer the ex-ante
preference split becomes. Fixing the preference split q, turnout is non-monotonic in
the electoral/institutional system γ, first increasing and then decreasing. For any
q < 1/2, the turnout maximizing γ    b is increasing in the competition q: the closer
the election, the closer to winner-take-all the electoral system has to be in order to
achieve its highest turnout. In other words, if ex-ante preference splits are uneven,
then more proportional systems maximize turnout; on the other hand, if ex ante
preference splits are even, more majoritarian systems achieve the highest turnout.
In sum, the electoral/institutional system that delivers the highest turnout crucially
depends on the initial preference split and in a non trivial way. This questions the
validity of all cross-country empirical comparisons of turnout which, to the best of
our knowledge, lump together electoral turnout results over time in each country,
never controlling for the value of q in each election.



                                                    13
           Figure 2: T as a function of γ and q, ethical voter model.




Counterexample In general, from the FOCs we obtain turnout

                                                 G (α) + G (β)
                   T = γ (G (α) G (β))γ−1                        2
                                            ((G (α))γ + (G (β))γ )
  For γ = 1 we have:
                                            1
                                T =
                                      G (α) + G (β)
  The cdf family

           F (c) = 1 − (1 − c)1/m           ⇐⇒     G (α) = 1 − (1 − α)m
               c ∈ [0, 1] , m > 0

  violates the DGRHR property, as the GRHR of the inverse G (α) (see Lemma 1)


                                         14
is decreasing:
                                        mα (1 − α)m−1
                                h (α) =
                                        1 − (1 − αα)m
   Take for instance m = 2. For γ = 1 the FOCs are:

                         qα2 (2 − α) = (1 − q) β 2 (2 − β) = W
   where:
                        β (2 − β)                α (2 − α) β (2 − β)
                   R=             ,     W =
                        α (2 − α)             (α (2 − α) + β (2 − β))2
   and turnout is:
                                                1
                              T =
                                      α (2 − α) + β (2 − β)
    Figure 3 shows a violation of the competition effect. Namely, despite the presence
of the underdog effect, total turnout is not always increasing for q ∈ [0, 1/2].

            Figure 3: T , α, and β as a function of q, ethical voter model.




                                            15
3.3     Mobilization Model
The main message of this paper is to document the robustness of our comparative
statics results of turnout across several well known turnout models. Morton (1987,
1991), Cox and Munger (1989), Shachar and Nalebuff (1999) and others have pro-
posed models based on group mobilization, where parties can mobilize and coordinate
citizens to go vote. In major elections, candidates and parties engage in hugely ex-
pensive get-out-the-vote drives. Empirical evidence suggests that these drives are
effective (Bochel and Denver 1971, Gerber and Green 2000). There is also evidence
that mobilization efforts can explain turnout variation across elections and across
electoral systems (Patterson and Caldeira 1983, Gray and Caul 2000). We adopt
here a group mobilization model a la Shachar and Nalebuff (1999) where parties’
campaign efforts and spending are able to mobilize and coordinate citizens to go
vote. In this model, each group can “purchase” turnout of its party members by
engaging in costly get-out-the-vote efforts. Thus, parties trade off mobilization costs
for higher expected vote shares, taking as given the mobilization choice of the other
party.
    A mobilization model assumes that more campaign spending by a party brings
more votes for the party according to an exogenous technology. We consider a very
simple version of group mobilization. We assume that the cost a party incurs in
order to bring to the polls all its supporters with voting cost below c is l (c), where
c ∈ [0, c] and l is an increasing, convex and twice differentiable function. We also
assume that it is infinitely costly for a party to turn out all its supporters: l (c) = ∞.
In addition to twice differentiability, we assume F (c) satisfies a (weakly) decreasing
reversed hazard rate (DRHR, or log-concavity of F ) property.13
    Under the above conditions, we have the following result, without loss of gener-
ality, for all q ∈ [0, 1/2].

Proposition 2 In the mobilization model, an equilibrium exists, it is unique and it
has the following properties: (1) Zero Underdog Compensation: α = β, hence R = Q
and T = α = β. (2) Competition Effect: given γ, turnout increases in q and peaks
at q = 1/2.(3) Contest Effect: given q < 1/2, turnout increases and then decreases
with γ; it achieves its maximum for intermediate γ. (4) As γ goes to infinity (first-
past-the-post), turnout goes to one when q = 1/2 and goes to zero otherwise.

Proof. See Appendix.
  13
    Note that the DRHR (also known as log-concavity of F ) is weaker than the DGRHR used in
the ethical voter model. Hence, the DGRHR property is sufficient for all the results obtained in
both models.


                                              16
    The weak DRHR property of the cost distribution roughly means that the relative
variation in the number of agent-types does not increase as we span the support of
the distribution. In other words, as we increase the cost we do not suddenly find
many more agents with a given cost. This guarantees monotonicity and it is essential
for a unique interior solution: the cost-benefit ratio of turning agents with marginally
higher costs is increasing.
    The results for this model and their intuition are very similar to the ethical voter
model, with one caveat. The zero underdog compensation obtained in the mobi-
lization model means that, regardless of the electoral system and of the preference
split, either side turns out the same proportion of its supporters. The zero underdog
compensation is due to the non-rival structure of the campaign spending costs in
mobilization models (see, e.g., Morton 1987, 1991, or Schachar and Nalebuff 1999).
Namely, it costs the same for either side to mobilize all their supporters below a
given voting cost threshold. In particular, it does not cost less to turn out the same
share of supporters of the smaller group than of the larger group. This is, for ex-
ample, the case if one thinks of campaigning as advertising through media, which is
in its nature non-rival, but not for other forms of campaigning such as door to door
persuasion, which are clearly rival. If the latter were the case, then compensation
would be partial and the results would be similar to the ethical voter model.

3.3.1   Example: Uniform Distribution
Assume that costs are uniformly distributed on the unit interval, i.e., F (c) = c ∈
[0, 1] . A simple cost function which satisfies our assumption of DGHR is:
                                                c
                                     l (c) =
                                               1−c
   Then, the FOC becomes:

                           Qγ              l0 (c)
                                                            
                                                         c
               M B := γ             =               =
                        [1 + Qγ ]2     f (c) /F (c)   (1 − c)2
   Hence the solution is:
                                                       p
                                         2 (M B) + 1 −   4 (M B) + 1
              T = α = β = F (c∗ ) = c∗ =
                                                   2 (M B)
    Figure 4 shows T as a function of both q and γ. The similarity with Figure 2
is apparent. Also, for any electoral/institutional system γ the competition effect is
clear, as well as the non-monotonic contest effect for any preference split q.

                                          17
             Figure 4: T as a function of γ and q, mobilization model.




4    Rational Voter Model
Another workhorse model for studying turnout in elections is the rational voter model
(Palfrey and Rosenthal 1985). Some scholars consider the rational voter model non-
satisfactory, as it predicts very low levels of turnout in large electorates. Far from
contributing to this debate, our goal here is rather to show that, regardless of the
turnout levels predicted, the comparative statics we obtain in the rational voter model
across institutional systems and across preference splits is consistent with what we
obtained in the, high turnout yielding, group models of turnout we discussed above.
    Let N denote the total number of voters. As usual, the symmetric equilibrium is
characterized by two cutoff levels, with α = F (cα ) and β = F (cβ ) which solve:
                          M BA = G (α) ,        M BB = G (β)
   where M BA and M BB are the marginal benefits from voting for an individual of,
respectively, group A and group B. Given expected turnout rates in the two parties,

                                           18
α and β, the expected marginal benefit of voting for a party A and party B citizen
are equal to, respectively:

       N N −b
       X X                                          N!
                 [V (a + 1, b) − V (a, b)]                    T a T b (1 − TA − TB )N −a−b    (3)
       b=0 a=0
                                             a!b! (N − a − b)! A B

       N N −b
       X X                                          N!
                 [V (b + 1, a) − V (b, a)]                     TAa TBb (1 − TA − TB )N −a−b   (4)
       b=0 a=0
                                             a!b! (N − a − b)!
       where:
                                                  aγ
                                    V (a, b) := γ
                                                a + bγ
    In equations (3) and (4), the first term in brackets in the summation is the increase
in power share as a consequence of an increase in vote shares. The remaining terms
                                                                  a
represent the probability of the vote share being equal to a+b      without your vote,
                               14
given turnout rates α and β. For this model, we can offer analytical proofs for two
results, existence of an equilibrium and the presence of a partial underdog effect. To
show that the comparative statics discussed for the previous models hold also under
these alternative modeling assumptions, we recur to numerical computations.

    Existence. Fix N , γ and q. The pair of equilibrium conditions can be written
in terms of cost thresholds as:

                           M BA (cA , cB ) = cA ,        M BB (cA , cB ) = cB

Because c > 1/2, M BA and M BB are continuous functions of cA , cB from [0, c]2
into itself, and [0, c]2 is a compact convex subset of R2 .15 Therefore, by Brouwer’s
theorem there exists a fixed point (c∗A , c∗B ), which satisfies both equations and is an
equilibrium.

   Underdog Effects. This proof is contained in Kartal (Forthcoming) and Herrera
et al. (2014). As pointed out there, in general, the partial underdog effect holds
whenever a symmetric power sharing function V (a, b) (as, for instance, the purely
                                                    a
proportional one with γ = 1 in our model: V = a+b     ) has the property that an
  14                               j
     By convention, we denote j+k    = .5 if j = k = 0.
  15
     The assumption c > 1/2 guarantees that the range of these functions is contained in [0, c]2 .
Existence also holds more generally for any c > 0, with only minor changes in the proof to account
for the possibility that c is the cutpoint (i.e., 100% turnout) for one or both parties.


                                                    19
additional vote for the underdog has a higher marginal impact for the underdog
than an additional vote for the leader has for the leader. In other words, the proof
just hinges on following two properties of W (a, b):

               W (a, b) = −W (b, a) ,    and W (a, b) > 0       if a < b

where
            W (a, b) := (V (a + 1, b) − V (a, b)) − (V (b + 1, a) − V (b, a))


     While closed form analytical expressions of the equilibria do not exist, they are
easily computed numerically. Figure 5 below shows the equilibrium overall turnout
as a function of the institutional environment, γ, and the ex-ante preference split, q,
for N = 30, c ∼ U [0, 1], and a benefit from winning the election of 10. This figure
is qualitatively similar to the ones we presented for the mobilization and the ethical
voter models. Table 1 shows the overall turnout as a function of γ and q for the same
parameters. From these numerical computations, we can conclude that comparative
statics similar to the one discussed for the other two models hold.
     First, given γ, turnout increases in the size of the underdog group and peaks
when the preference split is even. This is an analogue of the competition effect we
discussed in the previous two models. Second, turnout increases and then decreases
as we approach the majoritarian system (that is, as γ grows). In the large majority
case, i.e., an uneven preference split (for example, NA = 4 when N = 30), turnout
is maximized for γ = 1 and decreases as we increase γ. When preferences are closer
(for example, NA = 10 when N = 30), turnout initially increases as we increase γ.
As the system becomes less proportional, winning the election becomes paramount
so competition becomes fiercer. On the other hand, the γ that maximizes turnout is
still finite (that is, does not coincide with pure first-past-the-post) . As we approach
the majoritarian system, the incentive to vote is reduced: winning becomes all that
matters and the underdog, which has a smaller chance of winning (especially when
preferences are uneven) turns out less. This is an analogue of the contest effect we
discussed in the previous two models. Finally, we see in both cases the presence of
a partial underdog effect. The underdog effect in this model comes from the benefit
side, not from the cost side. The underdog has a larger benefit to turn out as an
additional vote for the underdog brings the election closer to a tie hence raising the
stakes, namely the benefit function becomes steeper as we approach a tie. The fact
that the underdog effect is partial thought is entirely due to cost heterogeneity, as
in the ethical voter model.


                                           20
      Figure 5: T as a function of γ and q, rational voter model with N = 30.




5     Concluding Remarks
This article investigated how the endogenous decisions of voters to participate to
an election is affected by the degree of proportionality of the political system. We
introduce a novel modeling instrument, a generalized context success function, in
order to measure the sensitivity of power sharing to vote shares. Contrary to previous
theoretical studies linking turnout to political institutions, this allows us to consider
a wide array of electoral systems or power sharing regimes, ranging from a perfectly
proportional system to a pure winner-take-all system.
    We show that turnout depends on the degree of proportionality of influence in the
institutional system in a subtle way, and that it is important to control for the inter-
action of the electoral rules and the relative strength of parties in the electorate. With
the exception of the knife-edged case of a perfectly even split of preferences, turnout
is highest for an intermediate degree of proportionality. When the distribution of
preferences is lopsided, turnout is maximized with a relatively more proportional

                                           21
Table 1: T as a function of γ and q, rational voter model with N = 30 and c ∼ U [0, 1].

        γ
 q      1        2       3       4       5       6        7       8       9       10
 0.07   0.311    0.262   0.218   0.199   0.189   0.184    0.181   0.179   0.178   0.178
 0.10   0.333    0.318   0.269   0.241   0.223   0.219    0.214   0.211   0.209   0.208
 0.13   0.351    0.364   0.318   0.285   0.266   0.255    0.249   0.244   0.241   0.239
 0.17   0.365    0.404   0.367   0.331   0.308   0.294    0.285   0.279   0.275   0.272
 0.20   0.376    0.437   0.415   0.379   0.352   0.336    0.324   0.316   0.311   0.307
 0.23   0.385    0.466   0.462   0.429   0.401   0.381    0.367   0.358   0.351   0.346
 0.27   0.393    0.490   0.501   0.482   0.453   0.431    0.415   0.403   0.395   0.389
 0.30   0.399    0.510   0.546   0.536   0.511   0.487    0.469   0.455   0.445   0.437
 0.33   0.404    0.527   0.583   0.591   0.573   0.550    0.529   0.514   0.502   0.492
 0.37   0.408    0.541   0.615   0.644   0.640   0.621    0.600   0.582   0.567   0.556
 0.40   0.411    0.551   0.641   0.694   0.711   0.702    0.682   0.662   0.645   0.631
 0.43   0.414    0.558   0.660   0.736   0.783   0.795    0.781   0.759   0.738   0.720
 0.47   0.415    0.563   0.672   0.765   0.847   0.905    0.906   0.878   0.849   0.823


system; when the distribution of preferences is close to even, turnout is maximized
with a relatively more majoritarian system. The fact that in a more majoritarian
system the underdog is unlikely to win a large election when partisan preferences are
lopsided strongly discourages turnout. On the other hand, with a more proportional
power sharing, some competition remains even when the election is not close, and
therefore the effect of relative party size on turnout is small. These theoretical results
are robust to a wide range of alternative assumptions about the role of parties and
about the rationality of voters.
    There are many possible directions for the next steps in this research. The the-
oretical results we obtain from all models, from instrumental voting to mobilization
models, depend on a key variable, namely, the expected winning margin or the close-
ness of the election. While there is some empirical evidence about the relationship
between ex ante closeness and turnout (Blais 2000, Cox and Munger 1989), we are
not aware of any empirical work focusing on the interaction effect of the expected
closeness and the degree of power sharing of the institutional system: most empirical
work comparing turnout in different electoral systems does not control for election
closeness. As we try to prove in this paper, election closeness is a key variable which
should not be overlooked. While closeness has been conjectured to play an important
role, at least in plurality elections, little is understood about the effect of closeness


                                           22
in proportional or partially proportional systems. In this paper, we identify theo-
retically how proportionality and turnout interact with election closeness, and find
that these interaction effects are important, yet quite subtle. On the theoretical
side, it would be interesting to study voters’ turnout decisions when elections have a
common value dimension and how system proportionality affects political platforms
and the endogenous entry of parties.


A      Appendix
A.1     Proof of Lemma 1
Omitting the arguments of the functions in our notation, the derivative of the inverse
function is well-known to be:
                                        1                   1
                                G0 =          ⇐⇒       g=
                                        F0                  f
    using the chain rule of the above expression we can obtain the second derivative
of the inverse function, i.e.:

                             F 00 0        F 00                           f0
                  G00 = −           G = −              ⇐⇒       g0 = −
                            (F 0 )2       (F 0 )3                        (f )3

    The IGRHR property for G, namely
                          αg 0                         αg 0   αg
                                   >0        ⇐⇒     1+        >
                            G                             g     G
    translates, substituting the above expressions, to:

                         f0           F                  cf     cf 0
                    −       3Ff + 1 >             ⇐⇒        >1+
                        (f )          cf                 F       f

    which is precisely the DGRHR property for F , and vice versa.

A.2     Proof of Proposition 1
Partial Underdog Compensation Before proving existence and uniqueness (be-
low), we show that any solution must satisfy the partial underdog effect property.



                                              23
   The marginal group benefits to the two parties, with respect to (cα , cβ ), are given
by (??). The first order conditions are:

                    dPγA (1 − q) β
                                    
                                       qf (cα ) = qcα f (cα )
                     dV        T2
                     dPγA  qα 
                                 (1 − q) f (cβ ) = (1 − q) cβ f (cβ )
                      dV T 2
which gives the condition

                                 qαG (α) = (1 − q) βG (β)

If a solution exists, the above condition implies partial underdog compensation,
namely:
                      q < 1/2 =⇒ a > β, qα < (1 − q) β
The preference group that is smaller in expectation (that is, the underdog) turns
out a larger fraction of its members than the larger group, that is, α > β. However,
this is not enough to compensate the initial disadvantage in the population, that is,
qα < (1 − q)β.

Existence and Uniqueness We can write:

                         G (β)                     (G (α))γ (G (β))γ
                      R=       ,      W =γ                             2
                         G (α)                ((G (α))γ + (G (β))γ )

   and the two FOCs compactly as:

                              (1 − q) βG (β) = qαG (α) = W
   The first equality above implicitly defines the increasing function β (α) . Taking
derivatives, the relative variation of both expressions in the first equality gives:

                           dβ dG (β)      dα dG (α)
                              +         =    +
                            β     G (β)   α     G (α)
                                                   
                            βg (β) dβ          αg (α) dα
                         1+             =   1+
                             G (β)    β        G (α)    α
                                                                  dβ       dα
   since for q < 1/2 we have α > β, the above implies              β
                                                                       >    α
                                                                                under IGRHR.
                      G(α)
Hence, the function   G(β)
                             is increasing in α as its relative variation is:

                                              24
                                   
                             G(α)
                     d       G(β)           dG (α) dG (β)    dβ dα
                         G(α)
                                        =          −       =   −   >0
                                             G (α)   G (β)   β   α
                         G(β)

   The second equality in the FOCs above can be written as:
                                             γ
                                                          G(α)
                                                          G(β)
                                    qαG (α) = γ              γ        2
                                                        G(α)
                                                        G(β)
                                                                    +1
    To show uniqueness, note that the LHS is strictly increasing in α while the RHS
is strictly decreasing because for all γ ≥ 1 :

                                    xγ
                                         
                           d
                              γ              < 0 for x > 1
                          dx    (xγ + 1)2

   To show existence, note that for α = 0 the LHS is zero while the RHS is bounded
by 1 as
                        G (α)                    G (α)
                               > 1 =⇒        lim       ≥1
                        G (β)                α→0 G (β)

   On the other hand, for α = 1, the LHS is equal to q while, given that G(α) G(β)
                                                                                   =   (1−q)β
                                                                                          q
                                                                                              ,
the RHS is bounded by:
                    γ
                G(α)
                G(β)                      qγ                      qγ
        γ       γ      2 = γ              γ 2 < γ             γ 2 ≤ q
             G(α)                           q                       q
             G(β)
                     +  1          1 +   (1−q)β
                                                            1 +   (1−q)


where the latter inequality is true for all γ ≥ 1.

Competition Effect Take wlog q < 1/2, hence α > β and R < 1. We now show
that under IGRHR, if q increases then both R and T increase in the equilibrium
solution.
    Fixing γ, W increases with R as for the partial derivative of W we have:
                                               1 − Rγ
                      WR = Rγ−1 γ 2                     >0           for      R<1
                                              (Rγ + 1)3
  Suppose by contradiction that if q increases R decreases in equilibrium, then
W = qαG (α) = (1 − q) βG (β) decreases which implies that α decreases. Hence,


                                                   25
                             G(β)         qα                                    α
β decreases too as R =       G(α)
                                    =   (1−q)β
                                               ,   which in turn implies that   β
                                                                                    is decreasing
and G(α)
    G(β)
         increasing, a contradiction under IGRHR. In fact, the IGRHR property
guarantees or α > β, that:
                         
                          α                         dα     dβ
                      d       > 0         ⇐⇒            >
                          β                          α      β
                                                                    
                      G (α)                                 dα          dβ
                  d           > 0         ⇐⇒        h (α)      > h (β)
                      G (β)                                  α          β
which implies the two ratios (the turnout ratio α/β and the cost threshold ratio
cα /cβ ) must move in the same direction, namely:
                                                       
                             α                      G (α)
                         d        > 0 =⇒ d                  >0
                             β                      G (β)
                                                 
                         G (α)                      α
                     d            < 0 =⇒ d              <0
                         G (β)                      β
    We have shown that R cannot decrease when q increases. As a consequence
W = qαG (α) = (1 − q) βG (β) increases (which means that β increases, that is, the
front-runner group turns out more when his ex-ante lead shrinks). In formulas this
implies that:
                         d (qαG (α))
                  0    <              = αG (α) + q (G (α) + αg (α)) αq
                              dq
                                         α
                      ⇐⇒    qαq > −
                                     1 + h (α)
   and
                d ((1 − q) βG (β))
         0    <                     = −βG (β) + (1 − q) (G (β) + βg (β)) β q
                        dq
                                      β
             ⇐⇒     (1 − q) β q >
                                  1 + h (β)
   Hence the variation of turnout with competition is:
                                                                      
                                                1                 1
    Tq = α + qαq − β + (1 − q) β q > α 1 −               −β 1−
                                             1 + h (α)         1 + h (β)
   So turnout is increasing if the function h is increasing. In sum under IGRHR for
q ∈ [0, 1/2] we have:
                                  Tq > 0,    Rq > 0

                                                   26
Contest Effect Fixing the preference split q < 1/2, we study turnout as the
contest becomes more competitive, namely increasing γ from 1 (proportional power
sharing) to infinity (winner-take-all).
   Taking the total derivative with respect to γ of the first order conditions, we
have:
              Wγ = q (G (α) + αg (α)) αγ = (1 − q) (G (β) + βg (β)) β γ
   This implies that Wγ , αγ and β γ and hence also the variation of turnout

                                  Tγ = qαγ + (1 − q) β γ

always have the same sign and (if applicable) are maximized for the same value γb (q) .
In sum, T, α and β are increasing in γ if and only if Wγ > 0, so it suffices to study
when the latter is the case. Defining

                 z   :   = Rγ ∈ [0, 1]
                                                
                                                   βγ
                                                           
                                  γ                  γ  αγ
                zγ   = (ln R) R Rγ = (− ln R) R R     −
                                                   β    α

   Taking the total derivative of W with respect to γ we have

                  (ln z) (1 − z) + 1 + z
           Wγ = z                         zγ
                          (1 + z)3
                                                       
                                                            βγ
                                                                    
                    2 (ln z) (1 − z) + 1 + z                     αγ
              =   z                            (− ln R) R      −
                              (1 + z)3                      β    α

   The second bracket on the RHS is positive because R < 1 and under the IGRHR
we have β γ /β > αγ /α. Namely, manipulating the total derivative of the first order
conditions we obtain:
                           αγ                                     βγ
       q αG (α) + α2 g (α)            = (1 − q) βG (β) + β 2 g (β)
                            α                                       β
                                                           αg(α)
                         β γ αγ            qαG (α) 1 + G(α)        1 + αg(α)
                                                                       G(α)
                            /         =                    βg(β)
                                                                 =     βg(β)
                                                                             >1
                         β α            (1 − q) βG (β) 1 +         1 + G(β)
                                                           G(β)

   Hence the sign of Wγ depends on the first factor:
                                                   
                         2 (ln z) (1 − z) + 1 + z
   Wγ > 0 ⇐⇒           z                          =0 >0        ⇐⇒        z > z ∗ ' 0.21
                                   (1 + z)3


                                             27
   Hence it suffices to study when the function z is above the threshold z ∗ . Namely,
turnout is increasing for all values (q, γ) for which
                                                   γ
                                              qα
                             z=R = γ
                                                       > z∗
                                          (1 − q) β
   We can equivalently define the function
                                                                
                                                  γ    (1 − q) β
                              Z (γ, q) := ln R = −γ ln
                                                          qα
   and explore when:
                                        Z (γ, q) > ln z ∗ ' −1.5
   The function Z has the following properties

       Z (1, 0) = −∞ < ln z ∗ < −1 = Z (1, 1/2) ,    Z (∞, q) = −∞ < ln z ∗
                                        
                                          βγ
                                                  
                           (1 − q) β           αγ
          Zγ (γ, q) = − ln           −γ      −      < 0,    Zq (γ, q) > 0
                              qα          β     α
    Namely, Z decreases in γ ∈ [1, +∞) for all q ∈ [0, 1/2] and, given γ, increases in
q (as Rq > 0). Hence, for low enough q ∈ (0, 1/2) we have Z < ln z ∗ and turnout
decreases for all γ ∈ [1, +∞). As q increases eventually we have Z < ln z ∗ and
turnout increases in γ, is highest for intermediate system γ b (q) and then drops as
Z (∞, q) < ln z .Lastly, for q = 1/2, we have z = 1 > z ∗ , so turnout is always
                ∗

increasing in γ

First Past the Post Case For q = 1/2, as γ → +∞, we have αG (α) = βG (β) =
2W = γ/2, which gives the corner solution: α = β = 1. For q < 1/2, as γ → +∞
given that R < 1 (partial underdog effect), we have: W = α = β = 0. Hence, in
first-past-the-post we have full turnout in an evenly split election and zero turnout
otherwise.

A.3     Proof of Proposition 2
Existence and Uniqueness Given (??), the first order conditions that charac-
terize the solution are:


       dPγA                                                dPγA  qα 
                             
                  (1 − q) β                   0
                                  qf (cα ) = l (cα ) ,                 (1 − q) f (cβ ) = l0 (cβ )
        dV           T2                                     dV T   2


                                                      28
taking the ratio of the two we obtain

                                l0 (cα )           l0 (cβ )
                                             =
                            f (cα ) /F (cα )   f (cβ ) /F (cα )

Hence, assuming that F satisfies DRHR (decreasing reversed hazard rate, aka log-
concavity of F ) is sufficient to obtain the following zero underdog compensation con-
dition
                               cα = cβ =⇒ α = β = T
that is, both parties turn out an identical proportion of their supporters regardless
of the preference split q.
    The mobilization model reduces therefore to one equation in one unknown, equat-
ing marginal benefit (MB) and marginal cost (MC):

                               Qγ                l0 (cα )
                                                                  
                   M B := γ             =                     := M C              (5)
                            [1 + Qγ ]2       f (cα ) /F (cα )

The solution cα ∈ [0, c] exists and is unique because M C (cα ) is increasing, l (c) = ∞
and l is convex. Therefore, l0 (c) = M C (c) = ∞, and M C (0) = F (0) = 0.

Competition Effect For any fixed cost distribution and cost mobilization function
turnout depends only on the marginal benefit (henceforth MB) and increases with it.
Hence, in what follows we study MB as a proxy for turnout T. Fixing the institutional
setting γ, we study turnout as we increase the ex-ante preference split q from zero
(landslide) to 1/2 (close election). We have dMdq
                                                 B     1
                                                   = (1−q) dM B
                                                          2 dQ , hence we can focus

only on the sign of the derivative with respect to Q:
                   dM B    d    γQγ         2 γ−1 1 − Q
                                                        γ
                        =               = γ  Q              >0
                    dQ    dQ [1 + Qγ ]2          (1 + Qγ )3
    Hence, regardless of the institutional setting, as the preference split becomes
tighter the marginal benefit of voting (MB) and turnout T increase.

Contest Effect Fixing the preference split q, we study turnout as the contest
becomes more competitive, namely, if we increase γ from 1 (proportional power
sharing) to infinity (winner-take-all). We have:

                           γQγ
                                      γ
                                      Q (1 − Qγ )     1 + Qγ
                                                                   
          dM B        d                                            γ
                  =                =                         + ln Q > 0
            dγ       dγ [1 + Qγ ]2      (1 + Qγ )3    1 − Qγ

                                            29
   For any Q < 1, the first factor is always positive so does not change the sign of
the slope of MB nor its maximum, namely the above condition is equivalent to

                                   1 + Qγ
                                                  
                                                 γ
                           Ω :=            + ln Q > 0
                                   1 − Qγ

where the function Ω is decreasing in γ, as

                                           Q2γ + 1
                              Ωγ = ln Q             <0
                                          (Qγ − 1)2

   hence Ω can cross zero only once, where turnout is highest, i.e. for:

                                   γ
                                   b (q) : Ω (b
                                              γ) = 0

   In sum, for any given preference split q < 1, turnout is highest for an intermediate
system γ
       b (q)                                
                                      ∂Ω         ∂Ω
                            bQ = −
                            γ                /        >0
                                      ∂Q         ∂γ
where:
                                      γ 1 + Q2γ
                               ΩQ =                >0
                                      Q (1 − Qγ )2

First Past the Post Case Lastly, it is easy to see that:

                                 Qγ
                                         
                                                +∞       if Q = 1
              lim M B = lim γ          2   =
             γ→∞        γ→∞   [1 + Qγ ]         0      otherwise

Hence, in first-past-the-post we have full turnout in an evenly split election and zero
turnout otherwise.


References
 [1] Black, J. (1991): “Reforming the Context of the Voting Process in Canada:
     Lessons from Other Democracies,” in Voter Turnout in Canada, edited by Her-
     man Bakvis, Toronto: Dundurn Press, 61-176.

 [2] Blais, A. (2000): To Vote or Not to Vote: The Merits and Limits of Rational
     Choice Theory, Pittsburgh University Press.


                                          30
 [3] Blais, A. and K. Carty (1990): “Does Proportional Representation Foster Voter
     Turnout?” European Journal of Political Research, 18: 168–181.

 [4] Blais, A. and Dobrzynska A. (1998): “Turnout in Electoral Democracies,” Eu-
     ropean Journal of Political Research33: 239-61.

 [5] Bochel, J. M. and D. T. Denver (1971): “Canvassing, Turnout and Party Sup-
     port: An Experiment,” British Journal of Political Science, 1(3): 257-269.

 [6] Calvert, T. R., and J. A. Ferejohn (1983): ”Coattail Voting in Recent Presiden-
     tial Elections,” American Political Science Review, 77: 407-416.

 [7] Canstanheira, M. (2003): “Victory Margins and the Paradox of Voting,” Euro-
     pean Journal of Political Economy, 25: 152-162.

 [8] Che, Y. K., Wouter D., and Navin K. (2013): ”Pandering to Persuade.” Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 103(1): 47-79.

 [9] Coate, S. and M. Conlin (2004): “A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter
     Turnout: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1476-1504.

[10] Cox, G. (1999): “Electoral Rules and the Calculus of Mobilization,” Legislative
     Studies Quarterly, 24(3): 387-419.

[11] Cox, G. and M. C. Munger (1989): “Closeness, Expenditures, and Turnout in
     the 1982 U.S. House Elections,” American Political Science Review, 83: 217-31.

[12] Crewe, I. (1981): “Electoral Participation,” in Democracy at the Polls: A
     Comparative Study of Competitive National Elections, edited by David But-
     ler, Howard R. Penniman, and Austin Ranney, Washington, D.C.: American
     Enterprise Institute.

[13] Faravelli, M., P. Man and R. Walsh (2013): “Mandate and Paternalism: A
     Theory of Large Elections”, Working Paper, University of Queensland.

[14] Faravelli, M. and S. Sanchez-Pages (Forthcoming): “(Don’t) Make My Vote
     Count”, Journal of Theoretical Politics.

[15] Feddersen, T. and A.Sandroni (2006): “A Theory of Participation in Elections,”
     American Economic Review, 96(4): 1271-1282.

[16] Ferejohn, J. A., and R. L.Calvert (1984): ”Presidential Coattails in Historical
     Perspective,” American Journal of Political Science, 28:127-146.

                                        31
[17] Franklin, M. (1996): “Electoral Participation,” in Comparing Democracies:
     Elections and Voting in Global Perspective, edited by Lawrence LeDuc, Richard
     G.Niemi, and Pippa Norris. Thousand Oaks, Calf.: Sage.

[18] Gerber A. S., and D. P. Green (2000): “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone
     Calls, and Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment,” American Po-
     litical Science Review, 94(3): 653-663.

[19] Goeree, J. K. and J. Grosser (2007): “Welfare Reducing Polls,” Economic The-
     ory, 31: 51-68.

[20] Golder, M. (2006): “Presidential Coattails and Legislative Fragmentation,”
     American Journal of Political Science, 50: 34-48.

[21] Gray, M. and M. Caul (2000): “Declining Voter Turnout in Advanced Indus-
     trial Democracies, 1950 to 1997: The Effects of Declining Group Mobilization,”
     Comparative Political Studies, 33(9): 1091-1122.

[22] Herrera, H., M. Morelli and T. R. Palfrey (2014): “Turnout and Power Shar-
     ing,”The Economic Journal, 124 (February), F131-F162.

[23] Hirshleifer, J. (1989): “Conflict and Rent-Seeking Success Functions: Ratio vs.
     Difference Models of Relative Success,” Public Choice, 63: 101-112.

[24] Jackman, R. (1987): “Political Institutions and Voter Turnout in the Industrial
     Democracies,” American Political Science Review, 81: 405-23.

[25] Jackman, R. and R. A. Miller (1995): “Voter Turnout in the Industrial Democ-
     racies During the 1980s,” Comparative Political Studies, 27: 467–492.

[26] Kartal, M. (Forthcoming): “A Comparative Welfare Analysis of Electoral Sys-
     tems with Endogenous Turnout,” The Economic Journal.

[27] Kartal, M. (Forthcoming): “Laboratory Elections with Endogenous Turnout:
     Proportional Representation versus Majoritarian Rule,” Experimental Eco-
     nomics.

[28] Key, V. O., Jr. (1949): “Southern Politics in State and Nation,” New York:
     Alfred A. Knopf.

[29] Krasa, S. and M. Polborn (2009): “Is Mandatory Voting Better than Voluntary
     Voting,” Games and Economic Behavior, 66:1, 275-291.

                                        32
[30] Lariviere, M. A. (2006): “A Note on Probability Distributions with Increasing
     Generalized Failure Rates,” Operations Research, 2006, 54(3): 602-604.

[31] Levine, D. and T. R. Palfrey (2007): “The Paradox of Voter Participation: A
     Laboratory Study,” American Political Science Review, 101: 143-158.

[32] Lijphart, A. (1997): “Unequal Participation: Democracy’s Unresolved
     Dilemma.” American Political Science Review 91(1): 1–14.

[33] Morton, R. (1987): “A Group Majority Model of Voting,” Social Choice and
     Welfare, 4(1): 17-31.

[34] Morton, R. (1991): “Groups in Rational Turnout Models,” American Journal
     of Political Science, 35: 758-76.

[35] Moser R. G. and E. Scheiner (2004): “Mixed Electoral Systems and Electoral
     System Effects: Controlled Comparison and Cross-National Analysis,” Electoral
     Studies, 23: 575-599.

[36] Palfrey, T. R. and H. Rosenthal (1985): “Voter Participation and Strategic
     Uncertainty,” American Political Science Review, 79: 62-78.

[37] Patterson, S. C. and G. A. Caldeira (1983): “Getting Out the Vote: Participa-
     tion in Gubernatorial Elections,” American Political Science Review, 675-689.

[38] Pintor, Rafael, Maria Gratschew, and Kate Sullivan (2012): “Voter Turnout
     Rates from a Comparative Perspective,” Institute for Democracy and Electoral
     Assistance, June 9, 2012.

[39] Powell, G.B. (1980): “Voting Turnout in Thirty Democracies,” in Electoral
     Participation, edited by Richard Rose. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.

[40] Powell, G.B. (1982): Comparative Democracies: Participation, Stability and
     Violence, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[41] Powell, G.B. (1986): “American Voter Turnout in Comparative Perspective,”
     American Political Science Review, 80: 17-45.

[42] Razin, R. (2003): “Signaling and Election Motivations in a Voting Model with
     Common Values and Responsive Candidates,” Econometrica, 71(4): 1083-1119.

[43] Rose, R. (1980): Electoral Participation: A Comparative Analysis, London:
     Sage.

                                       33
[44] Shachar R. and B. Nalebuff (1999): “Follow the Leader: Theory and Evidence
     on Political Participation,” American Economic Review, 57: 637-660.

[45] Skaperdas, S. (1996) “Contest Success Functions,” Economic Theory, 7: 283-
     290.

[46] Taylor C.R. and H. Yildirim (2010): “Public Information and Electoral Bias,”
     Games and Economic Behavior, 68(1): 353-75.

[47] Tullock, G. (1980): “Efficient Rent Seeking,” in Toward a Theory of the Rent-
     Seeking Society, edited by James M. Buchanan, Robert D. Tollison, and Gordon
     Tullock, College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 97-112.

[48] Uhlaner, C. (1989): “Rational Turnout: The Neglected Role of Groups,” Amer-
     ican Journal of Political Science, 33: 390-422.




                                       34
