NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPORT MARKETS AND LABOR ALLOCATION IN A LOW-INCOME COUNTRY
Brian McCaig
Nina Pavcnik
Working Paper 20455
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20455

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014, Revised January 2018

We thank Hanh Nyugen and Truong Thi Thu Trang for excellent research assistance and Eric
Edmonds, Teresa Fort, Doug Irwin, Amit Khandelwal, discussants and seminar participants at
several universities and conferences for comments. We thank the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI) and the World Bank for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20455.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Brian McCaig and Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Export Markets and Labor Allocation in a Low-income Country
Brian McCaig and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 20455
September 2014, Revised January 2018
JEL No. F14,F16,O17,O47
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of a positive export shock on labor allocation between the informal,
microenterprise sector and the formal firm sector in a low-income country. The U.S.-Vietnam
Bilateral Trade Agreement led to large reductions in U.S. tariffs on Vietnamese exports. We find
that the share of manufacturing workers in Vietnam in the formal sector increased by 5
percentage points in response to the U.S. tariff reductions. The reallocation was greater for
workers in more internationally integrated provinces and for younger cohorts. We estimate the
gap in labor productivity within manufacturing across the informal and formal sectors. This gap
and the aggregate labor productivity gain from the export-induced reallocation of workers across
the two sectors are reduced when we account for worker heterogeneity, measurement error, and
differences in labor intensity of production.

Brian McCaig
Department of Economics,
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, N2L 3C5 Canada
bmccaig@wlu.ca
Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
Low- and middle-income countries have dramatically increased their participation in world
trade over the last two decades, with their share of total world exports growing from 21 to 43
percent and export growth outpacing output growth in these economies between 1992 and 2008
(Hanson (2012)). Within low-income countries, 70-80 percent of employment is in informal,
household-run microenterprises, which are substantially less productive than their formal-sector
counterparts. 1 Studies document a systematic negative relationship between the prevalence of
informal microenterprise employment and economic development. These studies attribute
aggregate income differences across countries to the inefficient allocation of inputs across sectors
and firms. 2 As a result, the reallocation of workers from microenterprises to more productive
establishments in response to rising exports could increase aggregate productivity.
This paper examines the relationship between international trade and the allocation of
labor across the informal microenterprise and formal sectors in a low-income country setting.
International trade can contribute to economic development if it promotes the reallocation of
workers out of informal microenterprises toward relatively more productive establishments.
However, exploring the role of this channel has been challenging for several reasons. First, data
constraints often make it difficult to measure such reallocation. While literature has examined how
trade affects labor allocation in less developed countries (see Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) and
Harrison, McLaren, and McMillan (2011) for surveys), data availability has limited most of this work
to employment in the formal sector or in urban areas. 3 In addition, the data in these studies rarely
distinguish between work in informal microenterprises and formal firms.4 Second, employment in
1

See Gollin (2002, 2008), Tybout (2000, 2014), and Nataraj (2011) for estimates of high rates of informal selfemployment and La Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014) and Nataraj (2011) for large productivity gaps.
2
See Gollin (2002, 2008) and La Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014) for evidence on the relationship between informal,
microenterprise employment and aggregate development and Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008), Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and McMillan and Rodrik (2011) for the relationship between resource allocation
and development.
3
See Revenga (1997), Currie and Harrison (1997), Wacziarg and Wallack (2004), and Topalova (2010) for studies on
trade policy and employment allocation across industries or firms using data based on formal manufacturing firms
above a certain employment cut-off; Feliciano (2001) and Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik (2004) for studies using
household surveys representative of labor markets in major urban areas; and Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011)
and Dix-Carneiro (2014) for studies using administrative employee-employer data that cover formal employers.
Topalova (2010), McCaig (2011), and Kovak (2013) use nationally representative household surveys, but they do
not study reallocation across informal microenterprises and formal firms.
4
Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003), Bosch, Goñi-Pacchioni, and Maloney (2012), Paz (2014), and Menezes-Filho and
Muendler (2011) examine the impact of trade on (formal) firm compliance with labor legislation (i.e. severance
payments or social security legislation) for a worker. Their definition of informality is worker based.

WĂŐĞϭŽĨϴϱ

the formal enterprise sector and international trade both tend to expand during the process of
growth and urbanization in low-income countries, making it difficult to identify the causal effect of
international trade on worker allocation across employers. Finally, the potential aggregate labor
productivity gains from labor reallocation through this channel depend on the size of the labor
productivity gap between informal microenterprises and formal firms. This gap is difficult to
measure because comprehensive data on informal microenterprises is scarce, and because informal
microenterprises and formal firms differ in dimensions other than productivity, including the
composition of the workforce and hours worked, record-keeping standards, and labor intensity of
production. For these reasons, the literature is missing a potentially important dimension of labor
reallocation through which trade affects economic development.
The paper addresses the above challenges by focusing on Vietnam, which has nationally
representative household surveys that includes the informal microenterprise sector, and which was
subjected to a large, plausibly exogenous (but positive) export shock with the 2001 U.S.-Vietnam
Bilateral Trade Agreement (henceforth, the BTA).
In low-income countries, nationally representative labor force data, covering workers in all
types of employers, is more commonly available than firm-level data that captures the entire firm
distribution. We use labor force data to analyze trade-induced shifts of labor across typically
unobserved points in the firm distribution, i.e., between informal and formal firms. Specifically, we
use labor force data from several Vietnam Household Living Standards Surveys (VHLSS), which cover
workers in all industries and types of employers and record whether a worker works for an
employer in the household business (informal) sector or the registered enterprise sector. 5 Our
definition of work in an informal microenterprise is based on the registration status of the business.
It is consistent with the definition of informal firms in other low-income countries and has a direct
connection to studies on the role of microenterprises in economic development. In Vietnam,
household businesses employed about 85% of workers economy-wide, and 66% in the
manufacturing sector, at the onset of the trade agreement.
We combine the labor force data with large and plausibly exogenous variation in declines in
export costs induced by the U.S.-Vietnam BTA. The principle trade policy change in the BTA was a
significant, immediate drop in U.S. tariffs on Vietnamese exports. This drop averaged 20.9
5

A household business is not registered as an enterprise under Vietnam’s Enterprise Law. Not all businesses are
required to register. See Section 4 for details on the definition and how it compares to other settings.

WĂŐĞϮŽĨϴϱ

percentage points, which substantially lowered the cost of exporting Vietnamese products to the
United States. This resulted in a substantial shock to Vietnam’s trade. Between 2001 and 2004,
exports to the United States grew from 1.1 to 5.0 billion USD (Figure 1), from 7.1 to 19.0 percent of
total exports (Figure 2), and from 3.6 to 10.4 percent of Vietnam's GDP.
Our empirical setting overcomes a key challenge in identifying the effect of exporting on the
allocation of workers by using heterogeneity in policy-driven export cost reductions across
industries: Vietnamese industries that faced greater declines in U.S. tariffs observed greater export
growth (Figure 3). The agreement lowered industry-specific tariffs when the United States moved
Vietnam from the pre-existing Column 2 to the pre-existing MFN U.S. tariff schedule, rather than by
industry-specific contemporaneous negotiations over tariff lines (McCaig (2011)). This means that
the industry-specific declines in U.S. tariffs were plausibly exogenous and not precipitated by
industry-specific economic conditions in Vietnam during the early 2000s (see Section 3 for details).
Importantly, tariff changes are not spuriously correlated with pre-existing or concurrent global
demand or supply shocks to Vietnamese products that occur at the same time in industries with
greater declines in U.S. tariffs. While Vietnamese industries that faced larger declines in U.S. tariffs
observed greater export growth (driven by U.S. export expansion), we show that U.S tariff declines
were not predictive of Vietnamese export growth prior to the agreement, nor were they correlated
with Vietnamese export growth to the European Union, another high-income export destination.
After examining the effect of export costs on the movement of employment from the
household business to the enterprise sector, we assess the potential gains in aggregate labor
productivity from this trade-induced shift of workers across the two sectors. By combining
comprehensive data on informal microenterprises from the household business module of the
VHLSS, with the census of registered enterprises, we provide one of the first estimates of the labor
productivity gap between the informal and formal sectors for a low-income country. Conceptually,
we follow the approach in the macroeconomic development literature (see Caselli (2005) for a
survey). We adjust the labor productivity gap for differences in worker composition and hours
worked across the two sectors using worker-level information from the VHLSS. 6 We also assess the

6

Our approach relates to the literature on the labor productivity gap between agriculture and non-agriculture. See
Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014), Vollrath (2014) and Herrendorf and Schoellman (2015) for measurement and
Caselli (2005) and Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu (2008) for the role of these labor productivity gaps in explaining
aggregate productivity differences across countries.

WĂŐĞϯŽĨϴϱ

potential role of differences in measurement error and the output elasticity of labor across the two
sectors for the size of the labor productivity gap.
The reallocation of labor from household businesses to employers in the enterprise sector
provides an important margin of adjustment to exporting. Approximately half of the aggregate
decline in the share of workers in household businesses during the early 2000s derives from such
reallocation within industries. 7 The within-industry component is particularly pronounced in
manufacturing, which experienced the largest tariff cuts and greatest export growth. Importantly,
industries that experience larger declines in tariffs on Vietnamese exports to the U.S. experienced
greater decreases in the share of household business employment. The estimated magnitudes for
manufacturing imply that export opportunities due to the U.S. tariff reductions increased the share
of employment in the enterprise sector in manufacturing by 4.9 percentage points: about 207,000
workers. Our estimates reflect short run responses and may underestimate the long run effects of
the BTA on employment in the formal sector, as the economy has more time to adjust. We perform
several robustness and falsification checks. We find no effects of the BTA on household business
employment prior to its implementation. Additionally, the results are robust to using selfemployment as a measure of informality, a measure potentially more comparable across countries
than one based on the country-specific legal definition. Moreover, the results are robust to
controlling for the sorting of workers across sectors based on observable and time-invariant
unobservable worker characteristics.
Our results are consistent with models that predict a reallocation of workers away from selfemployment into wage employment and towards larger, more productive firms in response to
shocks that raise aggregate wages. For example, Melitz (2003) style models suggest that a reduction
in export market tariffs leads to a reallocation of labor toward more productive firms as the wage
rises (Demidova and Rodriguez-Clare (2013)). More generally, Lucas (1978) style models, such as
Gollin (2008), predict a reallocation of individuals from self-employment toward wage work in firms
run by managers with greater managerial talent as the aggregate wage rises. This reallocation
mechanism is further supported by evidence of wage increases and poverty reductions in McCaig
(2011) and Fukase (2013), where BTA-induced declines in US tariffs are associated with greater
increases in wages (especially for less educated workers) and decreases in poverty in areas of
7

The remaining half of the decline derives from the relative contraction of industries that tend to concentrate
production in microenterprises, namely agriculture and aquaculture.

WĂŐĞϰŽĨϴϱ

Vietnam more exposed to exporting. Not all individuals are affected equally by exporting
opportunities. Younger workers and workers in more internationally integrated provinces are more
likely to reallocate, which is consistent with lower adjustment costs to trade shocks among the
young and those with lower geographic mobility costs (Dix-Carneiro (2014), Hanson (1996)).
Our study also relates to the literature on the effects of trade policy on the allocation of
labor across industries, which finds limited net industry employment adjustment in response to
tariff declines in the short run in less developed countries. 8 In Section 5.5, we also do not find shifts
in the structure of total industry employment with declines in export costs. Earlier studies primarily
examined the domestic market consequences of unilateral import liberalizations. We focus on
export market liberalization and our findings of employment shifting toward employers in the
formal sector are consistent with theory predictions. 9
More generally, our analysis highlights the role of output-market factors (i.e. demand-side
constraints) in influencing the allocation of resources between informal microenterprises and
formal firms. Many studies focus on the effects of the removal of input-market distortions (i.e.
supply-side constraints) on the growth and formalization of microenterprises (see surveys by
Banerjee (2013) and Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman (2015) for microcredit; Bruhn and McKenzie
(2014) for business registration; and McKenzie and Woodruff (2014) for business training). Our
study complements this literature by focusing on an output-market (i.e. product demand-side)
policy change that disproportionally benefits and expands better performing firms (Melitz (2003))
and thereby reallocates employment away from microenterprises toward formal firms.
We contribute to the recent literature on the role of resource allocation across
heterogeneous firms and sectors in aggregate productivity differences across countries. 10 The
estimates of the aggregate labor productivity gains from the BTA-induced reallocation from the
informal to the formal sector depend critically on the estimates of the labor productivity gap. The
usual measure, based on average revenue product of labor, suggests a gap of 9. We show that it is
crucial to account for differences in worker composition and hours worked across the household

8

See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) for a survey. Section 5.5 provides detailed discussion.
See also Verhoogen (2008), Bustos (2011a, b), and Brambilla, Lederman, and Porto (2012) for the effects of
exporting on firm technology, quality or skill upgrading in formal enterprises and Brambilla, Porto, and Tarozzi
(2012) on the effects of exporting on microenterprises in aquaculture.
10
Most papers study misallocation among formal firms. Recent exceptions include Hsieh and Olken (2014) and
Bento and Restuccia (2016).
9

WĂŐĞϱŽĨϴϱ

business and enterprise sectors. This adjustment reduces the gap to 6, as worker heterogeneity
accounts for almost 40% of the original average revenue per worker gap.11 Additional adjustments
for potential differences in measurement error in revenue and hours worked across the two sectors
reduce the gap to 3.7, with a further drop to 2.5 when allowing for differences in the output
elasticity of labor. The BTA-induced reallocation of labor from the informal to the formal sector
increased aggregate labor productivity within manufacturing by 2.8 percent per year in the two
years following the BTA based on a labor productivity gap of 3.7, but the increase would be 1.5
percent with a labor productivity gap of 2.5. Overall, our analysis in Section 6 highlights the
sensitivity of the estimates of the labor productivity gap and aggregate productivity gain to worker
heterogeneity, measurement error in revenue or employment, and assumptions on labor intensity
of production. These issues are not unique to our setting and have implications for the literature on
misallocation, which relies on the size of the productivity gap to assess the aggregate gain from the
elimination of distortions.
Finally, our study relates to the literature on formal sector job creation in developing
countries. For workers, working in a formal firm rather than an informal microenterprise is more
than simply the distinction between working in a high- versus low-productivity firm. Working in a
formal firm changes the way a worker is attached to the workforce. In Vietnam, workers in the
formal sector earn higher wages, are more likely to receive non-wage/salary payments, work longer
hours, and are less likely to hold multiple jobs. Hence, the reallocation of workers towards the
formal sector in response to the BTA may have welfare consequences for workers. This is in line
with Banerjee and Duflo (2008, 2011), who argue that stable jobs with regular hours are an
important feature of the middle class in developing countries. 12
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes a conceptual framework.
Sections 3 and 4 describe the BTA and the data. Section 5 discusses our empirical methodology and
results. Section 6 estimates the labor productivity gap between the household business and
enterprise sectors and assesses the aggregate labor productivity change in manufacturing from
BTA-induced worker movement to the enterprise sector. Section 7 concludes.

11

Gollin et al. (2014) attribute part of the labor productivity gap between agriculture and non-agriculture to
worker heterogeneity and La Porta and Shleifer (2008) document lower levels of education among managers of
informal firms relative to formal firms.
12
See as well Atkin (2009), Jensen (2012), Javorcik (2015), and Heath and Mobarak (2015).

WĂŐĞϲŽĨϴϱ

2. A conceptual framework
We briefly discuss why tariff reductions on exports from a low-income country
(corresponding to the main trade policy change in the BTA) could affect the composition of
employment between the household business and formal enterprise sectors within an industry.
This discussion guides the empirical framework and analysis in Section 5.
A reduction in tariffs on exports from a low-income country will increase product demand
and labor demand in the country. If firms differ in underlying profitability due to heterogeneity in
marginal costs of production and face a fixed cost of exporting, the reduction in variable export
costs disproportionately raises the profitability of firms with a lower marginal cost of production
(Melitz (2003), Demidova and Rodriguez-Clare (2013)). Firm-specific marginal cost differences might
stem from differences in entrepreneurial ability of the owner/manager (Lucas (1978), Gollin (2008))
or underlying productivity (Melitz (2003)). Household businesses differ from firms in the enterprise
sector in many dimensions and exhibit substantially lower productivity, perhaps owing in part to
lower education or managerial ability of owners. 13 In this setting, only initially more productive
firms benefit from declines in policy-induced variable export costs because only they earn high
enough variable profits from increased exports to cover the fixed cost of exporting. Declines in
tariffs increase product and labor demand (and profitability) among these more productive firms,
while increasing the labor costs and reducing the profitability of inefficient firms that only serve the
domestic market. This is predicted to shift the composition of employment away from less
productive employers (such as household businesses) toward more productive employers in the
enterprise sector. 14
This mechanism does not require that household businesses and formal enterprises
compete in the product market. A framework such as Melitz (2003) assumes product-market
competition among the firms, implying, in our context, that household business products are
imperfect substitutes for varieties produced by firms in the enterprise sector, including exported
varieties. This is clearly a strong assumption. Even if household businesses and formal enterprises
do not compete in product markets, exporting could affect employment in household businesses
13

See Gollin (2008), La Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014), de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2013), and Nataraj
(2011).
14
Mrazova and Neary (forthcoming) show that the selection effects in Melitz style models are very robust to
functional form assumptions and market structure, requiring supermodularity of the profit function in marginal
production costs and market access costs (export).

WĂŐĞϳŽĨϴϱ

through the general equilibrium effects of trade on labor demand. In fact, evidence from Vietnam
suggests that exporting opportunities from the BTA raise wages (McCaig (2011), Fukase (2013)). If
household businesses compete for labor with firms in the enterprise sector, which
disproportionately benefit from declines in export costs (Melitz (2003)), the increased labor
demand among firms in the enterprise sector increases the opportunity cost of working for a
household business, resulting in a relative contraction of employment in household businesses (see
also Lucas (1978), Gollin (2008)). This discussion abstracts from frictions that might impede the
mobility of individuals from the household business to the enterprise sector. To the extent that
such frictions exist, they dampen the reallocation in response to declines in export costs, making it
more difficult to detect empirically reallocation across this margin of employment after tariff
declines. Likewise, firms might face different distortions across the two sectors (see Hsieh and
Klenow (2009)). This would lead to lower employment in a sector facing greater distortions than in
Melitz (2003) without distortions.
Reductions in trade costs also influence the relative size of industries, as emphasized in the
neoclassical trade models, and this too may influence the allocation of labor between the
household business and enterprise sectors. In general, the effect of trade on the composition of
aggregate employment across employers via this neoclassical channel depends on the nature of the
trade liberalization and the relative prevalence of household business employment in industries
subject to larger declines in trade frictions. For example, in Vietnam, production in agriculture is
more prone to be organized around household businesses than the apparel industry. If the trade
agreement reduces the export cost of apparel (relative to agriculture), trade shifts the structure of
employment away from agriculture toward apparel, reducing the aggregate share of jobs in
household businesses. Our empirical framework accounts for such compositional changes.

3. Background on the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement
In this section, we describe the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA) and highlight
its key features that we utilize in our empirical methodology and identification strategy in Section 5.
The BTA was implemented on December 10, 2001. 15 The agreement led to negligible
changes in Vietnam’s import tariff commitments to the U.S. because Vietnam already applied Most

15

See STAR-Vietnam (2003) and McCaig (2011) for an extensive discussion of the BTA.

WĂŐĞϴŽĨϴϱ

Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs on U.S. imports. 16 The main trade policy change was for the U.S to
immediately grant Vietnam Normal Trade Relations (NTR) or MFN access to the U.S. market. Prior
to the BTA Vietnam was subject to tariffs according to Column 2 of the U.S. tariff schedule. With the
BTA, Vietnam became subject to MFN tariff rates. In our analysis, we use industry-level U.S. import
ad valorem equivalent tariffs applied to Vietnamese exports constructed from these two tariff
schedules by McCaig (2011) as the main policy variable to measure the industry-level policy cost of
accessing export markets. 17
Our identification strategy in Section 5 relies on several features of the U.S. tariff declines.
Table 1 summarizes industry tariff levels and changes overall and for broad sectors. First, the U.S.
tariff cuts were large, as the BTA on average reduced tariffs by 20.9 percentage points, from 23.4 to
2.5 percent. The large magnitude of tariff cuts makes it ex ante plausible to separate the effects of
changes in tariffs from confounding changes in the Vietnamese economy. Our empirical
methodology in Section 5 relies on the heterogeneity of tariff declines across industries to identify
the effects of lower exporting costs on labor allocation across employers. Thus, a second useful
feature of the BTA is that the tariff cuts varied widely across industries. As Table 1 suggests, the
standard deviation of the industry tariff decline is 17.9 percentage points. Industries within
manufacturing experienced the largest average tariff cut of 30.2 percentage points, with the
average tariff falling from 33.8 to 3.6 percent.
Importantly, these tariff declines significantly affected the volume and structure of
Vietnamese exports to the U.S. and worldwide. During this period, Vietnam’s aggregate worldwide
exports were expanding, but the exports to the U.S. grew even more. Figures 1 and 2, also reported
in Fukase (2013), show the value and the share, respectively, of Vietnamese exports to the U.S.
from 1997 through 2006. The implementation of the BTA led to a significant surge in exports, which
16

The BTA required Vietnam to reduce import tariffs on approximately 250 (out of approximately 6000) 6-digit HS
agricultural and manufactured food products. As these tariff cuts were small in comparison to the U.S. tariff cuts
and only affected a relatively small number of products, we do not discuss them in detail. Our results are robust to
controlling for these tariff cuts. As part of the BTA, Vietnam was required to implement various regulatory and
legal changes over a period of 10 years following the implementation of the BTA. These included commitments to
improve market access in services such as banking and telecommunication, intellectual property rights, and
protection of foreign direct investment (STAR-Vietnam (2003)).
17
McCaig (2011) uses detailed information on U.S. tariffs for both of these tariff schedules from the U.S.
International Trade Commission’s online Tariff Information Center and computes the ad valorem equivalent of any
specific tariffs. He then matches the tariff lines to industries by the concordance provided by the World Bank via
the World Integrated Trade Solution database to construct industry-level tariffs according to 2-digit ISIC industry
nomenclature. This classification closely matches the industry classification in the VHLSSs.

WĂŐĞϵŽĨϴϱ

is evident from the break in trend in 2001 in Figure 1. This break is especially pronounced for
manufactured exports, which experienced substantially larger BTA tariff cuts than primary sector
exports. 18 Figure 2 indicates that the share of Vietnamese exports going to the U.S. grew rapidly
from 5.1 percent in 2000 to 19.0 percent in 2004 and this increase was primarily driven by
manufacturing, where U.S. exports accounted for 26.1 percent of Vietnamese exports by 2004. 19
The top eight exports to the U.S. according to 2004 value by industry were apparel; footwear;
textiles; food products and beverages; furniture; agriculture; refined petroleum; and office,
accounting and computing machinery.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between growth in exports to the U.S. between 2001 and
2004 and tariff changes across 2-digit ISIC industries. A strong negative relationship suggests that
industries with greater tariff cuts experienced faster export growth. Appendix Table A.1 reports the
industry-level regression of the change in log exports to the U.S. between 2001 and 2004 on the
change in U.S. tariffs, which yields a statistically significant estimate of the coefficient on the change
in U.S. tariffs for traded industries and for manufacturing. The estimate in column 1 implies that an
industry with the average tariff cut, 20.9 percentage points, experienced average annual export
growth to the U.S. of 48 percent.
This BTA-related expansion of U.S. exports is not driven by industry-specific global demand
shocks. Appendix Table A.1 also reports results for Vietnamese exports to the European Community
as an outcome variable. Unlike exports to the U.S., Vietnamese exports to the E.U. were already
subject to MFN tariffs prior to the implementation of the BTA (STAR-Vietnam (2003)). As a highincome export market destination, the E.U. likely faces similar industry-specific demand for lowincome country exports as the U.S. market. To the extent that U.S. tariff changes are correlated
with these shocks, BTA-induced tariff changes would also be spuriously correlated with Vietnamese
exports to the E.U. However, the coefficients on tariffs reported in columns 3 and 4 are statistically

18

Total manufacturing exports also increased following the BTA, as they grew at an annual rate of 23.4% between
2001 and 2006 as compared to 12.8% between 1997 and 2001. The corresponding figures for total exports are
13.1% between 1997 and 2001 and 21.5% between 2001 and 2006.
19
As a non-member of GATT and the WTO, Vietnam was not subject to the Multi Fibre Agreement and did not
initially face any export quotas for textile and apparel products destined for the U.S. In July 2003, a bilateral textile
agreement came into force that imposed quotas on Vietnamese textile and apparel exports to the U.S. This
agreement is likely responsible for the reduction in the rate of growth of the share of U.S.-bound Vietnamese
manufacturing exports following 2003. In the analysis below, this is one of the reasons why we restrict our period
to the two years immediately following the implementation of the BTA. To the extent these quotas affected
Vietnamese households in 2003 they would likely attenuate our findings.

WĂŐĞϭϬŽĨϴϱ

insignificant and an order of magnitude smaller than the corresponding coefficients in columns 1
and 2, indicating no association between the changes in U.S. tariffs and changes in Vietnamese
exports to the E.U. It is therefore unlikely that BTA-induced tariff changes are spuriously correlated
with industry-specific global demand shocks for Vietnamese goods. 20
A fourth useful feature of the U.S. tariff cuts induced by the BTA is that the usual concern
about the political economy of protection and the endogeneity of tariff changes are potentially less
severe. Industry-specific tariff cuts occurred by the U.S. reassigning Vietnam from one pre-existing
tariff schedule to another. Prior to the BTA, imports from Vietnam were covered by Column 2 of the
U.S. tariff schedule, whereas after the BTA they were covered by Most Favored Nation tariffs, also
known as Normal Trade Relations. The Column 2 and MFN tariffs began to diverge in 1951 when the
U.S. assigned Vietnam and twenty other communist countries to a list of countries without normal
trade relations. These countries became subject to substantially higher Column 2 tariffs, which were
based on tariffs levels legislated by the Tariff Act of 1930 (Pregelj (2005)). The Column 2 tariff rates
have remained relatively unchanged over time (Pregelj (2005)). Immediately prior to the BTA, the
mean Column 2 tariff across 4-digit HS products remained essentially unchanged, at 31.2 and 31.5
percentage points, respectively in 1997 and 2001, and the correlation was 0.991 (McCaig (2011)).
While the U.S. MFN tariffs have fallen over time, Vietnam was not part of the negotiation process as
a non-member of the GATT and the WTO.
The U.S. tariff cuts were presented as an all-or-nothing package whereby exports from
Vietnam into the U.S. would immediately be covered by MFN tariff rates (negotiated among the
WTO members in a round that concluded by 1995) instead of Column 2 tariffs. The movement of
Vietnam from one pre-existing U.S. tariff schedule to a second pre-existing U.S. tariff schedule
implies that neither U.S. nor Vietnamese industries had an opportunity to influence the tariff cuts
faced by specific industries at the time of the implementation of the BTA.
We further confirm the lack of correlation between BTA-induced tariff changes and preexisting industry trends and levels. In particular, BTA-induced tariff changes do not appear to be
related to pre-existing trends in Vietnamese exports to the U.S nor to other high-income

20

We obtain qualitatively similar results when we exclude industries whose exports accounted for less than 0.5%
of total Vietnamese exports in 2001. We also find qualitatively similar results when we use growth rates as in Davis
and Haltiwanger (1992) as a dependent variable. These growth rates are defined as g
yt  yt 1 ª¬0.5 yt  yt 1 º¼
and accommodate zero exports in an industry at either the start or end of the period.

WĂŐĞϭϭŽĨϴϱ

destinations such as the E.U. A falsification check of the growth of exports to the U.S. between 1997
and 2000, where the industry-level pre-BTA tariffs are matched with exports in 1997 and the postBTA tariffs are matched with exports in 2000, yields a coefficient substantially smaller in magnitude
that is statistically insignificant (see Appendix Table A.1, Panel B, columns 1 and 2). We obtain a
similar finding for growth of exports to the E.U. between 1997 and 2000 (see Appendix Table A.1,
Panel B, columns 3 and 4). 21 Thus, the export growth to the U.S. following the BTA is not simply the
continuation of pre-existing trends. In addition, we regressed the change in U.S. tariffs on a
measure of the unskilled labor intensity of an industry (measured by the share of workers that
completed grade 9 or less) and the share of workers within the industry working in household
businesses prior to the implementation of the BTA. Across traded, all, and manufacturing industries
we find partial correlations of 0.155, -0.120, and 0.030 for the share of unskilled labor and 0.207,
0.047, and 0.056 for the share of informal workers. None of the correlations are statistically
significant. Overall, neither contemporaneous growth in demand for Vietnamese exports from
other high-income countries, nor pre-existing trends in industry exports, nor baseline industry
characteristics are statistically correlated with the BTA-induced industry tariff changes.

4. Data and Aggregate Trends in Household Business Employment
4.1 Definition of a household business
In Vietnam, firms operate either in the household business sector or in the registered
enterprise sector. The registered enterprise sector includes four ownership categories: state,
collective, foreign, and (domestic) private as defined by the Enterprise Law. 22 All state, collective,
and foreign businesses have to legally register as an enterprise. Private businesses can legally
operate as either a household business or a registered private enterprise. The legal guidelines for
when a private business must register as an enterprise are at times vague, but they consistently
require registration as an enterprise for private businesses that regularly employ workers, or
employ more than 10 workers, or that operate in more than one location. 23 Thus, while small,
single-location businesses may operate as household businesses or enterprises, all larger businesses
21

A similar regression for worldwide exports between 1997 and 2000 also yields statistically insignificant findings.
See law No. 13-1999-QH10 Law on Enterprises.
23
Decrees No. 02/2000/ND-CP of 3 February 2000 and No. 109/2004/ND-CP of 2 April describe household business
and enterprise registration requirements during our study period, with the first decree focusing on regular
employment and the second on the 10 worker threshold.
22

WĂŐĞϭϮŽĨϴϱ

are required to operate as enterprises. Note that the average household business in manufacturing
has only 1.5 workers (including the owner), well below the enterprise employment threshold, and
being a household business does not imply that a business operates illegally. Household businesses
can operate in the physical premise of a household (or farm), market stalls, industrial zones, trade
centers, and in variable locations (e.g., street vendors).
While the definition of an informal business varies across countries, using the distinction
between a household business and an enterprise in Vietnam is consistent with informal firm
definitions in other countries. Commonly, the informal versus formal distinction is about firm
registration status, which may be related to other firm characteristics. 24 La Porta and Shleifer (2008)
define informal as unregistered with the central government and thus without a tax identification
number in a collection of informal and micro firm surveys across countries. Although the exact legal
requirements and number of steps to formally register vary across countries, firm informality is
regularly based on the firm’s registration status for a license, certificate, or tax code. 25 Informal
firms frequently do not hire workers and a large component of the informal firm distribution is selfemployment and own-account work. 26 In Section 5.2, we therefore explore the link between the
concept of household business and self-employment and check the robustness of our findings to
the use of self-employment.
In Vietnam, most household businesses are household farms in agriculture and aquaculture.
Non-farm household businesses predominately operate in services (70%). Of the 30% of household
businesses in manufacturing, the most common activities are production of food and beverages,
wood processing, clothing, furniture, and textiles. The difference in registration status is predictive
of important differences in underlying firm characteristics in the household business and enterprise
sectors. Consistent with other studies on household businesses (La Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014)
and Nataraj (2011)), Vietnamese household businesses are substantially smaller and have lower
24

For example, manufacturing firms in India that have 10 or more workers and use electricity or have 20 or more
workers but don’t use electricity are required to register (Nataraj (2011)).
25
A related literature, primarily from Latin American countries and studying domestic import liberalization, focuses
on whether formal firms comply with labor legislation requirements concerning contracts, severance payments
and social insurance contributions for workers. Some of these studies face data constraints. Goldberg and Pavcnik
(2003) and Bosch, Goñi-Pacchioni, and Maloney (2012) use survey data covering only urban areas; Paz (2014) uses
a nationally representative household survey, but excludes the self-employed from the analysis; and MenezesFilho and Muendler (2011) use matched employer-employee data that covers workers with a signed work card in
registered firms and the same urban survey as Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003).
26
Gollin (2008), Banerjee and Duflo (2007), de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2009), Fafchamps, McKenzie, Quinn,
and Woodruff (2014) equate informal microenterprises with self-employment or own-account work.

WĂŐĞϭϯŽĨϴϱ

labor productivity than firms in the enterprise sector. For example, the average household business
in manufacturing has only 1.5 workers (including the owner), while the average employment size
for manufacturing firms in the enterprise sector is 152. 27 Household businesses in manufacturing
have on average 6 times lower average revenue per equivalent hour worked than enterprises (see
Section 6 and Appendix B for further details on this calculation).
Registered enterprises are required by the Enterprise Law to follow formal accounting
standards and to report comprehensive information about their financial position, including
information on their workforce. Consequently, as in other low-income countries, in Vietnam
workers in the enterprise sector are captured in the conventional firm-level datasets covering the
formal sector, whereas workers in the household business sector are not. The next section
describes how we use comprehensive household surveys to observe workers in both sectors.

4.2 Data Description
We use two waves of the Vietnam Household Living Standards Surveys (VHLSS) conducted
by the General Statistics Office (GSO) of Vietnam in 2002 and 2004 as our primary data source. The
surveys are nationally representative, have a 12 month recall, and cover 2001/2002 and
2003/2004. 28 While the VHLSS is a repeated cross section of households, it also contains a smaller
panel subsample, which we employ in several specification checks. 29
We focus on employed individuals, ages 20 to 64, in their main job (i.e., the most time
consuming). 30,31 We create variables on workers’ demographic and educational characteristics

27

These estimates are based on the estimated number of manufacturing household businesses and primary job
workers in these businesses from the 2002 VHLSS for household businesses and the end of year employment in the
2001 Enterprise Survey for manufacturing enterprises.
28
The BTA was implemented on December 10, 2001. The 2002 survey interviewed households throughout the
year. With a recall period of 12 months, individuals interviewed at the start of 2002 have a recall period that
almost entirely precedes the BTA, while individuals interviewed at the end of 2002 have a recall period almost
exclusively after the implementation of the BTA. Our results thus potentially underestimate the full impact that the
BTA has had on labor reallocation as of 2003/04.
29
In robustness checks, we rely on two additional data sources: the 1992/93 and 1997/98 Vietnam Living Standard
Surveys (VLSS), predecessors to the VHLSS. Additionally, we use Vietnam’s Enterprise Survey for 2000 and 2003, a
firm-level dataset that covers all registered firms in the enterprise sector, for an analysis of industry employment
changes.
30
For each individual in the household the survey collects information on whether the individual is employed,
unable to find work or out of the labor force. Unemployment is very infrequent in our data. For example, among
individuals age 20 to 64 in the 2004 VHLSS, 88.7 percent report working during the past 12 months while only 6.2
percent of those not working (or 0.7 percent of the age group) report being unable to find a job.

WĂŐĞϭϰŽĨϴϱ

(gender, age, highest level of completed education, ethnic minority status), geographic location
(urban residence, province), and industry affiliation. The survey distinguishes between 60 2-digit
ISIC (Rev 3) industries overall, 34 in the traded sector, and 22 of which are in manufacturing. We use
industry affiliation to link individual-level data to industry-level U.S. tariffs on Vietnamese exports,
described in Section 3.
We construct the main variable of interest, an indicator for whether a worker works for a
household business, from a survey question about the worker’s employer type. The question
distinguishes whether a worker is self-employed, works for another household, the state sector, the
collective sector, the private enterprise sector, or the foreign sector. The indicator takes the value
one if an individual works in his/her own household business or in another household’s business,
and zero otherwise. This definition of employment in a household business is consistent with the
distinction between household businesses and registered enterprises as per Vietnam’s Enterprise
Law as discussed in Section 4.1. 32
One potential problem with the construction of a household business indicator is that the
individuals might not know whether they work for a household business or a private enterprise.
While this is a concern, the survey provides detailed instructions to the enumerators about how to
record the answers to questions. Furthermore, most workers in household businesses work for
their own business and presumably know its registration status. 33 If measurement error was severe,
one would not expect to observe differences in worker outcomes such as earnings and benefits for
workers in household businesses and other establishments. As we discuss below, we find notable
differences in wages and benefits received between workers in the household business and
enterprise sectors. 34 To the extent that there is some measurement error in our dependent
variable, it would reduce the precision of our estimates and bias us toward finding no significant

31

Among workers age 20 to 64 in the 2004 VHLSS, 42.5 percent reported working more than one job during the
past 12 months. Among these individuals the average annual hours worked was 1355 and 511 in their primary and
secondary jobs respectively as compared to 1907 hours for workers that reported working only one job.
32
The 2004 VHLSS distinguishes between self-employment in a household business and self-employment in a
private enterprise, while the 2002 VHLSS does not. To be consistent across surveys we classify all self-employed
individuals as working for a household business. This is not a very egregious grouping since self-employment in the
private sector is only 0.7 percent of self-employment across all industries and 1.6 percent of self-employment in
manufacturing in the 2004 VHLSS.
33
In section 5.2, we also rely on an indicator for whether an individual is self-employed.
34
This also holds if we compare workers in household businesses and private enterprises.

WĂŐĞϭϱŽĨϴϱ

impact. Appendix Table A.2 provides summary statistics for the sample of 152,388 workers in
2001/02 and 96,407 workers in 2003/04.

4.3 Employment in enterprises versus household businesses
While our study can capture worker allocation between employers in the household
business and enterprise sectors – a margin that is not observed in firm-level or matched employeeemployer administrative data – we do not observe the allocation of workers across firms within
employer types. Our study thus complements the literature on labor allocation across
heterogeneous employers in the formal sector.
Household businesses tend to be substantially less productive than firms in the enterprise
sector, even relative to smaller private enterprises, a point we return to in Section 6. Large labor
productivity gaps, combined with a large employment share of informal firms in many low-income
countries, suggest that focusing on this margin of labor adjustment may be important for aggregate
productivity.
However, the distinction between a household business and an enterprise is also important
from the perspective of the workers. Appendix Table A.3 reports summary statistics on several
worker-related outcomes for individuals employed in household businesses and enterprises. To
begin with, self-employment is very high in the household business sector (83 percent of household
business workers in all industries and 61 percent in manufacturing industries are self-employed).
For wage earners, hourly wages are higher in the enterprise sector. These wage gaps persist when
one compares observationally equivalent workers. 35 For example, manufacturing workers in a
household business earn about 25 percent less per hour than observationally equivalent workers
working in the same industry and province (Column 6 of Appendix Table B.1). Controlling for
unobserved worker characteristics, informal manufacturing workers that switch to work for an
enterprise tend to earn 9 percent more than when they work for a household business (Columns 1
and 2 of Appendix Table B.2). These patterns for Vietnam are consistent with the literature on firm
size and earnings and on informality (Marcouiller, Ruiz de Castilla, and Woodruff (1997) and
Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003)). Similar differences emerge in earnings, which include income from
self-employment (see Appendix Table B.3).

35

See Appendix B.1.3 for detailed discussion.

WĂŐĞϭϲŽĨϴϱ

Workers that work for household businesses are less likely to report receiving nonwage/salary payments, such as for holidays (see Appendix Table A.3). Additionally, workers in the
enterprise sector are legally entitled to compulsory social insurance contributions on their behalf by
their employers. This is in addition to their contemporary wage/salary payments. Hence, these
workers will have access to a formal pension upon retirement. Unfortunately, our data does not
include information on whether an employer provides these benefits, so we cannot measure such
compliance.
Finally, Appendix Table A.3 shows that enterprise workers work longer hours in their
primary job (about 25% more per year across all industries) and are substantially less likely to work
more than one job. This suggests that precarious work is less of a concern for these workers.
Furthermore, Banerjee and Duflo (2008, 2011) discuss psychological benefits of secure
employment. An important difference between being employed in the formal versus the informal
sector is that workers in the formal sector have more stable jobs from the perspective of hours
worked in a given week (as opposed to having to piece together hours across one or two jobs).
Overall, this discussion suggests that the distinction between employment in the household
business and enterprise sectors has additional implications for workers than simply the difference
between working for a more and/or less productive firm in the formal sector would.

4.4 Aggregate trends in household business employment
Table 2, Panel A reports the aggregate share of individuals that work in household
businesses in Vietnam in 2001/02 and 2003/04 and motivates the importance of this employment
margin. 36 The results are presented for workers in all industries, in industries other than agriculture
and aquaculture, and in manufacturing. The major fact to emerge is that employment in household
businesses is very high in Vietnam. Economy-wide, 85 percent of workers are employed in
household businesses in 2001/02. The prevalence of employment in household businesses does not
merely reflect the large overall share of employment in agriculture and aquaculture, as the share
continues to be high, at 67 percent, when we exclude agriculture and aquaculture. 37 We observe
similarly high levels of working for household businesses, 66 percent, within manufacturing,
36

See McCaig and Pavcnik (2015) for descriptive analysis of the decline in the share of workers in informal firms
and patterns of birth cohort and individual attachment to the informal sector over a decade.
37
The middle panel also excludes forestry, a very small sector; for brevity, we refer to agriculture and aquaculture
only.

WĂŐĞϭϳŽĨϴϱ

consistent with evidence from India (Nataraj (2011)) and Ghana (Gollin (2008)). Thus, even in
manufacturing, the sector that is the focus of most of the existing work on trade and labor
allocation, the usual analysis of formal enterprise firms captures a small share of employment.
The second key fact to emerge from Table 2 is the decline in the prevalence of working in
household businesses between 2001/02 and 2003/04. Economy-wide, the share of workers in
household businesses fell by 3.3 percentage points (or 4 percent). The drop was particularly
pronounced in manufacturing, where the share of workers employed in household businesses fell
by 5.6 percentage points (or 9 percent). The conceptual framework in Section 2 emphasizes that
trade can influence the composition of employment through the reallocation of employment across
employers within industries and between industries with differential prevalence of household
business employment. We examine whether the observed aggregate changes in the incidence of
employment in household businesses stem from changes in the structure of employment across
industries (e.g., expansion of employment in industries that tend to organize their production in
formal enterprises) or from within-industry reallocation of workers across employers. We
decompose the change in the share of workers in household businesses in total employment
between 2001/02 and 2003/04, denoted by 'H , into within and between industry shifts,
respectively: 'H t

H t  H t 1

¦ 'h
j

jt

s j  ¦ 's jt h j , where s jt is the share of industry j's
j

employment in total employment at time t, hjt is the share of workers in household businesses in
total employment in industry j, s j

0.5 s jt  s jt 1 , and h j

0.5 h jt  h jt 1 . The first summation

term captures the importance of mobility of workers across employers within an industry and the
second summation term captures the prevalence of mobility of workers across industries as sources
of changes in aggregate employment in household businesses.
Panel B of Table 2 presents the results of the decomposition. Economy-wide, both channels
contribute equally toward the decline in the aggregate share of household business employment. The
between-industry component accounts for 48 percent of the aggregate decline and mainly reflects
the relative contraction of employment in agriculture and aquaculture, where almost all workers
work in household farms. Exclusion of agriculture and aquaculture raises the contribution of the
within-industry channel from 52 to 86 percent. The within-industry reallocation of workers across
employers from the household business to the registered enterprise sector plays an even larger role

WĂŐĞϭϴŽĨϴϱ

in manufacturing, where it accounts for the entire decline in the aggregate share of household
business employment. Overall, these aggregate trends motivate our empirical analysis, which we turn
to next.

5. Empirical Implementation
This section first describes our empirical methodology and main results, followed by
discussing several robustness and falsification checks. The section concludes with a discussion of
the implications of the BTA for industry employment.

5.1 Empirical Methodology and Main Results
We exploit large heterogeneity across industries in declines in U.S. tariffs on Vietnamese
exports induced by the BTA to investigate the relationship between exporting costs and the
allocation of workers between employers in the household business and enterprise sectors. The
empirical methodology relies on a comparison of the probability that a worker works for a household
business before and after implementation of the BTA across Vietnamese industries differentially
exposed to the declines in U.S. tariffs. In the initial empirical specifications, we estimate the following
linear probability model:
H ijt

X ijt G  E tariff jt  J p  O j  T t  H ijt .

(1)

Hijt is an indicator for whether a worker i employed in industry j at time t works for a household
business, Xijt is a vector of worker characteristics (this vector includes age, age squared, and
indicators for highest completed education category (primary, lower secondary, upper secondary,
with no formal education as the excluded category), gender, ethnic minority indicator, an indicator
for whether a person lives in a rural area), tariffjt is the U.S. tariff on Vietnamese exports in industry j
at time t. The specification also includes province ( J p ), industry ( O j ), and time ( Tt ) fixed effects. The
main parameter of interest is the coefficient on tariffs. A positive coefficient implies that a decline in
tariffs is associated with a decline in the probability of working in a household business and the
reallocation of labor away from household businesses. Standard errors are clustered by industry to
account for general forms of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error term within an
industry.

WĂŐĞϭϵŽĨϴϱ

Inclusion of individual worker demographic characteristics in equation (1) sweeps out
differences in worker composition across industries, employers, and time that could simultaneously
affect the allocation of labor and be spuriously correlated with tariff levels. The post-BTA fixed
effect controls for aggregate economy-wide adjustments in household business employment
coinciding with the implementation of the BTA agreement. Province fixed effects absorb any timeinvariant features of provinces affecting labor market conditions in a province, while industry-level
fixed effects capture all time-invariant industry characteristics correlated with tariff levels and
prevalence of household business employment. In this set up, the empirical strategy identifies the
coefficient on tariffs by comparing effects of tariff declines on workers with the same observable
characteristics within provincial labor markets, some of whom worked in industries that experience
large tariff cuts and others who worked in industries with smaller tariff cuts.
Any potential threats to the underlying identification assumption would stem from industry
specific time-varying factors that covary with industry tariff changes and independently influence
industry-specific changes in the propensity to work for a household business. As discussed in detail
in Section 3, the institutional implementation of the BTA-induced tariff cuts eliminated the ability of
industry-specific contemporaneous conditions in Vietnam or the U.S. to influence the magnitude of
industry tariff cuts through the political economy of tariff formation. One could potentially still be
concerned about spurious correlation between industry tariff changes and contemporaneous
industry-specific changes in global demand for Vietnamese exports. In Section 3, we also show that
U.S. tariff changes are not spuriously correlated with contemporaneous industry-specific changes in
global demand for Vietnamese exports: the U.S. tariff declines lead to a strong increase in
Vietnam’s exports to the U.S, but are not associated with changes in export growth to the E.U. This
also likely eliminates the role of contemporaneous supply shocks in Vietnam, which would be
affecting all global destinations. We also find no statistically significant association between U.S.
tariff changes and industry baseline characteristics, such as the share of household business
workers in industry employment and the unskilled-labor intensity of the industry, prior to the
implementation of the BTA, nor between U.S. tariff changes and pre-existing industry-specific time
trends in Vietnamese exports to the U.S., the E.U., and worldwide. These results, discussed in detail
in Section 3, further validate the identification strategy in equation (1). Finally, we focus on the
short run effects of the BTA because we want our identification strategy to only capture the effects
of the BTA as opposed to other changes occurring in the Vietnamese economy, including World

WĂŐĞϮϬŽĨϴϱ

Trade Organization (WTO) accession in 2007 and the 2008 crisis. Our estimates should therefore not
be viewed as long-run estimates of the effects of the BTA, which are potentially larger (see DixCarneiro and Kovak (2017) for long-run adjustment to import liberalization).
Figures 4 and 5 present scatterplots of the change in the share of household business
workers in an industry and the BTA-induced change in U.S. tariffs for all traded industries and for
manufacturing, respectively. 38 The size of the circles reflects the employment size of each industry.
The slope of the displayed regression lines is equivalent to the estimate of the coefficient on tariffs
based on equation (1) without controlling for worker characteristics and province fixed effects. 39
The figures show a clear positive relationship: industries with larger tariff cuts experienced larger
reductions in the share of workers working in household businesses.
The relationships shown in the scatterplots continue to hold once we estimate the
coefficient on tariffs as specified in equation (1) and reported in Table 3. Column 1 presents
estimates of equation (1) for traded industries. We find that workers in industries that faced greater
reductions in U.S. tariffs experienced larger decreases in the probability of employment in
household businesses relative to observationally equivalent workers in industries with smaller tariff
reductions. The magnitude of the coefficient (0.209) suggests that an industry that experienced the
average reduction in tariffs, 20.9 percentage points, saw the probability of working in a household
business fall by 4.4 percentage points relative to an industry facing no reduction in tariffs. In
Column 2, we report the estimates of equation (1) for workers in all industries, including non-traded
industries. The non-traded sectors were not directly impacted by the tariff cuts and observed no
change in tariffs. 40 The inclusion of non-traded sectors dampens the magnitude of the coefficient
relative to the estimate based on the traded sector alone, although the coefficient continues to be
positive and statistically significant. Lastly, in column 3 we estimate equation (1) for the
manufacturing sector, a sample that is more comparable to the samples used in most studies of
labor reallocation in response to trade reform. The estimated coefficient suggests that the average
reduction in manufacturing tariffs of 30.2 percentage points is associated with a 4.7 percentage
38

Both figures exclude industry 12 (mining of uranium and thorium ores) from the display, but not from the
regression line, as it is an extreme outlier and a very small industry in terms of employment.
39
The industry observations are weighted by
where nj is the number of workers in industry j in
the indicated year.
40
We assign a tariff of 0 to non-traded industries in both years. Equation (1) includes industry fixed effects, which
implies that non-traded industries experience no tariff change. See Kovak (2013) for an alternative approach in the
local labor markets literature.

WĂŐĞϮϭŽĨϴϱ

point reduction in the probability of employment in a household business in that industry. 41,42
Importantly, our estimates reflect short run responses and may underestimate the long run effects
of the BTA on employment in the formal sector, as the economy has more time to adjust.
The results in Panel A of Table 3 are robust to a variety of specification checks. In Panel B we
report estimates based on a specification that replaces the province and year fixed effects with
province-year fixed effects. In addition, in Panel C we also allow the effects of worker observables
to vary over time by interacting the individual covariates with a 2004 indicator. The estimates in
Panel B and C are very similar to those in Panel A. 43 In Appendix Table A.4, we report regression
results from additional modifications of equation (1). The specification in Panel A removes all
individual covariates from equation (1). The specification in Panel B estimates equation (1) with a
sample that excludes observations from mining of uranium and thorium ores (industry 12), a small
industry, but a significant outlier. The results remain consistent across these additional
specifications. 44
The analysis thus far focuses on the extensive margin of labor adjustment. As workers move
into the enterprise sector they may not work the same number of hours as current enterprise
sector workers, so that labor reallocation measured in terms of hours may differ relative to
reallocation solely on the number of workers. We compute the share of total hours worked in the
household business sector in an industry using information on hours worked in the primary job. In
the spirit of Figures 4 and 5, we use this variable as a dependent variable and estimate an industrylevel version of equation (1) (without individual covariates and province fixed effects), weighting
each industry by its average size. The results are reported in Appendix Table A.5. Consistent with
41

The magnitude is slightly smaller for manufacturing than for all traded industries because of agriculture. In
column (1), the coefficient on tariffs is identified by differential changes in household business employment across
industries, including agriculture, which received a lower tariff reduction than most manufacturing industries.
During this period, households, not enterprises, undertake essentially all agricultural activity in Vietnam.
Consequently, regressions in column 1 that include agriculture are estimated with additional observations that,
relative to observations from manufacturing, tend to experience almost no change in the share of household
business employment and a small tariff decline. This contributes to higher magnitude of coefficient in column 1
than 3.
42
These results are robust to controlling for Vietnam’s BTA tariff reduction commitments, which are concentrated
in agriculture and the processing of food and beverages. The estimated coefficient on U.S. tariffs is 0.170, 0.131,
and 0.180 on traded, all, and manufacturing industries respectively, all of which remain statistically significant at
the 1 percent level.
43
To the extent that different price changes of non-tradables across provinces (as in Kovak (2013)) would be key
for our results in column 2, the estimates of the effects of the BTA in column 2 would change substantially in Panel
B of Table 3, relative to Panel A. The estimated coefficients are similar.
44
Our main findings are also robust to estimation using probit or logit. Results are available upon request.

WĂŐĞϮϮŽĨϴϱ

our main findings, the results document a reduction in the share of hours worked in the household
business sector in response to the tariff cuts. Moreover, the similar magnitudes of the coefficients
in Appendix Table A.5 and Panel A of Table 3 suggest that as workers move between sectors, the
average number of hours worked per person within each sector is relatively unchanged. Hence, the
primary margin of adjustment in hours worked within an industry appears to be reallocation of
workers across sectors.

5.2 Results and Falsification Test based on Self-Employment
One may worry that our results might not generalize to other settings because our
definition of employment in a household business is specific to the definition of firm informality in
Vietnam. The discussion in Section 4.1 illustrates that this definition is consistent with those for
many other countries studied in the literature on informal microenterprises. In addition, this
definition is highly correlated with self-employment (in these microenterprises) in low-income
countries. For example, La Porta and Shleifer (2008) show that self-employment correlates highly
with various measures of informality in a large set of low-income countries. This is also the case in
Vietnam, where the correlation between self-employment and working in a household business is
0.67.
Importantly, our main finding that declines in tariffs on exports are associated with
reductions in informality (i.e., declines in probability of working for a household businesses) is
robust to using self-employment as a dependent variable. We estimate equation (1) with an
indicator for self-employment as the dependent variable and report the estimated coefficients on
tariffs in columns 1 to 3 in panel A of Table 4. The coefficients are positive, statistically significant,
and of similar magnitudes as the corresponding coefficients on tariffs in Table 3. The similar
magnitudes of the coefficients suggests that movement out of working for household businesses
reflects both movements from self-employment and wage work in a household business, although
movements out of self-employment play a slightly stronger role in manufacturing. The margin of
self-employment versus paid employment is potentially more comparable across countries than
definitions of informality based on the country-specific legal definition of an informal firm and this
margin is more commonly available in labor force or household surveys in low-income countries.
We further focus on self-employment to show that the previous results are not driven by
differential pre-existing employment trends across industries that differ in their propensity to

WĂŐĞϮϯŽĨϴϱ

organize production in household businesses. As discussed in Section 3, the industry changes in U.S.
tariffs are not related to initial industry conditions, such as the share of household business workers
within an industry or industry skill intensity, nor to pre-BTA growth in exports to the U.S. A
falsification test that uses two rounds of data covering a pre-reform period further finds no
evidence that changes in industry tariffs are correlated with pre-existing trends in household
business employment across industries. We perform this test using information from the 1993 and
1998 Vietnam Living Standards Surveys (VLSSs) and assign the pre-BTA tariffs (Column 2 tariffs in
2001) to the 1993 data and the post-BTA tariffs (MFN tariffs in 2001) to the 1998 data. 45 The
employment module for the 1993 VLSS does not separately identify employment in a household
business from employment in a private sector business because Vietnam did not make a legal
distinction between household businesses and private enterprises at that time. Consequently, we
use an indicator for being self-employed as the dependent variable.
If pre-existing trends in household business employment were correlated with industryspecific U.S. tariff cuts, this specification would yield estimates of tariff coefficients of the same sign
and similar magnitude to the coefficients obtained in the corresponding analysis using data
surrounding the actual policy change. The results are presented in panel B of Table 4. The estimated
coefficients on tariffs are close to zero in magnitude, always statistically insignificant, and differ
from the estimates of the corresponding coefficients in panel A of Table 4 based on data
surrounding the period when BTA was actually implemented. 46 Underlying trends therefore cannot
account for the strong relationship between the U.S. tariff reductions and the decrease in the
probability of working for a household business that we reported in Table 3 and the top panel of
Table 4, further validating the identification strategy.
We further examine the robustness of our findings to industry-specific pre-existing trends
by including these trends directly in our main specification, equation (1), which uses an indicator for
45

The 1993 and 1998 VLSSs are based on the same sampling framework, which differs from the sampling
framework used for the 2002 and 2004 VHLSSs.
46
The industry codes between the 1993 and 1998 VLSSs do not perfectly match. In particular, 2-digit ISIC revision 3
industries 31 and 32, 34 and 35, and 30 and 33 were merged together since the 1993 VLSS used a more aggregate
industry definition in these instances. Additionally, industries 17 and 18 and 20 and 36 have also been merged
since the 1998 VLSS appears to have switched the assignment of some workers in some of these industries. The
low point estimates of the tariff coefficient and the lack of statistical relationship in panel B of Table 4 (relative to
panel A) do not simply reflect higher levels of industry aggregation. When we estimate the specifications in panel A
at the same level of industry aggregation as the bottom panel, we continue to obtain positive and statistically
significant coefficients on tariffs during the period that spans the BTA (0.174 (0.015) for traded in column 1, 0.101
(0.036) for all industries in column 2, and 0.159 (0.018) for manufacturing in column 3).

WĂŐĞϮϰŽĨϴϱ

working in a household business as a dependent variable. In particular, we add three pre-BTA
industry-specific trends: the change in ln employment, the change in the self-employment rate, and
the change in the mean grade completed, all computed between 1993 and 1998, interacted with a
2004 indicator as controls to the specification in (1). We report the results in Panel C of Appendix
Table A.4. The table reports the coefficients on tariffs, as well as the coefficients on the included
pre-existing trends interacted with the 2004 indicator. The tariff coefficients are similar to those we
report in Table 3, especially for traded and manufacturing industries.

5.3 Heterogeneity in Worker Responses to Tariff Declines
The results show that large BTA-induced declines in industry-specific export costs decrease
the probability that Vietnamese workers work for a household business, leading to a reallocation of
workers toward the formal enterprise sector. The overall effects analyzed so far might mask
heterogeneity in responses of workers. We explore this potential heterogeneity to tariff cuts by
location, age, gender, and education.
Vietnamese provinces differ in their degree of integration with international markets and
this heterogeneity in part reflects proximity to a major seaport. Provinces closer to major seaports
are more internationally integrated and more exposed to export opportunities (World Bank, 2011).
For example, the information on the value of manufacturing exports from the 2000 Enterprise
Survey suggests that five provinces with or near major seaports (Ho Chi Minh City, Dong Nai, Hanoi,
Binh Duong, and Hai Phong) account for over three quarters of reported manufacturing exports. To
the extent that export opportunities associated with the BTA disproportionately increase labor
demand in the larger firms operating in the export sector, as noted in the conceptual framework in
Section 2, one would expect a relatively larger increase in labor demand among firms in the
enterprise sector in more integrated provinces. Consistent with this view, McCaig (2011) finds that
poverty declined and average wages increased relatively more in provinces with a higher
concentration of export-oriented industries at the onset of trade reform. The impact of U.S. tariff
cuts on the incidence of household business employment would then be expected to be more
pronounced in more internationally integrated provinces.
To explore the possible heterogeneity of effects by location, we split Vietnam’s provinces
into two groups based on the median distance from one of Vietnam’s three major seaports in Hai
Phong, Da Nang, and Ho Chi Minh City. We estimate equation (1) for each sample. The results are

WĂŐĞϮϱŽĨϴϱ

presented in Panel A of Table 5. As expected, declines in U.S. tariffs are associated with larger
relative declines in household business employment for individuals living in more internationally
integrated provinces. While all estimates of the coefficient on tariffs are positive, the magnitudes of
the coefficients are substantially larger and always statistically significant in provinces closer to
major seaports. The difference in magnitude and statistical significance of the estimated
coefficients on tariffs is particularly notable in manufacturing, the sector most exposed to the BTA
tariff cuts. This finding is consistent with Hanson (1996).
We also examine heterogeneity in responses to tariff cuts by worker age, gender, and
education. This heterogeneity could stem from differences in adjustment costs across workers with
different demographic characteristics (see Dix-Carneiro (2014), CoƔar (2013)), or it could reflect
differential changes in labor demand across worker types. These results are also presented in Table
5. We split workers into five age groups and estimate equation (1) separately for each of the
groups. The probability of working in a household business declines more for young workers in
response to the US tariff cuts (column 1) in the traded sector and economy-wide (column 2). The
heterogeneity in responses to tariffs by age appears at first less pronounced in manufacturing
(column 3). However, the implied share of reallocated young workers is above, while the implied
share of reallocated workers in older age groups is below the predicted share of reallocated
workers manufacturing-wide. Gender does not appear to differentially affect the responsiveness of
working in a household business to tariff cuts. Estimates of equation (1) by gender in Table 5
suggest that men and women were similarly affected by tariff declines. We also estimate equation
(1) separately for three education groups: 0 to 8 years of formal education (i.e., did not complete
lower secondary), 9 to 11 years of formal education (i.e., completed lower secondary, but not upper
secondary), and 12 or more years of formal education (i.e., completed upper secondary). We
consistently find that workers with a medium level of education observed smaller declines in the
probability of working for a household business than workers with low or high levels of education,
albeit these differences are not statistically distinguishable. The larger response of workers with the
highest level of education is consistent with models and empirical evidence of increased demand
for highly educated workers among exporting, formal firms, particularly when exporting to highincome countries (Bustos (2011a, b), Verhoogen (2008), Brambilla, Lederman, and Porto (2012))
and potentially lower adjustment costs of the more educated (Dix-Carnerio (2014)).

WĂŐĞϮϲŽĨϴϱ

Note that workers that live in more internationally integrated provinces, younger workers,
and more educated workers are less likely to work in the household business sector even prior to
the BTA. One implication is that the declines in export costs further enlarge the gap in the
probability of working in a household business between workers in provinces that differ in access to
international seaports and between younger and older workers. This gap also widens between the
middle and the highest education group, but narrows between the low and middle education
group.

5.4 Longitudinal analysis
The VHLSS resurveyed about 30 percent of the households from 2001/02 in 2003/04. 47
Using this smaller longitudinal subsample, we examine the robustness of the results to selection on
unobserved individual-level heterogeneity into moving out of household businesses. We restrict the
analysis to individuals aged 20-64 in 2001/02 that worked in both years. 48 We estimate a version of
equation (1):
H ijt

D i  E tariff jt  O j  T t  Q ijt

(2)

where the vector of individual characteristics and province fixed effects have been replaced by an
individual fixed effect D i .
To establish comparability with the results from Section 5.1, we first estimate the
specification in equation (1) using the longitudinal subsample. The results are reported in columns 1
to 3 in panel A of Table 6 and confirm the findings from Table 3. With the exception of
manufacturing, the magnitudes of the coefficients based on the longitudinal sample are somewhat
lower than the magnitudes of the corresponding coefficients based on repeated cross-sections, but
they are not statistically different from each other. 49 The specifications so far use the tariff in a

47

The household panel is based on a random selection of enumeration areas from the 2002 VHLSS.
In order to be part of the household panel, the household, or at least some of its members, must reside in the
same location as in 2001/02. 9.7 percent of individuals in panel households that report working in 2001/02 are not
in the sample in 2003/04. The attrited individuals are more likely young and better educated, and were more likely
initially employed in the enterprise sector, in industries that received larger tariff cuts, and by an enterprise in
industries that received larger tariff cuts. The attrition might thus bias the coefficient on tariff in the panel
estimation downward toward zero, increasing the likelihood of finding no relationship.
49
Lower magnitudes of the coefficients based on longitudinal subsample could reflect attrition and slight
differences in the composition of the longitudinal and cross-sectional samples. As discussed earlier, attrition could
potentially bias our estimates downward. Second, to track the same individuals over time, the longitudinal sample
48

WĂŐĞϮϳŽĨϴϱ

worker's contemporaneous industry at time t as a measure of exposure to industry export costs. In
the longitudinal data, workers’ exposure to export costs can also be measured based on the
workers’ initial industry of employment, further allowing one to control for the sorting of
individuals across industries. Panel B of Table 6 reports estimates of equation (1) based on the
tariffs in the worker’s initial industry of employment. The magnitudes of the coefficient on tariffs
are similar to those obtained in panel A with the contemporaneous industry tariff. In the remainder
of this section, we measure workers’ exposure to the export cost shock through the initial industry
of employment.
The empirical strategy so far compared effects of tariff declines on workers with the same
observable characteristics within provincial labor markets, some of whom worked in industries that
experienced large tariff cuts and others who worked in industries with smaller tariff cuts. Note that
to the extent that workers might select to work in the enterprise sector because of higher expected
earnings in this sector based on observable characteristics such as education, gender, age, and
minority status included in specification in equation (1), we already account for selection through
the inclusion of direct controls for such observable worker characteristics. In addition, any form of
selection is only a concern to the extent that it is industry-specific and spuriously correlated with
BTA-induced industry-specific tariff changes. The specification in equation (2) includes worker fixed
effects, directly controlling for time-invariant individual-level heterogeneity in unobserved worker
characteristics that might influence the selection of workers into industries and the propensity to
switch employers. The estimates from this specification are reported in columns 1-3 in panel C of
Table 6 and confirm the existing findings. Individuals initially working in industries that experience
larger tariff cuts face greater declines in the probability of working for a household business than
observationally equivalent individuals initially working in industries with lower tariff cuts. The
inclusion of individual fixed effects somewhat reduces the estimate of the coefficient on tariffs. For
example, the magnitude of the coefficient on tariffs for traded sectors falls from 0.146 to 0.112,
implying that a 20.9 percentage point decline in tariffs was associated with a 2.4 percentage point
decline in the probability of household business employment. In manufacturing, the coefficient on
tariffs drops from 0.179 to 0.09, so that a 30.2 percentage point decline in tariffs is associated with
a 2.7 percentage point decline in the probability of working for a household business. Overall,
includes individuals based on initial age (ages 20-64 in 2002), not contemporary age and excludes individuals that
enter or exit the workforce because we only have one observation for their work status.

WĂŐĞϮϴŽĨϴϱ

greater declines in exporting costs are associated with greater reallocation of workers from
household businesses to employers in the enterprise sector, although the magnitudes of the effects
are attenuated in manufacturing.

5.5. Implications for Industry Employment
The literature on the effects of trade on net industry employment finds limited or no
response to import tariff declines in the short run in less developed countries (see Goldberg and
Pavcnik (2007) for a survey). These studies primarily focus on the consequences of domestic trade
liberalizations, which reduced tariffs on imported goods entering the domestic market. Data
constraints precluded many earlier studies from examining the effects of trade policy on industry
employment patterns representative of the nationwide labor force. 50 Our data provides
comprehensive coverage of workers in all industries, in both formal and informal firms, and in
urban and rural areas. In this section, we reexamine the effect of industry trade costs on the
structure of total employment across industries with this comprehensive dataset and in a setting
where trade liberalization primarily lowered tariffs on exports in a destination market
We relate industry tariffs to the structure of employment across industries by estimating
the following specification:
s jt

E tariff jt  O j  T t  u jt

(3)

where sjt is the share of industry j at time t in total employment and all other notation follows
previously introduced notation. The results, based on estimating equation (3) with an industry's
employment share in total employment as a dependent variable (i.e., employment in household
businesses and enterprises), are presented in Panel A of Table 7. Interestingly, the magnitude of the
coefficients on tariffs is virtually zero and always statistically insignificant when we consider
changes in the overall industry structure of employment. These findings are consistent with those
of Feliciano (2001) for Mexico and Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik (2004) for Colombia, which use
household survey data that are representative of the entire urban workforce and find no evidence
of changes in total industry employment in response to changes in trade policy. Those studies use
household surveys that only cover urban areas. For comparison purposes, we replicate the analysis
50

Feliciano (2001) and Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik (2004) rely on household surveys that are representative
of urban areas, while Revenga (1997), Currie and Harrison (1999), Wacziarg and Wallack (2004), and Topalova
(2010) use data covering employment in formal manufacturing firms above a certain employment cut-off.

WĂŐĞϮϵŽĨϴϱ

from Panel A of Table 7 using only urban households. These results are reported in Appendix Table
A.6 and yield similar results to using all households. Thus, our findings on the effects of trade policy
on the structure of total employment across industries are consistent with the findings from
existing literature.
Moreover, our analysis in Sections 5.1 through 5.4 highlights compositional changes across
household business and enterprise employers within industries. Further analysis shows that the
structure of employment across industries is shifting toward industries with larger tariff cuts in the
enterprise sector, the sector most directly impacted by export liberalization. In particular, we
estimate equation (3) with industry employment shares obtained from the Enterprise Survey, which
covers all firms in the enterprise sector. 51 The results are presented in Panel B of Table 7. The
negative estimates of the coefficients on tariffs suggest greater expansion in enterprise sector
employment in industries with larger tariff cuts. Importantly, the coefficients in Panel B are at least
an order of magnitude larger than the corresponding coefficients obtained for the overall industry
employment in Panel A. 52 Thus, the structure of industry employment in the enterprise sector shifts
toward industries subject to greater drops in U.S. tariffs on Vietnamese exports. 53 This evidence of
shifting employment in industries with larger tariff cuts among employers in the enterprise sector
(but not overall) is consistent with the framework in Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2007) as
employers in the enterprise sector more directly benefit from lower variable exporting costs. 54

51

We use end of year firm-level employment in 2000 and 2003 and aggregate firm-level information to compute
employment shares at the industry level. When we use end of year employment in 2001 instead of 2000, such that
the timing more closely matches that of the VHLSSs, we obtain very similar results. The advantage of using 2000,
however, is that we have a cleaner pre-BTA measure of employment.
52
The results in Table 7 are robust to controlling for pre-existing trends in industry employment. These results are
available upon request.
53
The enterprise sector could grow because either workers are leaving household businesses for employers in the
enterprise sector or because existing household businesses are formalizing and registering as private enterprises.
Additional evidence suggests that the majority of workers move to the enterprise sector by finding a new
job/employer in the enterprise sector. First, summary statistics suggests little mobility of household businesses to
the enterprise sector. During this period, the number of registered private enterprises increased significantly, from
about 35,000 in 2000 to about 84,000 in 2004 (Malesky and Taussig (2009)). Although this is an impressive growth
in the number of private enterprises, it is only a small fraction of the estimated 8 million operating household
businesses during this period (based on our own calculations from the household business modules of the 2002
and 2004 VHLSSs). Second, panel evidence on household businesses in Vietnam suggest that formalization is very
rare. Between the 2006 and 2008 VHLSSs, only 1.7% of household businesses that continue to operate become
registered as an enterprise (McCaig and Pavcnik (2017)). Consistent with this view, existing studies suggest little
job creation in micro enterprises that formalize (see de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2013)).
54
For example, products produced by firms in the household business sector might be poor substitutes for the
products of firms in the enterprise sector.

WĂŐĞϯϬŽĨϴϱ

The finding of employment reallocation across industries within the formal sector in panel B
of Table 7 might seem at odds with the findings on trade policy and industry employment of several
previous studies in the literature that use data that only covers employment in formal firms. 55
However, the difference in our results and those in the abovementioned studies can be reconciled
by the difference in the type of trade liberalization studied. The earlier studies focus on unilateral
trade liberalizations that reduced tariffs on imported goods entering the home market. We, on the
other hand, focus on an episode of trade liberalization that primarily lowered tariffs in an export
market. Recent theory on trade and firm heterogeneity highlights that the nature of trade reform
matters for the predictions about the consequences of trade on the composition of
employers/firms and their outcomes within an industry (see Melitz and Redding (2014) for a
survey). Our setting and results are consistent with the predictions of these models, which predict
reallocation of labor toward more productive firms in response to export market liberalization.
Along those lines, our evidence is consistent with evidence on responses of other formal firm
outcomes in studies that have examined the effects of export-market liberalization for firm
technology, product quality, or skill upgrading among formal firms (Bustos (2011a, b), Verhoogen
(2008), Brambilla, Lederman, and Porto (2012)).
More generally, our analysis highlights that the expansion of employment in the formal
enterprise sector occurs, in part, through the reallocation of workers previously employed in
household businesses. This demonstrates the importance of comprehensive micro data for
exploring the various mechanisms of employment reallocation.

6. Worker Allocation and Aggregate Labor Productivity in Manufacturing
The reallocation of workers from household businesses to employers in the enterprise sector
has potential implications for aggregate output. 56 In this section, we follow the macroeconomic

55
Studies that use data covering employment in formal manufacturing firms above a certain employment cut-off
include Revenga (1997), Currie and Harrison (1999), Wacziarg and Wallack (2004), and Topalova (2010). Topalova
(2010) uses census and household survey data that are nationally representative for the district level analysis,
while the analysis of reallocation across industries (Table 7, Panel A) is based only on the formal manufacturing
sector.
56
There is a large literature documenting the potential importance of firm- and sectoral-level distortions for
aggregate output and productivity differences across countries. See, for example, Gollin (2008), La Porta and
Shleifer (2008, 2014), Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), Hsieh and Klenow (2009),
McMillan and Rodrik (2011), and Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014).

WĂŐĞϯϭŽĨϴϱ

development accounting literature to assess the potential impact of the BTA through this reallocation
channel on aggregate labor productivity in manufacturing.
Consider a sector composed of two types of firms, household businesses and enterprises,
which differ in their underlying labor productivity. A standard accounting formula evaluates the
potential contribution to aggregate productivity stemming from the reallocation of labor across the
two firm types as 'P

seBTA 'peBTA , where seBTA is the share of manufacturing workers reallocated

from the household business to the enterprise sector due to the BTA and 'peBTA is the change in labor
productivity for these workers as they reallocate. seBTA can be computed using the estimated
coefficient on tariffs from Table 3. A key issue is measurement of the productivity gap between the
enterprise and household business sectors, which we turn to next.

6.1 Labor productivity gap
We first compute the labor productivity gap between firms in the enterprise and household
business sectors using the common practice in the development accounting literature. Consider an
industry composed of two types of firms, household businesses and enterprises, which differ in their
underlying total factor productivity. Following Caselli (2005) and Gollin et al. (2014), we assume a
Cobb-Douglas production function of the form Ys

As K sD s Ls1D s , where A is total factor productivity, K

is capital, L is labor, (1  D s ) is the output elasticity with respect to labor, and s  ^e, h` denotes the
enterprise and household business sectors respectively. If labor is homogeneous and markets are
perfectly competitive, wages are equal to the marginal revenue product of labor (MRPL):
ws

MRPLs

1  D s ARPLs , where ARPLs is average revenue product of labor in sector s. This leads

to the well-known result that with a Cobb-Douglas production function, the gap in the marginal
revenue product of labor across the two sectors is proportional to the gap in the observed average
revenue product of labor across the two sectors:

we
wh

MRPLe
MRPLh

ARPLe 57
.
ARPLh

This framework suggests two ways for calculating labor productivity gaps across the
household business and enterprise sectors: wages and revenue per worker. Both of these measures
have recently been used to compute productivity gaps between agriculture and non-agriculture, with

57

Output elasticities of labor may also differ across sectors, which we return to later on.

WĂŐĞϯϮŽĨϴϱ

Vollrath (2014) and Herrendorf and Schoellman (2015) using wages and Gollin et al. (2014) using
revenue per worker. As in most other studies, the above approach computes revenue-based
productivity assuming it is proportional to physical productivity. The revenue-based productivity gap
might capture demand shocks or markup differences (see De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and
Pavcnik (2016)). 58
Our data enables us to compute the productivity gap using both measures. For the enterprise
sector, we compute the average revenue product of labor, ARPL, in the sector based on revenue per
worker from firm-level data that covers all registered firms (the Vietnamese Enterprise Survey). For
the household business sector, we compute ARPL based on aggregate revenue and the total number
of workers from the household business and labor modules of the VHLSS. We compute the wage
ratio using total annual earnings (this includes wage/salary payments as well as other payments such
as public holiday payments and social allowance payments) among wage workers in the two sectors
based on the labor module of the VHLSS. The details of these calculations are provided in Appendix B,
Section B.1.1.
Table 8 reports the results. Row 1 of Table 8 reports the productivity gap based on ARPL in
column 1 and wages in column 2. Both ratios exceed one, suggesting the possibility of aggregate
productivity improvements from the reallocation of workers toward the higher productivity
enterprise sector. However, the two ratios differ significantly. The ARPL ratio is 9.0, while the wage
ratio is 1.82, almost 5 times smaller. Our estimate of the ARLP gap is consistent with large labor
productivity gaps between informal and formal firms in other developing countries. For example,
Nataraj (2011) reports that output per worker is 12.4 times higher in formal firms than informal firms
in India. 59
There are two issues with the above approach. First, the large labor productivity gap between
the enterprise and household business sector in row 1 of Table 8 could in part reflect worker
heterogeneity between the two sectors as, for example, workers in the enterprise sector are better
educated on average. Second, the above framework cannot account for the difference in the
magnitude of the labor productivity gap computed based on ARPL and wages. To the extent that
firms in the household business sector face different distortions than firms in the enterprise sector,
58

Analysis in De Loecker et al. (2016) requires firm-level prices. Like most studies, we do not have this information.

59

La Porta and Shleifer (2014) report that value added per worker is 6.7 times higher in the formal than the
informal sector in the median country in their sample. See Appendix B.1.2 for further discussion of the literature.

WĂŐĞϯϯŽĨϴϱ

and these distortions create gaps between the payment received by a worker and the marginal
revenue product of labor (Hsieh and Klenow (2009)), these differences could explain the disparities in
the ARPL and wage gaps. We turn to these issues next. 60

6.2 Interpreting the Labor Productivity Gap
6.2.1 Worker Heterogeneity
In the absence of data on the composition of workers, computation of a productivity gap
using the ARPL from national accounts, industry-level, or firm-level data requires the assumption
that labor is homogeneous across sectors. We relax this assumption and use additional worker-level
information from the VHLSS to adjust the labor productivity gap for worker heterogeneity across
the enterprise and household business sectors. As noted in Appendix Table A.3, workers in the
enterprise sector work more hours annually and have higher levels of education than workers in the
household business sector, implying that the productivity gap is overstated. We adjust the
productivity ratios for differences in hours worked and human capital as in Gollin et al. (2014).
This adjustment significantly reduces the productivity gap, emphasizing the importance of
accounting for worker heterogeneity across sectors. The results are presented in row 2 of Table 8.
Consider the gap computed from wages in column 2. The gap drops by 0.58 from 1.82 to 1.24. In
order for the wage gap to be fully eliminated, it would have to drop by 0.82 to 1. Worker
heterogeneity therefore accounts for 70% of the wage gap (i.e., 0.58/(1.82-1)). Once we adjust for
worker heterogeneity, the wage ratio is substantially closer to 1. Consider now the gap based on
ARPL. As column 1 suggests, the ARPL ratio decreases from 9.0 to 6.0 after the adjustment. For the
gap to be entirely eliminated it would have to decrease by 8 to 1. Thus, worker heterogeneity
accounts for 37% of the labor productivity gap (3/(9-1)). This illustrates that accounting for worker
heterogeneity matters.

60

The above wage analysis excludes the self-employed, as they do not report a wage. Self-employment is
uncommon in the enterprise sector: only 1.6% of manufacturing enterprise sector workers are self-employed
(based on the 2004 VHLSS, as the 2002 VHLSS does not separately identify self-employment in the enterprise
sector from self-employment in general). Hence, their omission from the wage ratio calculation is unlikely to
significantly influence the results. However, the majority (61%) of manufacturing household business sector
workers are self-employed in 2002. On average, the self-employed within the manufacturing household business
sector have slightly more years of formal education (7.9 relative to 7.4) than wage workers within the sector and
work a similar number of hours as wage workers (1851 vs 1948) in the household business sector. Hence, their
unaccounted earnings would likely increase mean earnings in the household business sector and therefore
decrease the wage ratio across the sectors. See further discussion and analysis in Appendix B.1.3.

WĂŐĞϯϰŽĨϴϱ

ARPL and wage gaps continue to be present when we adjust for worker heterogeneity and
additionally consider potential differences in industry composition and location of enterprises and
household businesses in Table 8. For example, in columns 3 and 4 we report the two ratios for just
one large manufacturing industry, textiles and apparel, so that differential industry composition
across the two sectors does not influence the ratios. The adjusted ARPL and wage ratios in row two
are 4.7 and 1.28, respectively. The gaps remain when computed for one major manufacturing area,
the neighboring provinces of Ho Chi Minh City and Dong Nai (ARPL gap of 5.5 in column 5 and wage
gap of 1.15 in column 6). 61
The above approach controls for two dimensions of worker heterogeneity. Additionally, we
estimate the wage gap for working in the enterprise sector by using Mincerian regressions, while
controlling for worker heterogeneity in other dimensions, including location, gender, age, ethnic
minority status, and industry affiliation. This analysis is discussed in detail in Section B.1.3 of
Appendix B. After simultaneously controlling for these additional observable dimensions of worker
heterogeneity (Appendix Table B.1), the wage gap is a similar order of magnitude as the adjusted
wage gaps reported in Table 8. Relative to these estimates, using individual panel data and
controlling for unobserved worker heterogeneity by including worker fixed effects reduces the hourly
wage gap to 9% (Appendix Table B.2). Finally, the estimate of the earnings gap is a similar order of
magnitude when we estimate Mincerian-style regressions that also include the self-employed and
use hourly income as a dependent variable (Appendix Table B.3).
The bottom line that emerges from this analysis is that worker heterogeneity accounts for
almost 40% of the original gap in ARPL across the two sectors and for 70% of the original gap in
wages. Otherwise, a substantial part of the labor productivity gap simply reflects worker
heterogeneity across sectors rather than labor productivity gaps for sectors with observationally
equivalent workers.

6.2.2 Possible role of distortions
The adjusted ARPL gaps in Table 8 still substantially exceed the corresponding wage gaps. Our
findings of a large ARPL ratio and small wage ratio is consistent with results on labor productivity
gaps between agriculture and non-agriculture, namely large gaps in Gollin et al. (2014), which focuses
61

These two provinces account for 21.2% of total manufacturing employment in the 2002 VHLSS and 38.3% of
enterprise manufacturing employment in the 2001 enterprise data.

WĂŐĞϯϱŽĨϴϱ

on average revenue product of labor; as compared to much smaller wage gaps in Vollrath (2014) and
Herrendorf and Schoellman (2015). One potential explanation for the differences in ARPL and wage
gaps are distortions imposed on firms as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), which create gaps between the
payment received by a worker and the marginal revenue product of labor. If firms in the household
business sector face different distortions than firms in the enterprise sector, these differences could
explain the differences in the ARPL versus wage gap.
Consider the framework in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), where firms in each sector face
distortions in their profit function: S s

1  W Ys PY
s s  1  W Ls ws Ls  1  W Ks rs K s , where W Ys , W Ls , and

W Ks are the distortions in sector s for revenue, labor, and capital respectively. The optimal amount of
labor in each sector s is found by setting ws

1  W Ys
1  W Ls

MRPLs

1  W Ys
1  W Ls

1  D s ARPLs .

The average revenue product of labor across the two sectors can then be expressed as:
ARPLe
ARPLh

we 1  D h
wh 1  D e

1  W Le

1  W Yh

1  W Lh

1  W Ye

.

(4)

The above expression illustrates that even if the ratio of wages is small, large differences in
ARPL may persist due to a combination of differences in revenue distortions, labor market
distortions, and output elasticities of labor. In this setting, which is more general than the one in
Section 6.1, wage differences between sectors do not necessarily reflect overall marginal labor
productivity differences across firms in the two sectors. Nonetheless, the wage gap is still useful as it
captures the information on the potential income gap facing workers across the two sectors.
Consequently, to compute the potential gain in aggregate labor productivity, we use the ARPL gap,
adjusted for worker heterogeneity, as a measure of the labor productivity gap between the
enterprise and household business sectors. 62

6.2.3 Other considerations
We further examine the sensitivity of the ARPL estimate to measurement error that differs
across the two sectors, and the possibility that the ARPL gap in part reflects differences in output
elasticity of labor across sectors. These issues are presented in detail in Sections B.1.4-B.1.6 of
Appendix B and briefly summarized below.
62

See Trefler (2004), Bloom and Van Reenan (2007) and papers cited at the beginning of Section 6.

WĂŐĞϯϲŽĨϴϱ

First, another potential concern is measurement error that differs across the two sectors. One
concern is that the ARPL gap mainly reflects measurement error related to combining two different
data sources. We use two different data sources to compute the ARPL gap because we are not aware
of any surveys in Vietnam or elsewhere that are nationally representative and include formal and
informal firms. 63 In fact, even data on informal firms alone is scarce. While measurement error is a
concern, it is unlikely that most of the gap reflects measurement error due to two sources of data.
First, note that similarly large productivity differences exist between informal and formal firms in La
Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014), which rely on surveys that capture both informal and formal firms.
Second, we can compare annual earnings per formal sector manufacturing worker between the 2002
VHLSS and 2001 enterprise data. Mean annual earnings per worker were 11.6 million VND in the
2002 VHLSS as compared to 11.8 million VND in the 2001 enterprise data. The similarity of these
estimates suggests that survey differences do not necessarily lead to divergent responses. Third, as
an additional check, we use the business module of a more recent household survey, the 2006 VHLSS,
which distinguished between household businesses and private enterprises (but did not cover other
firms in the enterprise sector, such as state-owned and foreign enterprises), and asked about
business revenue in an identical manner to the 2002 VHLSS. We estimate an ARPL ratio of 3.6 (2.8
adjusted for worker heterogeneity) between private enterprises and household businesses (Appendix
Table B.4, column 1). This comparison excludes state owned enterprises and foreign invested firms,
and the private enterprises are less productive, on average, than state and foreign enterprises. Thus,
we would expect, and indeed do find, a lower ARPL gap when household businesses are compared
only to private enterprises. Nevertheless, an APRL gap remains in this comparison based on a single
data source.
More generally, we evaluate the potential impact of measurement error in revenue or
employment in the household business sector for ARPL gaps. Very few microenterprise operators
keep formal accounts and thus measurement error is potentially more likely to affect our estimates
of the ARPL in the household business sector than in the enterprise sector. In Appendix Section B.1.4
(and Appendix Table B.5), we adjust the ARPL gap for potential measurement error in reported
revenue and in reported labor supply in household businesses, relying on estimates of possible
measurement error based on detailed data on microenterprises from de Mel, McKenzie, and
63

Nataraj (2011), Hsieh and Olken (2014), and Ulyssea (2017) also use informal and formal firm data from two
datasets.

WĂŐĞϯϳŽĨϴϱ

Woodruff (2009) and Fafchamps et al. (2014). For example, de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2009)
suggest that reported revenue in microenterprises may underestimate true revenue by as much as
30%. When we adjust the reported revenue in the household business sector by this factor, the labor
productivity gap falls from 6 to 4.2. The other concern is that people working in the household
business sector may overstate effective hours worked. Data collected by Fafchamps et al. (2014)
reports information from Ghana on total hours worked and total hours worked with full effort, and
suggest that microenterprise owners report working at full effort 89 percent of the time. Thus,
reported hours worked may slightly overestimate true labor input. 64 When we adjust the productivity
gap for potential measurement error in revenue and hours worked, the ARPL gap is 3.7. We focus on
this productivity gap and report it in column 1 and row 3 of Table 8 because it is the most
conservative measure from Appendix Table B.5. The above discussion suggests that the labor
productivity gap between workers in the enterprise and household business sectors could partially
reflect measurement error.
Second, equation (4) illustrates that the ARPL gap could in part reflect a lower output
elasticity of labor in the enterprise sector within a given industry and not just the gaps in MRPL. Like
much of the productivity gap literature, we so far assumed equal output elasticity of labor across
heterogeneous sectors or firms. To be conservative, we also consider an alternative case using
estimates from existing literature (see section B.1.6 of Appendix B and Appendix Table B.5 for
details). For example, Restrepo-Echavarria (2014) assumes output-labor elasticities of 1 and 0.68 in
the household business sector and enterprise sector, respectively, for a ratio of about 1.5. 65 This
alternative case, where the informal sector uses no capital and only labor for production, yields a
MRPL gap of 4. Note that the output-labor elasticity difference would have to be 6 to fully account
for the productivity gap that adjusts for worker heterogeneity reported in column 1 of Table 8. When
we adjust the labor productivity gap for worker heterogeneity, measurement error in revenue and
hours worked, and differences in output- labor elasticities, it drops to 2.5. This gap is reported in row
4 of column 1 in Table 8.
Overall, the above analysis highlights the importance of considering worker heterogeneity,
potential measurement error issues, and assumptions about output elasticity of labor in this

64

Additionally, measurement issues specific to the 2002 VHLSS are discussed in Section B.1.5.
Restrepo-Echavarria (2014) reports value added-labor elasticity. Adjusting for factor share of materials based on
Nataraj (2011) yields similar results because the factor share of materials is very similar across the two sectors.
65

WĂŐĞϯϴŽĨϴϱ

literature. The underlying assumption for the different output-labor elasticities across the two
sectors assumed that the informal sector uses no capital and only labor for production, a very
conservative assumption. As a result, we use the estimate of the labor productivity gap that adjusts
for worker heterogeneity and measurement error in revenue and hours worked (i.e., 3.7) as our
preferred estimate of the ARPL gap. We use the estimate that adjusts only for worker heterogeneity
(i.e., 6) as the upper bound, and the estimate that adjusts for worker heterogeneity, measurement
error in revenue and hours worked, and differences in output-labor elasticities (i.e., 2.5) as the lower
bound.

6.3 Aggregate labor productivity in manufacturing
We use our estimates of the ARPL gap across sectors in Table 8 to calculate the potential gain
in aggregate productivity within manufacturing in response to BTA-induced reallocation of workers
from the household business to the enterprise sector. We evaluate the potential contribution of
reallocation to aggregate productivity stemming from the reallocation of labor across the two sectors
by using a standard development accounting formula introduced at the beginning of the section and
expressing it as the percentage change in aggregate labor productivity, relative to the baseline
aggregate labor productivity:

s BTA ARPLratio  1 ARPLh
1  sh ARPLe  sh ARPLh

,

(5)

where s BTA is the share of manufacturing workers reallocated from the household business to the
enterprise sector due to the BTA, ARPLratio is the ARPL gap , ARPLe and ARPLh are the initial
average revenue per hour worked in the enterprise and household business sectors, respectively, and
sh is the initial share of hours worked in the household business sector.

The coefficient on the industry tariff in column 3 of Table 3 implies that the BTA reallocated
5.0 percent of manufacturing hours from household businesses to enterprises by 2003/04 (see
Section B.2 of Appendix B for details). This is our measure of s BTA . Based on our preferred estimate
of the ARPL gap across sectors, which adjusts for worker heterogeneity and measurement error in
revenue and hours worked, reported in row 3 of column 1 in Table 8, we find that the BTA-induced
movement of workers increased ARPL per hour worked by 2.8 percent annually within
manufacturing. This estimate focuses on productivity per hour worked. Since workers in the

WĂŐĞϯϵŽĨϴϱ

enterprise sector work approximately 25 percent more hours annually, predicted growth in
productivity per worker is 3.4 percent annually (see Section B.3 of Appendix B and Appendix Table
B.6). This estimate of the annual aggregate labor productivity gains based on the ARPL gap is
relatively large. As discussed in Section 5.5, the reallocation of workers is predominantly due to the
creation of new jobs in enterprise sector firms as opposed to existing household businesses
transitioning to the enterprise sector. Moreover, Table 8 illustrates that, depending on the
assumptions about the measurement error issues and differences in output-labor elasticities
between the sectors, the estimated aggregate gains in labor productivity could range from 3.5
(when we assume no measurement error differences between the two sectors) to 1.5 percent per
year (when we adjust for measurement error differences and allow for a large output elasticity of
labor difference across the two sectors). Appendix section B.3 discusses the alternative estimates in
greater detail.
We use a similar formula as above to compute the associated gains in hourly wages for
workers due to reallocation, which is 0.5 percent per year (Table 8, column 2). The gains in annual
wages for workers are slightly larger, 0.9 percent per year (see Appendix Table B.6, column 2), when
one also takes into account the difference in hours worked between the two sectors on an annual
basis. The estimates based on the 9% wage premium for working in the enterprise sector among
panel workers suggest gains in hourly wages at a rate of 0.19 percent per year.
In sum, our preferred estimate of the labor productivity gap suggests that the reallocation
of labor from the informal to the formal sector in response to the BTA increased aggregate labor
productivity within manufacturing by 2.8 percent per year in the two years following the BTA.

7. Conclusion
Vietnam’s trade agreement with the U.S. provides an excellent setting to examine how
declines in export costs affect the reallocation of employment across employers in a low-income
country, where a majority of workers are employed in informal microenterprises. We find that the
reallocation of labor from microenterprises to formal employers provides an important margin of
adjustment to new exporting opportunities. Industries with bigger declines in export costs
experience a greater reduction in household business employment, with workers in more
internationally integrated provinces and in younger cohorts responding more strongly. Our results
complement the existing literature on trade and labor reallocation in developing countries, which

WĂŐĞϰϬŽĨϴϱ

has primarily focused on the effects of domestic import liberalization on the reallocation of workers
across firms within the formal sector or across industries. Our estimates reflect short run responses
and may underestimate the long run effects of the BTA on employment in the formal sector, as the
economy has more time to adjust (Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017)).
The difference in the type of trade reform may help explain why our findings diverge from
the literature that found no formal sector employment increase in the short-run after import tariff
liberalization in developing countries. Factors such as differences in mobility of labor across regions
could also pay a role. Overall, further exploration of the relationship between the type of trade
reform, imperfections in the domestic product or factor markets and worker outcomes, and longerrun responses to the trade shock remains a fruitful area for future research. In addition, our findings
might generalize to other low-income country settings as they are robust to using self-employment,
a definition of informal microenterprise employment that does not depend on a country-specific
legal definition of informality, as a dependent variable. They are more likely to generalize to other
low-income countries with a comparative advantage in low-skill manufacturing where production
takes place in both informal microenterprises and larger, formal firms.
The movement into a formal sector firm has potentially important consequences for
workers. We show that working in a formal enterprise changes the way a worker is attached to the
workforce. In Vietnam, workers in the enterprise sector earn higher wages, are more likely to
receive non-wage/salary payments, work longer hours, and are less likely to hold multiple jobs. At
the same time, our analysis highlights that it is crucial to take into account worker heterogeneity
and sorting in assessing wage and earnings differences across the two sectors.
Our results also relate to the literature that emphasizes the implications of the inefficient
allocation of resources across heterogeneous firms for aggregate productivity (Restuccia and
Rogerson (2008), Hsieh and Klenow (2009)). We show that the removal of an output market
distortion that is more binding for initially more productive firms, such as a tariff on exports,
induces a movement of workers away from less-productive employers in informal microenterprises
to employers in the more productive enterprise sector. Due to firm data constraints, one usually
cannot observe the entire distribution of firms, both informal and formal, in low-income countries.
The use of labor force data provides an alternative for observing the allocation of workers across
this margin of the firm distribution in response to trade if the labor force data includes information

WĂŐĞϰϭŽĨϴϱ

on employer type and informal sector firm data is not available (see Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017)
for a recent example).
We also evaluate the labor productivity gap between the formal and informal sectors within
manufacturing using detailed micro-survey data from nationally representative surveys of both
informal microenterprises and formal firms. Our preferred estimate of the labor productivity gap of
3.7 suggests that the BTA increased aggregate labor productivity by 2.8 percent annually in the two
years following the BTA due to moving labor from the informal to the formal sector. Our analysis
highlights some of the challenges in estimating this productivity gap, including the importance of
taking into account worker heterogeneity, potential measurement error issues that might be
particularly large in the informal sector, and differences in output-labor elasticities across the two
sectors. Adjustment for all these issues substantially reduces the estimates of the labor productivity
gap and the implied change in labor productivity, lowering it to only 1.5 percent per year. More
broadly, this finding has implications for the reallocation and misallocation literature, which uses
the gap to evaluate the potential aggregate productivity gains from the reallocation of workers or
the removal of distortions. To the extent that used measures of distortions do not account for
worker heterogeneity, such exercises might overestimate the aggregate productivity gains from the
removal of distortions.
Given the prevalence of informal microenterprises in low-income countries and increasing
availability of better micro survey data, we expect that studying the determinants of the prevalence
of informal microenterprises and the sources of the labor productivity gap between informal and
formal firms will continue to be a topic for future research.

WĂŐĞϰϮŽĨϴϱ

References
Atkin, David. (2009). “Working for the future: Female factory work and child health in Mexico,”
unpublished manuscript.
Attanasio, O., P. Goldberg, and N. Pavcnik. (2004). “Trade reforms and wage inequality in
Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics, 74, 331-366.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. 2013. “Microcredit under the microscope: What have we learned in the past
two decades, and what do we need to know?” Annual Review of Economics, 5, p. 487-519.
Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo (2005). “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development Economics,” in
eds. Aghion, P. and S. Durlauf. Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. (2007). “The Economic Lives of the Poor” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21(1), pp. 141-168.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. (2008). “What is middle class about the middle classes around
the world?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), pp. 3-28.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. (2011). Poor economics: A radical rethinking of the way to
fight global poverty, PublicAffairs: New York City.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Six randomized evaluations of
microcredit: Introduction and further steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 7(1), p. 1-21.
Bento, P. and D. Restuccia. (2016). “Misallocation, establishment size, and productivity,” University
of Toronto Department of Economics Working Paper 557.
Bernard, A., S. Redding, and P. Schott (2007). “Comparative advantage and heterogeneous firms,”
Review of Economics Studies, Vol. 74, No. 1, pp. 31-66.
Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenen. (2007). “Measuring and explaining management practices across
firms and countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), pp. 1351-1408.
Bosch, M., E. Goñi-Pacchioni, and W. Maloney. (2012). “Trade liberalization, labor reforms and
formal–informal employment dynamics,” Labour Economics, 19(5), 653-67.
Brambilla, I., D. Lederman and G. Porto (2012). “Exports, Export Destinations, and Skills,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 7, pp. 3406-3438.
Brambilla, I., G. Porto, and A. Tarozzi (2012). "Adjusting to trade policy: Evidence from U.S.
antidumping duties on Vietnamese catfish," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 94, No.
1, pp. 304-319.

WĂŐĞϰϯŽĨϴϱ

Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie. 2014. “Entry regulation and the formalization of
microenterprises in developing countries,” The World Bank Research Observer, 29(2), p.
186-201.
Bustos, P. (2011a). "Trade liberalization, exports, and technology upgrading: Evidence on the
Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms," American Economic Review, 101(1), 304-40.
Bustos, P. (2011b). “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Skill Upgrading: Evidence from
Argentina,” unpublished manuscript.
Caselli, F. (2005). “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in eds. Aghion, P. and S.
Durlauf. Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland.
CoƔar, A. K. (2013). “Adjusting to trade liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market Policies,”
mimeo.
Currie, J. and A. Harrison. (1997). “Sharing the costs: The impact of trade reform on capital and
labor in Morocco,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(3), S44-71.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. (1992). “Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and
employment reallocation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), pp. 819-863.
De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik. (2016). “Prices, markups, and trade
reform,” Econometrica, 84(2), 445-510.
de Mel, Suresh, David J. McKenzie, and Chris Woodruff. 2009. “Measuring microenterprise profits:
Must we ask how the sausage is made?” Journal of Development Economics, 88(1), 19-31.
de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2013). "The Demand for, and
Consequences of, Formalization among Informal Firms in Sri Lanka." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 5(2): 122-50.
Demidova, S. and A. Rodríguez-Clare. (2013). “The simple analytics of the Melitz model in a small
open economy,” Journal of International Economics, 90(2), 266-72.
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael. (2014). “Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics”, Econometrica, 82(3),
pp. 825-885.
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael and Brian Kovak. (2017). “Trade liberalization and regional dynamics,”
American Economic Review, 107(10), pp. 2908-46.
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff. (2014).
“Microenterprise growth and the flypaper effect: Evidence from a randomized experiment
in Ghana,” Journal of Development Economics, 106, 211-226.

WĂŐĞϰϰŽĨϴϱ

Feliciano, Zadia M. (2001). “Workers and trade liberalization: The impact of trade reforms in Mexico
on wages and employment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55(1), pp. 95-115.
Fernández, Andrés and Felipe Meza. (2015). “Informal employment and business cycles in emerging
economies: The case of Mexico,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18, pp. 381-405.
Fukase, Emiko. (2013). “Export liberalization, job creation and the skill premium: Evidence from the
U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement,” World Development, 41, 317-337.
Gollin, Douglas. (2002). "Getting Income Shares Right," Journal of Political Economy, 110 (2),
pp.458-474.
Gollin, D. (2008). “Nobody’s business by my own: Self-employment and small enterprise in
economic development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 219-233.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. Waugh (2014). “The Agricultural Productivity Gap in Developing
Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 939-993.
Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2003). “The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade Liberalization”,
Journal of Development Economics, 72, 463-496.
Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2007). "Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Countries",
Journal of Economic Literature March 2007, 45(1), pp. 39-82
Hanson, G. (1996). “Economic Integration, Intraindustry Trade, and Frontier Regions,” European
Economic Review 40(3-5), pp. 941-949.
Hanson, G. (2012). “The rise of Middle Kingdoms: Emerging economies in global trade,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 41-64.
Harrison, A., J. McLaren, and M. McMillan (2011). “Recent perspectives on trade and inequality,”
Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 261-289.
Heath, Rachel and A. Mushfiq Mobarak. (2015). “Manufacturing growth and the lives of Bangladeshi
women,” Journal of Development Economics, 115, pp. 1-15.
Herrendorf, Berthold and Todd Schoellman. (2015). “Wages, human capital, and structural
transformation,” draft.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow (2009). “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 4, pp. 1403-1448.
Hsieh, C.-T. and B. Olken. (2014). “The missing ‘Missing Middle’,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28, 89-108.

WĂŐĞϰϱŽĨϴϱ

Javorcik, Beata S. (2015). “Does FDI bring good jobs to host countries?” The World Bank Research
Observer, 30(1), pp. 74-94.
Jensen, Robert. (2012). “Do labor market opportunities affect young women’s work and family
decisions? Experimental evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2),
pp. 753-792.
La Porta, R. and A. Shleifer. (2008). “The unofficial economy and economic development,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 39, 275-363.
La Porta, R. and A. Shleifer. (2014). “Informality and development,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 28, 109-26.
Lucas, R. (1978). “On the size distribution of business firms,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 9, 50823.
Kovak, B. (2013). “Regional effects of trade reform: What is the correct measure of liberalization?”
American Economic Review, 103(5), 1960-76.
Marcouiller, D., V. Ruiz de Castilla, and C. Woodruff (1997): “Formal Measures of the Informal-Sector
Wage Gap in Mexico, El Salvador, and Peru," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 45:2,
pp. 367-392.
Malesky, E. and M. Taussig (2009). “Out of the gray: The impact of provincial institutions on
business formalization in Vietnam,” Journal of East Asian Studies, Vol. 9, pp. 249-290.
McCaig, Brian (2011). “Exporting out of poverty: Provincial poverty in Vietnam and U.S. market
access.” Journal of International Economics, 85(1), pp. 102-113.
McCaig, Brian and Nina Pavcnik. (2015). “Informal employment in a growing and globalizing lowincome country,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5), 545-550.
McCaig, Brian and Nina Pavcnik. 2017. “Out with the old and unproductive, in with the new and
similarly unproductive: Microenterprise dynamics in a growing low-income country."
GLM|LIC Working Paper No. 23.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff. 2014. “What are we learning from business training
and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?” The World Bank Research
Observer, 29(1), p. 48-82.
McMillan, M. and D. Rodrik. (2011). “Globalization, structural change and productivity growth,”
NBER Working Paper No. 17143.
Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica 71, 1696-1725.

WĂŐĞϰϲŽĨϴϱ

Melitz, M. and S. J. Redding. (2014). “Heterogeneous firms and trade,” in Gopinath, G., E. Helpman, and
K. Rogoff. (eds). Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4: Elsevier.
Menezes-Filho, N. and M. Muendler (2011). "Labor Reallocation in Response to Trade Reform,"
NBER Working Paper 17372.
Mrazova, M and P. Neary (forthcoming). “Selection Effects with Heterogeneous Firm,” Journal of
European Economic Association.
Nataraj, S. (2011). “The impact of trade liberalization on productivity: Evidence from India’s formal
and informal manufacturing sectors,” Journal of International Economics 85, 292-301.
Paz, L. (2014). “The impacts of trade liberalization on informal labor markets: A theoretical and
empirical evaluation of the Brazilian case,” Journal of International Economics, 92, 330-348.
Pregelj, V. (2005). “Normal-Trade-Relations (Most-Favored-Nation) Policy of the United States,”
Congressional Research Service Report RL31558.
Restrepo-Echavarria. (2014). “Macroeconomic volatility: The role of the informal economy,”
European Economic Review, 70, pp. 454-469.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson. (2008). “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with
heterogeneous establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707-720.
Restuccia, D., D. Yang, and X. Zhu. (2008). “Agriculture and aggregate productivity: A quantitative
cross-country analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 234-250.
Revenga, A. (1997). “Employment and wages effects of trade liberalization: The case of Mexican
manufacturing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(3), S20-43.
STAR-Vietnam. (2003). “An Assessment of the Economic Impact of the United States – Vietnam
Bilateral Trade Agreement.” The National Political Publishing House: Hanoi, Vietnam.
Topalova, P. (2010). “Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence on
poverty from India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 1-41.
Trefler, D. (2004). “The long and short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,” American
Economic Review, 94(4), 870-95.
Tybout, J. R. (2000). “Manufacturing firms in developing countries: How well do they do, and why?”
Journal of Economic Literature, 38(1), 11-44.
Tybout, J. R. (2014). “The missing middle: Correspondence,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28(4), 235-36.
Ulyssea, G. (2017). “Firms, informality and development,” unpublished manuscript.

WĂŐĞϰϳŽĨϴϱ

Verhoogen, E. (2008). "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, no.2, pp. 489-530.
Vollrath, Dietrich. (2014). “The efficiency of human capital allocations in developing countries,”
Journal of Development Economics, 108, pp. 106-118.
Wacziarg R. and J. Wallack (2004). “Trade liberalization and intersectoral labor movements,” Journal
of International Economics, 64(2), 411-439.
World Bank. 2011. Vietnam Development Report 2012: Market Economy for a Middle-Income
Vietnam. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WĂŐĞϰϴŽĨϴϱ

Figure 1: Value of Vietnamese exports to the U.S., 1997 to 2006

Notes: Authors' calculations from COMTRADE.

Figure 2: Share of the United States in Vietnam's Exports

Notes: Authors' calculations from COMTRADE.

WĂŐĞϰϵŽĨϴϱ

Figure 3: Growth of Vietnamese exports to the US versus US tariff cuts by industry

Notes: The industry codes correspond to ISIC revision 3.

Figure 4: Change in share of household business workers and U.S. tariff reductions

Notes: The bubble sizes represent the weight given to the industry in the plotted regression line. See text for
explanation. The industry codes correspond to all traded industries in ISIC revision 3.

WĂŐĞϱϬŽĨϴϱ

Figure 5: Change in share of household business workers and U.S. tariff reductions, manufacturing
industries

Notes: The bubble sizes represent the weight given to the industry in the plotted regression line. See text for
explanation. The industry codes correspond to ISIC revision 3.

WĂŐĞϱϭŽĨϴϱ

Table 1: Summary of U.S. tariffs applied to imports from Vietnam

Industry
Traded industries
All industries
Manufacturing

Mean pre- Mean postNumber of BTA tariff BTA tariff
industries (Column 2)
(MFN)
34
0.234
0.025
60
0.133
0.014
22
0.338
0.036

Standard
deviation of
Mean
change in
tariff
tariff
change
-0.209
0.179
-0.119
0.170
-0.302
0.153

Notes: The tariffs reported are simple averages across the indicated set of industries. Non-traded
industries, which are included in "All industries" have been assigned a tariff of 0 both before and after
the BTA.

WĂŐĞϱϮŽĨϴϱ

Table 2: Share of employment in household businesses
Excluding
agriculture and
All
fisheries
Panel A: Share of employment in household businesses

Manufacturing

2002
0.847
0.672
0.656
2004
0.814
0.626
0.600
Panel B: Decomposing changes in household business employment
Within industries
Between industries
Total

-0.017
-0.016
-0.033

-0.040
-0.006
-0.046

-0.059
0.003
-0.056

Notes: Authors' own estimates based on the 2002 and 2004 VHLSSs. Based on
workers aged 20 to 64 inclusive. Survey sampling weights included.

WĂŐĞϱϯŽĨϴϱ

Table 3: Employment in Household Businesses and Tariffs
Dependent variable: Indicator for working in a household business
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Panel A: Baseline specification
Tariff

0.209***
(0.0144)

R-squared
0.419
Panel B: Province-year fixed effects
Tariff

0.212***
(0.0195)

0.127***
(0.0323)

0.156***
(0.0197)

0.594

0.299

0.123***
(0.0300)

0.170***
(0.0277)

R-squared
0.420
0.594
0.304
Panel C: Province-year fixed effects and time varying individual covariates
Tariff

R-squared
Number of industries
Observations

0.203***
(0.0232)

0.115***
(0.0266)

0.152***
(0.0266)

0.420

0.595

0.305

34
176,544

60
248,791

22
27,072

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. The sample is restricted to workers between
the ages of 20 and 64 inclusive at the time of the survey. Column (1) includes all traded
industries, column (2) includes all industries, and column (3) includes all traded
manufacturing industries. All regressions include worker characteristics (age, age squared,
education level indicators, female indicator, ethnic minority indicator, and rural
indicator), as well as industry fixed effects. In Panel A we include province and year fixed
effects. In Panel B, the province and year fixed effects are replaced by province-year fixed
effects. In Panel C, all control variables, except industry fixed effects, are interacted with a
2004 indicator.

WĂŐĞϱϰŽĨϴϱ

Table 4: Results and falsification test based on self-employment
Dependent variable: Indicator for self-employment
(1)
(2)
Traded
All
Panel A: Reform period
Tariff

(3)
Manufacturing

0.212***
(0.0405)

0.131***
(0.0390)

0.200***
(0.0501)

Observations
176,544
R-squared
0.370
Panel B: Pre-reform period (1993-1998)

248,791
0.532

27,072
0.240

Tariff

0.0379
(0.0334)

0.0157
(0.0357)

-0.00870
(0.0918)

17,559
0.344

22,753
0.501

2,367
0.236

Observations
R-squared

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent level, respectively. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether an
individual is self-employed. In Panel B, the pre-BTA tariffs (Column 2 rates in 2001) are
assigned to industries in 1993 and the post-BTA tariff (MFN rates in 2001) are assigned to
industries in 1998. All regressions include worker characteristics (age, age squared, education
level indicators, female indicator, ethnic minority indicator, and rural indicator), as well as
industry, province and year fixed effects.

WĂŐĞϱϱŽĨϴϱ

Table 5: Employment in Household Business and Tariffs by Age, Gender, Education, and Location
Dependent variable: Indicator for working in a household business
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Panel A: Location
Less than the median distance from a major
0.227***
0.142***
0.185***
(0.0215)
(0.0333)
(0.0269)
seaport
Observations
83,079
126,340
18,926
At least the median distance from a major
seaport
Observations
Panel B: Age
Age 20 to 29
Observations
Age 30 to 39
Observations
Age 40 to 49
Observations
Age 50 to 59
Observations
Age 60 to 64
Observations
Panel C: Gender
Males
Observations
Females
Observations
Panel D: Education
Did not complete lower secondary
Observations
Completed lower secondary
Observations
Completed upper secondary
Observations

0.147***
(0.0345)
93,465

0.0705*
(0.0365)
122,451

0.0493
(0.0482)
8,146

0.327***
(0.0512)
50,069

0.223***
(0.0424)
68,237

0.175***
(0.0610)
10,726

0.142***
(0.0198)
52,620

0.0821***
(0.0281)
75,901

0.0808***
(0.0240)
8,273

0.119***
(0.0276)
43,859

0.0379
(0.0389)
64,995

0.138***
(0.0349)
5,681

0.107
(0.0648)
22,530

0.0357
(0.0637)
30,611

0.131
(0.0914)
1,982

-0.0186
(0.107)
7,466

-0.0658
(0.0849)
9,047

-0.141
(0.173)
410

0.229***
(0.0384)
84,522

0.107**
(0.0509)
123,164

0.154**
(0.0610)
13,409

0.196***
(0.0178)
92,022

0.148***
(0.0204)
125,627

0.159***
(0.0317)
13,663

0.217***
(0.0180)
106,125

0.146***
(0.0406)
132,298

0.151***
(0.0286)
11,193

0.176***
(0.0168)
50,531

0.0991***
(0.0369)
71,256

0.126***
(0.0292)
9,208

0.201***
(0.0358)
19,888

0.125***
(0.0332)
45,237

0.193***
(0.0612)
6,671

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent level,
respectively. The table shows the estimated coefficient on industry tariffs from regressing an indicator for working in a
household business for the indicated sample. All regressions include the usual controls for worker characteristics, and
province, industry, and year fixed effects as in Table 3 Panel A.

WĂŐĞϱϲŽĨϴϱ

Table 6: Household business employment and tariffs, panel-level analysis
Dependent variable: Indicator for working in a household business
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Panel A: Tariff based on contemporary industry
Tariff

Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Tariff based on initial industry
Tariff

0.154***
(0.0264)

0.0797**
(0.0312)

0.160***
(0.0567)

57,682
0.449

79,876
0.628

7,586
0.365

0.146***
(0.0198)

0.0662**
(0.0288)

0.179***
(0.0486)

Observations
57,682
79,876
R-squared
0.450
0.628
Panel C: Tariff based on initial industry, with individual fixed effects
Tariff

Observations
R-squared

7,586
0.365

0.112***
(0.0304)

0.0476**
(0.0238)

0.0896**
(0.0436)

57,682
0.868

79,876
0.911

7,586
0.886

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5,
and 10 percent level, respectively. The sample is based on workers age 20 to 64 as of the 2002
VHLSS that reported working in the 2002 and 2004 VHLSSs. The groupings into traded, all, and
manufacturing are based on the initial industry of employment reported in the 2002 VHLSS. All
regressions that do not include individual fixed effects include individual covariates (age, age
squared, education levels, gender, ethnic minority status, urban indicator, and province fixed
effects). All regressions include industry and year fixed effects.

WĂŐĞϱϳŽĨϴϱ

Table 7: Industry Employment and Tariffs
Dependent variable: Share of industry employment in the indicated set of industries
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Panel A: Overall Employment (VHLSS Data)
Tariff

-0.00464
(0.00555)

-0.000263
(0.00257)

0.00290
(0.0321)

120
0.000

44
0.001

-0.0265**
(0.0113)

-0.0108**
(0.00533)

-0.0257
(0.0170)

66
0.232

110
0.124

44
0.167

Observations
68
Within R-squared
0.023
Panel B: Enterprise Sector (Enterprise Survey Data)
Tariff

Observations
Within R-squared

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and
10 percent level, respectively. The dependent variable is the share of workers and is calculated as the
number of workers in industry j divided by the total number of workers in the respective group. The
total number of workers includes workers in (i) traded industries for column (1), (ii) all industries for
column (2), and (iii) traded manufacturing industries for column (3). In Panel A, the industry
employment shares are based on the 2002 and 2004 VHLSSs and include workers between the ages of
20 and 64 inclusive. In Panel B, the industry employment shares are data from the 2000 and 2003
enterprises surveys. These employment estimates include all workers in enterprises at the end of 2000
and 2003 respectively. All regressions include year fixed effects and industry fixed effects, using the
within transformation.

WĂŐĞϱϴŽĨϴϱ

WĂŐĞϱϵŽĨϴϱ

3.5
2.8
1.5

0.050
0.597

0.5

0.050
0.597

5.8
4.3
2.1

0.086
0.615

1.0

0.086
0.615

2.7
2.2
1.2

0.053
0.380

0.3

0.053
0.380

Notes: The labor productivity gap reported in columns 1, 3, and 5 is based on the average revenue product of labor and subsequent
adjustments. The average revenue product of labor is the ratio of revenue per worker in the enterprise sector to revenue per worker in
the household business sector. The labor productivity gap reported in columns 2, 4, and 6 is based on the ratio of annual earnings per
worker in the enterprise sector to annual earnings per worker in the household business sector, plus subsequent adjustments. The
difference in output-labor elasticity allow the MRPL and ARPL gaps to differ. See section 6 and Appendix B for further details on the
calculations and data sources.

Annual growth (%)
Adjusted by hours worked & human capital
+ measurement error in revenue and hours worked
+ differences in output-labor elasticity

Share of hours reallocated to enterprises due to the BTA
Initial share of hours in the household business sector

Table 8: Labor productivity gap per hour between the enterprise and household business sectors in manufacturing
Textiles and
Ho Chi Minh City
apparel
and Dong Nai
Manufacturing
Revenue Wage Revenue Wage Revenue Wage
based
based
based
based
based
based
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Labor productivity gap:
Unadjusted
9.0
1.82
6.6
1.70
7.0
1.48
Adjusted by hours worked & human capital
6.0
1.24
4.7
1.28
5.5
1.15
+ measurement error in revenue and hours worked
3.7
2.9
3.4
+ differences in output-labor elasticity
2.5
2.0
2.3

Supplementary material for
Export markets and labor allocation in a low-income country
By Brian McCaig and Nina Pavcnik
(for online publication only)

WĂŐĞϲϬŽĨϴϱ

Appendix Table A.1: Growth of Vietnamese exports and BTA tariff changes
Dependent variable: Change in ln exports
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Industries
Traded
Manufacturing
Traded
Manufacturing
Destination market
US
US
EU13
EU13
Panel A: Change in ln exports 2001 to 2004
BTA tariff change

-5.677***
(1.474)

-4.331*
(2.111)

Observations
24
19
R-squared
0.283
0.119
Panel B: Change in ln exports 1997 to 2000
BTA tariff change

Observations
R-squared

0.372
(0.675)

0.142
(1.070)

24
0.009

19
0.001

-0.808
(1.896)

0.181
(1.722)

0.362
(0.599)

0.823
(0.904)

24
0.011

19
0.001

24
0.011

19
0.035

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively. We use data on imports from Vietnam as reported by the U.S. and
EU13 (EU15 excluding Belgium and Luxembourgh for which data was not consistently available) in
UNComtrade. We exclude industries for which imports were 0 for any of the years.

WĂŐĞϲϭŽĨϴϱ

Appendix Table A.2: Descriptive statistics
Variable
Self-employed
Worked in a household business
Indicator for urban
Age
Indicator for female
Indicator for ethnic minority
Indicator for completed primary
education
Indicator for completed lower
secondary education
Indicator for completed upper
secondary education
Indicator for agriculture, forestry
and aquaculture
Indicator for manufacturing
Indicator for services
Indicator for less than median
distance from seaport
Hours per year (primary job)
Indicator for more than one job
ln(hourly compensation)
Number of observations

All
Mean Std. Dev.
0.686
0.464
0.830
0.375

Pre BTA Round
Post BTA Round
Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev.
0.701
0.458
0.672
0.469
0.847
0.360
0.814
0.389

0.239
37.8
0.505
0.123
0.288

0.427
11.1
0.500
0.328
0.453

0.240
37.4
0.507
0.121
0.297

0.427
11.0
0.500
0.326
0.457

0.238
38.3
0.503
0.124
0.280

0.426
11.1
0.500
0.329
0.449

0.300

0.458

0.292

0.455

0.307

0.461

0.199

0.399

0.185

0.388

0.212

0.409

0.542

0.498

0.561

0.496

0.524

0.499

0.123
0.327
0.561

0.329
0.469
0.496

0.118
0.313
0.560

0.322
0.464
0.496

0.128
0.341
0.562

0.334
0.474
0.496

1701

814

1730

792

1.368
0.726
248,795

1.234
0.791
152,388

1673
833
0.425
0.494
1.494
0.634
96,407

Notes: The sample consists of all workers from the 2002 and 2004 VHLSSs that worked and were 20 to
64 years of age inclusive at the time of the survey. The 2002 VHLSS is the pre BTA round and the 2004
VLHSS is the post BTA round. The number of observations for wages are lower: 46,309 and 29,758 in the
2002 and 2004 VHLSSs respectively. The total number of observations is slightly higher than in our
regression results due to a small number of worker observations, 4, for which ethnicity data is missing
and these observations are subsequently dropped from the regression analysis.

WĂŐĞϲϮŽĨϴϱ

WĂŐĞϲϯŽĨϴϱ

Notes: The sample is all workers age 20 to 64 in the 2002 VHLSS, with the exception of the share of workers with more than one job,
which is based on workers age 20 to 64 in the 2004 VHLSS. The values are estimated using sampling weights. Social insurance payments
mean payments received by workers, for example, for workplace injuries, not necessarily social insurance coverage. Compensation is
reported in 000s of Vietnamese dong in January 2002 prices.

Appendix Table A.3: Differences in job characteristics between workers in household businesses and enterprises
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Household
Household
Household
businesses Enterprises businesses Enterprises businesses Enterprises
Share self-employed
0.868
0.000
0.827
0.000
0.609
0.000
Mean annual hours worked
1,531
2,193
1,667
2,076
1,889
2,293
Mean highest grade completed
6.4
9.5
6.7
10.4
7.7
9.6
Share with more than one job
0.496
0.200
0.463
0.261
0.492
0.157
Mean annual total compensation
4,237
11,454
5,248
11,518
6,380
11,608
Share of wage workers that report receiving
payments for …
Holidays
0.150
0.846
0.188
0.861
0.296
0.863
Social insurance
0.001
0.034
0.002
0.037
0.003
0.032
Business trips
0.001
0.073
0.003
0.149
0.001
0.040
Other
0.117
0.585
0.156
0.605
0.168
0.606
Any non-wage/salary payment
0.215
0.895
0.273
0.914
0.362
0.913

Appendix Table A.4: Additional Results for Employment in Household Businesses and Tariffs
Dependent variable: Indicator for working in a household business
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Panel A: Worker controls are omitted
Tariff

0.126***
(0.0342)

0.162***
(0.0210)

Observations
176,546
R-squared
0.404
Panel B: Remove mining of uranium and thorium ores from sample

248,793
0.580

27,072
0.245

Tariff

0.209***
(0.0144)

0.128***
(0.0323)

0.156***
(0.0197)

Observations
R-squared
Panel C: Pre-existing trends included

176,538
0.419

248,785
0.594

27,072
0.299

0.210***
(0.0141)
-0.0160**
(0.00736)
0.00196
(0.0554)
0.0117**
(0.00488)

0.138***
(0.0271)
-0.0266*
(0.0133)
0.0799
(0.0677)
0.0115*
(0.00601)

0.160***
(0.0177)
0.0100
(0.0161)
0.0124
(0.0595)
0.0163*
(0.00864)

176,455
0.418

248,355
0.592

26,981
0.298

Tariff
(Change in industry ln employment)
X (2004 indicator)
(Change in industry self-employment rate)
X (2004 indicator)
(Change in industry mean grade completed)
X (2004 indicator)
Observations
R-squared

0.212***
(0.0140)

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. The sample is restricted to workers between the ages of 20 and 64 inclusive at the time of the
survey. Column (1) includes all traded industries, column (2) includes all industries, and column (3) includes all
traded manufacturing industries. All regressions include a rural indicator, industry, province, and year fixed
effects, and regressions in Panels B and C also worker characteristics (age, age squared, education level indicators,
female indicator, and ethnic minority indicator). The pre-existing trends in Panel C are calculated between 1993
and 1998 using the respective Vietnam Living Standards Surveys. The decrease in the number of observations in
Panel C is due to a few small industries with missing information for pre-existing trends.

WĂŐĞϲϰŽĨϴϱ

Appendix Table A.5: Hours Worked in Household Businesses and Tariffs
Dependent variable: Share of total industry hours worked within the household business sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Tariff

Observations
R-squared
Industry fixed effects?
Year fixed effect?

0.202***
(0.0186)

0.119***
(0.0379)

0.157***
(0.0302)

68
0.565
Yes
Yes

120
0.350
Yes
Yes

44
0.814
Yes
Yes

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Column (1) includes all traded industries, column (2) includes all industries, and column (3)
includes all traded manufacturing industries. Hours worked in the household business and enterprise sectors are
estimated based on workers at 20 to 64 inclusive at the time of the 2002 and 2004 household surveys.

WĂŐĞϲϱŽĨϴϱ

Appendix Table A.6: Industry Employment and Tariffs in Urban Areas
Dependent variable: Share of industry employment in the indicated set of industries
(1)
(2)
(3)
Traded
All
Manufacturing
Tariff

Observations
Within R-squared

-0.00174
(0.0136)

0.00163
(0.00437)

0.00666
(0.0421)

68
0.001

120
0.006

44
0.003

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level; ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and
10 percent level, respectively. The dependent variable is the share of workers and is calculated as the
number of urban workers in industry j divided by the total number of urban workers in the respective
group. The total number of urban workers includes workers in (i) traded industries for column (1), (ii)
all industries for column (2), and (iii) traded manufacturing industries for column (3). The industry
employment shares are based on urban workers between the ages of 20 and 64 inclusive, calculated
from the VHLSSs. All regressions include year fixed effects and industry fixed effects, using the within
transformation.

WĂŐĞϲϲŽĨϴϱ

Appendix B: Supplemental Material for Section 6

This appendix provides a detailed description of the data and calculations used in section 6
to estimate the aggregate labor productivity change in manufacturing associated with the
reallocation of labor from household businesses to enterprises in response to the BTA.

B.1 Labor productivity gap between the household business and enterprise sectors
B.1.1 Basic Calculations
We compute the average revenue product of labor based on revenue per worker from firmlevel data that covers all registered firms in the enterprise sector (the Vietnamese Enterprise
Survey), and on aggregate revenue and the total number of workers in the household business
sector from the household business and labor modules of the VHLSS. Most of our analysis relies on
the 2001 Vietnamese Enterprise survey and the 2002 VHLSS. 66
We calculate average revenue product of labor in the household business sector by
summing annual revenue from all businesses reported in the household business module and
dividing by the total number of workers in household businesses as reported in the labor module of
the 2002 VHLSS. 67,68 Our estimate of revenue per worker in the household business sector is likely
an overestimate because the business module in the 2002 VHLSS did not distinguish between
private enterprises (i.e., belonging in the enterprise sector) and household businesses. Its scope was
all businesses run by households. This lowers the estimate of the gap in average labor productivity
between the household business and enterprise sectors and thus leads to a cautious estimate of the
gains from reallocation. See section B.1.5 for further discussion.
We calculate revenue per worker in the enterprise sector based on total annual revenue
divided by total employment in each enterprise at year-end using the 2001 enterprise data.

66

The VHLSS has has a 12-month recall and covers 2001/2002
All revenue values are expressed in January 2002 Dong. For the VHLSS data, household business revenue is
converted to January 2002 prices using monthly CPI data based on the month of interview. Information on the
number of workers is based on employment in workers’ primary job (i.e., employment based on their reported
most time consuming job). See discussion of employment in secondary jobs in Section B.1.5. We rely on the labor
force module for employment because the 2002 household business module did not collect information about the
number of workers in each business.
68
Both estimates are weighted using survey sampling weights.
67

WĂŐĞϲϳŽĨϴϱ

Aggregate revenue per worker within the enterprise sector is the employment-weighted average of
revenue per worker over all enterprises.
We use the labor force modules of the 2002 VHLSS to compute the wage gap between the
enterprise and household business sectors. We compute the wage ratio using total earnings, which
includes cash and in-kind wage/salary payments as well as other payments such as public holiday
payments and social allowance payments, among wage workers in the two sectors.
These labor productivity gaps are reported in row 1 of Table 8 in the main text.

B.1.2 Existing evidence on the labor productivity gap
How do our estimates compare to those from the literature? Nationally representative data
on household businesses (in other contexts also called informal firms or microenterprises) is rare,
so we cannot compare our estimates to many previous studies. That said, our estimate is consistent
with productivity gaps between informal and formal firms in other developing countries. We
compare existing estimates to our unadjusted estimates in row one of Table 8 in the main text
because the existing estimates do not adjust for worker heterogeneity across sectors. For example,
Nataraj (2011) finds that output per worker is 12.4 times higher in formal firms than informal firms
in India’s manufacturing sector. La Porta and Shleifer (2014) report gaps in value added per worker
between formal and informal firms using firm surveys from 25 developing countries. They rely on
World Bank Enterprise Surveys, which are not nationally representative and often exclude firms
without any hired workers (i.e., firms that the literature often refers to as own-account workers).
Consequently, the informal firms are larger on average, employing four workers, than in our context
where the average number of workers is about 2. A big advantage of our data is that it is based on a
census of all registered firms and a survey of household businesses based on a nationally
representative household survey. With these caveats about the World Bank Enterprise Survey data
in mind, value added per worker in formal firms is 6.7 times higher than in informal firms in the
median country in their sample. This is lower than in our data, but the range across countries is
large, from 5.3 in Mali to 14.3 in Tanzania, the 25th and 75th percentile countries, respectively. Our
estimate of the productivity gap of a factor of 9 is within the range of estimates from other
countries, comparable to their estimates for Angola and Kenya.

WĂŐĞϲϴŽĨϴϱ

B.1.3 Adjusting the labor productivity gap for worker heterogeneity
The productivity gap in row 1 of Table 8 could reflect worker heterogeneity across the two
sectors. We use micro-survey data on individuals from the labor force and education modules of
the VHLSS to adjust this productivity gap for heterogeneity in hours worked and human capital
between the household business and the enterprise sectors.
To begin with, the estimates reported in row 1 of Table 8 are based on revenue per worker
rather than revenue per hour worked. However, enterprise sector workers work significantly more
hours in the year than household business workers, 2,267 versus 1,825. 69 The difference in hours
will reduce the productivity gap. We adjust the productivity measures from row 1 so that they
reflect revenue per hour worked in each sector.
Second, we also adjust the productivity gap for differences in human capital across sectors.
We follow Gollin et al. (2014), who adjust for the differences in average years of education across
the agriculture and non-agriculture sectors. Specifically, let average human capital within a sector
be given by exp rschs where r is the rate of return to a year of schooling and schs is the average
years of education in sector s. We use a rate of return of 10 percent as in Gollin et al. (2014), based
on the observation in Banerjee and Duflo (2005) that returns to schooling are estimated to be
around 10% in most countries and don’t vary much between low- and high-income countries. Using
this approach, human capital in the enterprise sector is 1.2 times higher than in the household
business sector.
The productivity gap with both of these adjustments is reported in row 2 of Table 8 and
discussed in the main text. These adjustments matter. As noted there, worker heterogeneity
accounts for 37% of the original ARPL gap and for 70% of the original wage gap.
One potential objection to the above approach to controlling for worker heterogeneity is that
it only controls for two dimensions of worker heterogeneity. Alternatively, one can estimate the
wage gap for working in the enterprise sector with Mincerian regressions, while controlling for
worker heterogeneity in other dimensions, including location, gender, age, ethnic minority status,
and industry affiliation. Vollrath (2014) and Herrendorf and Schoellman (2015) apply this approach to
the wage gap between non-agriculture and agriculture. We estimate the following regression:
ln wi
69

D  E e enterprisei  T X i  H i

This is based on hours worked in primary job.

WĂŐĞϲϵŽĨϴϱ

where wi is the real hourly wage of worker i , enterprisei is an indicator variable for working in the
enterprise sector, and X i is a vector of worker characteristics, including education, location, gender,
age, age squared, minority status, and industry affiliation. The wage gap for working in the enterprise
sector (relative to the household business sector) is given by exp E e , where E e is the coefficient on
the indicator that a worker works in the enterprise sector.
We estimate the above Mincerian regression using data on manufacturing workers from the
2002 VHLSS. The estimates of the coefficient on the enterprise indicator E e are reported in Appendix
Table B.1. After controlling for additional dimensions of worker heterogeneity, the wage gap is a
similar order of magnitude as the wage gap reported in Table 8. The estimates that are the most
comparable to the wage ratio adjusted for human capital in row 2 of Table 8 are in column 2. 70 The
estimates in the table are of a similar order of magnitude as the estimates based on the wage ratio
adjusted for worker characteristics. 71 For example, the most conservative estimate of the wage
difference, reported in column 6, which controls for education, location, demographics, and industry
affiliation, suggests that workers in the enterprise sector earn 25% more per hour than
observationally equivalent workers in the household business sector. Thus, estimates of the wage
gap based on the Mincerian regressions, which simultaneously control for several dimensions of
worker heterogeneity, yield similar findings as the approach taken in the text.
We also use the individual panel data to estimate the impact on wages while controlling for
unobserved worker heterogeneity, which might be correlated with worker wages and sector of
employment. The results are reported in Appendix Table B.2. Our sample is all individuals that
worked for wages in manufacturing in both 2001/02 and 2003/04. Hence, the number of workers
included is lower than in Appendix Table B.1. The estimated coefficients on an indicator for working
in the enterprise sector from a regression that controls for unobserved worker heterogeneity with
individual fixed effects are reported in columns 1 and 2. The wage gap persists, albeit it is smaller in
magnitude. The estimates of the coefficient E e suggest that wage workers that move between these
70

Comparisons between estimates in column 2, which control for heterogeneity in education with years of
education, and column 3, which control for heterogeneity in education with education indicators, suggest that
these two approaches yield similar coefficient on the enterprise sector indicator. We therefore control for
heterogeneity in education with education indicators, as we did in Section 5 of the paper.
71
The difference in the estimates between the wage gap and Mincerian-based estimates could be attributed to
additional controls for observable worker characteristics, differences in functional form assumption, and the fact
that the wage bill ratio is weighed by hours worked, while the Mincerian regression weights each hourly wage
observation equally.

WĂŐĞϳϬŽĨϴϱ

two sectors earn about 9% more per hour when working in the enterprise sector. As the sample has
changed relative to Appendix Table B.1, we also estimate E e using the cross-sectional specification
that uses the same set of worker covariates as column 6 in Appendix Table B.1 with the panel sample.
The results in column 3 are based on both 2002 and 2004 data, while column 4 uses only 2002 data.
The estimates of E e are very similar to those using the cross section in column 6 of Appendix Table
B.1 (0.202 and 0.191 versus 0.221). Hence, the change in sample is not the primary reason for the
lower coefficient on working in the enterprise sector reported in columns 1 and 2. Instead,
controlling for unobserved individual heterogeneity is the important driver.
The above analysis excludes self-employed individuals, as they do not work for wages. Hence,
as an additional check relative to the wage regressions, we also include the self-employed in the
above analysis by focusing on worker hourly income as a dependent variable. For wage workers, this
is wage earnings as above. For the self-employed, we use self-reported profits. Specifically, we focus
on manufacturing household businesses run by the manager as their primary job. Additionally, we
restrict the sample of businesses to those for which no other household member reports being selfemployed in the same industry. This allows us to assign the reported profits to the manager without
having to make assumptions on how to assign profits across multiple household members. In this
analysis, we are treating the profits from the business as the manager’s wage earnings.
These results are reported in Appendix Table B.3, which follows the same specifications as
Appendix Table B.1. Interestingly, while the findings are in general similar to the findings with wages,
the earnings gap is smaller in magnitude, at 11 percentage points, relative to the differences in wages
only. This suggests that the managers of household businesses earn higher profits than
observationally equivalent wage workers.
In summary, the above discussion provides the details of how we adjust the labor
productivity gaps for worker heterogeneity. In the main text, we use these insights to emphasize that
worker heterogeneity accounts for an important component of the ARPL and wage gaps across
sectors, 37 % and 70%, respectively. For the wage gap, worker heterogeneity plays an important role
when we estimate the gap with differences in mean earnings between sectors, analogous to the
ARPL gap, and when we estimate the gap using Mincerian wage or earnings regressions. Overall, this
analysis highlights the importance of relying on information from micro-survey data to account for
worker heterogeneity.

WĂŐĞϳϭŽĨϴϱ

B.1.4 Measurement concerns
We address several concerns about measurement error. To begin with, one may be
concerned about the measurement error associated with combining two different data sources. 72 For
example, the surveys might measure revenue or earnings differently and this affects the estimates of
the productivity gap. We perform several checks to address this potential concern.
First, we compare annual earnings per manufacturing worker (i.e., the numerator of the wage
gap) in the enterprise sector across the two data sources, the 2002 VHLSS and the 2001 enterprise
data. Mean annual earnings per worker were 11.6 million VND in the 2002 VHLSS as compared to
11.8 million VND in the 2001 enterprise data. The similarity of these estimates suggest that workers
in the 2002 VHLSS are reporting labor earnings consistent with the reports of labor expenses from
firms in the 2001 enterprise data. Thus, the wage gap estimates between the enterprise and
household business sector are very similar if we use wage data for enterprises based on VHLSS or the
enterprise survey.
Second, the business module of a later VHLSS survey, the 2006 VHLSS, collected information
on whether the business owned by a household was a household business or registered as an
enterprise. We use this data to estimate the ARPL gap between household businesses and private
enterprises with one survey. 1.5 percent of manufacturing businesses in the 2006 VHLSS were
private enterprises, emphasizing the prevalence of household businesses in manufacturing. Note
that this calculation does not capture the productivity gap between household businesses and
other types of firms in the enterprise sector. Specifically, it excludes state-owned enterprises,
foreign-invested firms, and collective firms. We estimate the ARPL gap between private enterprises
and household businesses using the business module of the 2006 VHLSS. 73 These results are
reported in column 1 of Appendix Table B.4. ARPL is 3.6 times higher among private, domestic
enterprises than household businesses. The ratio drops to 2.8 after we adjust it for worker
heterogeneity. The gap is slightly lower than in Table 8 since foreign-invested, state-owned, and
collective enterprises are not included in the estimate of average productivity in the enterprise
sector. This gap is computed with data from 4 years after the 2002 VHLSS baseline year. For
comparison purposes, we estimate the ARPL gap between the entire enterprise sector and

72

See Nataraj (2011) and Hsieh and Olken (2014) for such an approach using Indian data and Ulyssea (2017) in
Brazil.
73
The 2006 VHLSS has a 12-month recall and was conducted from May through November.

WĂŐĞϳϮŽĨϴϱ

household business sector for 2005/06, using the same procedure from section B.1.1 and the same
two data sources for 2005/06 as those used for 2002 gaps reported in Table 8. These estimates are
reported in columns 2 through 4 of Appendix Table B.4. For example, the estimates of the ARPL gap
for manufacturing as a whole in column 2 suggest that the ARPL gap between sectors is 5.0, 3.5
adjusted for worker heterogeneity. As expected, they are higher than the estimates that rely on
private domestic enterprises alone. In addition, these estimates suggest that the ARPL gap has
partially closed between 2001/02 and 2005/06.
Overall, the above discussion suggests that the productivity gap between workers in the
enterprise and household business sectors is not likely driven entirely by differences in how firms
report revenues in the VHLSS and the enterprise survey.
An alternative measurement concern is that very few microenterprise operators keep
formal accounts and thus measurement error is more likely to affect our estimate of ARPL in the
household business sector than in the enterprise sector. We discuss the potential measurement
error in revenue and labor supply and consider adjustments to the ARPL gap to take these concerns
into account. The results are reported in column 1 of Appendix Table B.5. The first row of the table
reports the ARPL gap adjusted for worker heterogeneity that was discussed in Appendix B.1.3 and
that is also reported in row 2, column 1 of Table 8. This estimate serves as the upper bound on the
productivity gap.
First, de Mel, McKenzie and Woodruff (2009) provide experimental evidence on possible
measurement error in revenues of microenterprises from Sri Lanka, suggesting that reported
revenue in these businesses may underestimate true revenue by as much as 30 percent. Their
sample covers microenterprises without any paid employees, in both retail and manufacturing.
When we adjust the reported revenue in the household business sector by this factor, the
productivity gap falls from 6.0 to 4.2 (column1, row 2 of Table B.5).
Second, people working in the household business sector might overstate effective hours
worked. For example, a shopkeeper might be watching her children while tending to the business,
but reports total hours worked in the shop in the survey. We are not aware of a study that
examines potential mismeasurement of labor supply to microenterprises. However, the data from
Ghana generated by Fafchamps, McKenzie, Quinn and Woodruff (2014), which covers a sample of
microenterprises without paid employees, asked about the number of hours worked last week as

WĂŐĞϳϯŽĨϴϱ

well as the number of hours worked at full effort. 74 Interestingly, the difference in hours worked
versus full effort hours is not very large. Across all rounds of the surveys, microenterprise owners
reported working at full effort 89 percent of the time. This suggests that reports of hours worked
may slightly overestimate true labor input. When we adjust the productivity gap for the
measurement error in revenue and hours worked, the ARPL gap is 3.7 (column 1, row 3 of Table
B.5).

B.1.5 Measurement issues specific to the 2002 VHLSS
The above discussion focuses on measurement issues related to informal businesses in any
data. In this section, we use the 2004 and 2006 VHLSSs data to assess two measurement issues
specific to the 2002 VHLSS data used in the current study.
First, our estimate of aggregate revenue in the household business sector is likely
overestimated due to the inclusion of some private enterprises in the estimate. The 2002 VHLSS
asked each household whether they ran a business, but it did not distinguish between household
businesses and private enterprises. Consequently, revenue from private enterprises is also included
in our estimate of aggregate revenue in the household business sector. However, the labor module
clearly distinguishes between working in a household business versus a private enterprise. Hence,
our estimate of ARPL in the household business sector is an overestimate, as it is based on the
revenue from household businesses and private enterprises. This underestimates the ARPL gap
between the enterprise and household business sectors.
The 2006 VHLSS distinguished between the two types of private businesses, household
businesses and private enterprises, and we use this survey to get an estimate of how much we
might be overstating aggregate revenue from the household business sector by including private
enterprises. The estimate based on the 2006 data likely overstates the contribution of private
enterprises to the 2002 household business revenue because the relative share of the formal sector
has been growing over time. As a result, the adjustments below should be viewed as providing a
lower-bound estimate of the ARPL. Only 1.5 percent of manufacturing businesses in the 2006 VHLSS
were private enterprises. However, they tend to be bigger. In the 2006 VHLSS, among

74

This question was asked because many microenterprise owners are simultaneously engaging in nonmicroenterprise activities, such as childcare or household work, while operating their business. We thank
Christopher Woodruff for making us aware of this data.

WĂŐĞϳϰŽĨϴϱ

manufacturing businesses, 23% of aggregate revenue is from private enterprises. Under the
assumption that this share has not changed over time, we adjust the ARPL ratio for this
measurement error by subtracting the same proportion of revenue from the 2002 VHLSS based
estimates. The ARPL gap rises to 4.9 (column 1, row 4 of Table B.5).
In addition, our estimate of hours worked in the household business sector omits hours
worked as a secondary job because the 2002 VHLSS did not collect detailed data on secondary jobs,
defined as the second most time consuming job during the past 12 months. This underestimates
labor supplied to the household business sector. We assess the potential measurement error with
the 2004 and 2006 VHLSSs, which asked detailed questions about both the primary and secondary
jobs of workers. In the enterprise sector, only 1.2% and 1.0% of total hours reported in the 2004
and 2006 VHLSSs were worked in secondary jobs. However, 13.9% and 13.8% of total hours in the
household business sector in the 2004 and 2006 VHLSSs were worked as a secondary job. Adjusting
the 2002 estimate of the ARPL ratio to include the missing hours in the household business sector
due to secondary jobs increases the estimate to 5.6 (column1, row 5 of Table B.5).
In summary, while measurement error is certainly present in our data, attempts to adjust
for plausible measurement error do not eliminate the ARPL gap across the household business and
enterprise sectors within manufacturing. In the main text we focus on the most conservative
estimate of the productivity gap from column 1 of Table B.5, namely 3.7.

B.1.6 Differences in the output elasticity of labor
As equation (4) in section 6 makes clear, the ARPL gap may overestimate the MRPL gap if
the household business sector has a higher output elasticity of labor, because
. Estimating production functions is beyond the scope of this paper.
Hence, we use existing values from the literature. There are not many studies from which to draw.
Fernandez and Meza (2015) calibrate a model of informal and formal firms using output elasticities
of labor of 0.8 and 0.65, respectively. Restrepo-Echavarria (2014) assumes output-labor elasticities
of 1 and 0.68 in the informal and formal sectors, respectively. 75 We choose the largest elasticity

75

Restrepo-Echavarria (2014) reports value added-labor elasticity. Adjusting for factor share of materials based on
Nataraj (2011) yields similar results because the factor share of materials is very similar across the two sectors.

WĂŐĞϳϱŽĨϴϱ

ratio of about 1.5 (approximately 1/0.68) and apply it to the ARPL gaps reported in column 1 of
Table B.5. The obtained MRPL ratios are reported in column 3 of Table B.5.
Let us first focus on the ARPL gap that adjusts for worker heterogeneity and hours work
differences across the two sectors and is reported in row 1. Adjusting this ratio with the elasticity
ratio suggests an MRPL ratio of about 4 (row 1, column 3 of Table B.5). MRPL ratios associated with
alternative estimates of labor productivity gaps in column 1 of Table B.5 discussed in section B.1.5
are reported in the remaining rows in column 3. The most conservative MRPL ratio of 2.5 is the one
reported in row 3 and based on the productivity gap of 3.7 that adjusts for worker heterogeneity,
and the measurement error in revenue and hours worked. Note that we used a factor of 1.5, a very
large difference in elasticities, to provide a conservative estimate of the possible MRPL gap. In the
main text, we therefore discuss this most conservative estimate as the lower bound for the labor
productivity gap, adjusted for measurement error and differences in output-labor elasticities across
sectors.

B.2 Estimating the share of workers reallocated
The estimate of the aggregate labor productivity gain in section 6 of the main text requires
an estimate of the share of manufacturing workers reallocated from the household business to the
enterprise sector due to the BTA,

.

Within each industry j, we estimate the share of workers reallocated as

Eˆ u 'tariff j
where Ê is estimated based on equation (3) and 'tariff j is the change in the U.S. tariff on
Vietnamese exports in industry j due to the BTA. We then sum over manufacturing industries,
weighting by the industry’s share of overall manufacturing employment:

¦

Eˆ u 'tariff j s j

j

where s j is the share of manufacturing workers in industry j. To be consistent with how we
calculate the number of workers for the ARPL gaps, we calculate total employment in each industry
as the sum of household business sector employment, estimated from the 2002 VHLSS, and

WĂŐĞϳϲŽĨϴϱ

enterprise sector employment, derived from employment at the end of 2001 from the enterprise
data. 76
Our preferred estimate for Ê is 0.156 (see Panel A, column 3 of Table 3). With this value,
we estimate that 4.9 percent of manufacturing workers were reallocated out of the household
business sector to the enterprise sector. The regression estimates reported in Table 3 focus on the
reallocation of workers between sectors, whereas section 6 focuses on labor productivity per hour
worked, not per worker. In our case, this distinction in the reallocation of labor, whether workers or
hours, turns out to be inconsequential as the BTA induced essentially an identical change in the
share of hours worked in the household business sector (see the coefficient of 0.157 in column 3 of
Table A.5 for share of hours worked as compared to our benchmark estimate of 0.156 from Table
3). The estimates of reallocated hours worked are reported in Table 8 in the main text. They are
used in all subsequent calculations discussed in section B.3.

B.3 Aggregate Labor Productivity Gain
We use the formula in section 6 of the main text, equation (5), to compute the gain in labor
productivity based on various labor productivity gaps. Recall that these labor productivity gaps are
reported in Appendix Table B.4 and column 1 and 3 of Table B.5. Those tables also report the
associated annual aggregate labor productivity gaps.
Here we focus our discussion on the estimates of the aggregate gains for the labor
productivity gaps reported in Appendix Table B.5. Recall that in column 1, row 1, we present an
ARPL gap of 6.0, which adjusts for worker heterogeneity. Subsequent rows sequentially adjust the
ARPL gap for each measurement error issue discussed previously. The ARPL gap falls as we consider
possible reporting error in household business revenue and labor input and then increases as we
remove possible revenue from private enterprises being included as household business revenue
and add additional labor inputs from secondary jobs. These movements in the ARPL gap are
reflected in the estimates of aggregate labor productivity gains. Our preferred labor productivity
gap estimate of 3.7 in row 3 suggests that aggregate labor productivity per hour worked increased
by 2.8% annually over the period of the study. This is the estimate also reported in Table 8 and
discussed in section 6 of the main text. We view the 3.5% estimate in row 1, column 2 (which is
76

If we estimate industry employment solely from the 2002 VHLSS we arrive at a similar estimate of the share of
manufacturing workers reallocated.

WĂŐĞϳϳŽĨϴϱ

based on the labor productivity gap that only adjusts for worker heterogeneity) as the upper bound
on the aggregate labor productivity gains. Overall, the estimated productivity gains range from 2.8
to 3.5% per year. 77
Column 4 of Appendix Table B.5 presents estimates of the annual growth in labor
productivity that take into account potential measurement issues and additionally allow for
differences in the output-labor elasticity across the household business and enterprise sectors.
These are based on the MRPL gaps reported in column 3. The growth estimates range from 1.5 to
2.1% annually. Our most conservative estimate of the aggregate productivity gain is 1.5% (row 3,
column 4). We discuss this gap in the main text and Table 8.
In Appendix Table B.6, we replicate the analysis of Table 8 except that labor productivity is
based on per worker instead of per hour worked. We do so because micro data on hours worked is
often not available in firm-level datasets and thus labor inputs are typically measured on a per
worker basis. We focus our discussion on column 1, which is based on all of manufacturing. The
unadjusted labor productivity gap is 9, as in Table 8. Subsequently, we adjust for differences in
human capital, but not in hours worked and estimate a labor productivity gap of 7.5. Additional
adjustments for measurement error in revenue and labor inputs for household businesses as well as
the difference in the output-labor elasticity across sector are the same as in Table 8 for labor
productivity per hour. At the bottom of column 1 in Table B.6, we report the aggregate labor
productivity estimates due to the BTA associated with the reported labor productivity gaps. These
range between 2.0 and 4.1% annually, with an estimate of 3.4% as our preferred estimate of the
gains in aggregate labor productivity per worker. This preferred estimate parallels that for
aggregate labor productivity per hour in that the associated labor productivity gap in both cases is
based on adjustments for measurement error in revenue and labor inputs for household
businesses, but assumes the same output-labor elasticity across sectors.
We can also use equation (5) to estimate the growth in wages due to the BTA-induced
reallocation of workers towards formal firms within manufacturing. To do so, we simply use the
labor productivity gap based on the wage gap and use initial wage levels in each sector instead of
labor productivity levels. The wage gap adjusted for worker heterogeneity and annual hours worked
77

In Appendix Table B.4, we also report growth in aggregate labor productivity based on labor productivity gap
using data from four years later. Although the labor productivity gap is lower, 3.5 versus 6.0 after adjusting for
differences in human capital and hours worked, the associated growth in aggregate labor productivity is 2.7% per
year.

WĂŐĞϳϴŽĨϴϱ

is reported in row 2, column 2 of Table. The associated growth in wages per hour worked is 0.5%
annually. In Appendix Table B.6, we report the wage gap based on annual earnings (i.e., not
adjusting for differences in hours worked between the informal and formal sectors), but adjusted
for differences in human capital (row 2, column 2). The associated gain in annual wages is 0.9% per
year.

WĂŐĞϳϵŽĨϴϱ

Appendix Table B.1: Differences in hourly wages between enterprise and household business sector
workers in manufacturing
Dependent variable: ln real hourly wage
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Enterprise sector indicator 0.366*** 0.296*** 0.291*** 0.160*** 0.227*** 0.221***
(0.0129) (0.0133) (0.0133) (0.0131) (0.0127) (0.0136)
Observations
R-squared
Location?
Demographics?
Years of education?
Education categories?
Industry FEs?

9,416
0.079
No
No
No
No
No

9,416
0.101
No
No
Yes
No
No

9,416
0.104
No
No
No
Yes
No

9,416
0.280
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

9,416
0.356
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

9,416
0.372
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Notes: ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. The sample is all wage
workers in manufacturing age 20 to 64 in the 2002 VHLSS. Location controls include a rural identifier and
province fixed effects. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a female indicator, and an ethnic
minority indicator. Education controls include indicators for completed primary, completed lower secondary,
and completed upper secondary with did not complete primary as the excluded category. Industry controls
include industry fixed effects.

WĂŐĞϴϬŽĨϴϱ

Appendix Table B.2: Differences in hourly wages between enterprise and
household business sector workers in manufacturing
Dependent variable: ln real hourly wage
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Enterprise sector indicator
0.0874*
0.0892* 0.202*** 0.191***
(0.0459) (0.0463) (0.0234) (0.0354)
Observations
R-squared
Number of individuals
Location?
Demographics?
Years of education?
Education categories?
Industry?
Year FEs?
Individual FEs?

2,680
0.052
1,340
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes

2,680
0.077
1,340
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

2,680
0.435
1,340
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

1,340
0.445
1,340
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No

Notes: ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
The sample is a panel of workers age 20 to 64 in the 2002 VHLSS that worked in
manufacturing in 2002 and 2004 for a wage. In column (4) the analysis is restricted to
2002.

WĂŐĞϴϭŽĨϴϱ

WĂŐĞϴϮŽĨϴϱ

12,943
0.039
No
No
No
No
No

12,943
0.059
No
No
Yes
No
No

12,943
0.062
No
No
No
Yes
No

12,943
0.219
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

12,943
0.288
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

12,943
0.302
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

12,943
0.195
Yes
No
No
No
No

12,943
0.117
No
Yes
No
No
No

12,943
0.090
No
No
No
No
Yes

Notes: ***, **, and * denotes significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. The sample is all wage workers and managers of one-worker
household businesses in manufacturing age 20 to 64 in the 2002 VHLSS. Location controls include a rural identifier and province fixed effects.
Demographic controls include age, age squared, a female indicator, and an ethnic minority indicator. Education controls include indicators for
completed primary, completed lower secondary, and completed upper secondary with did not complete primary as the excluded category. Industry
controls include industry fixed effects.

Observations
R-squared
Location?
Demographics?
Years of education?
Education categories?
Industry FEs?

Appendix Table B.3: Differences in hourly earnings between enterprise and household business sector workers in manufacturing
Dependent variable: ln real hourly earnings
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Enterprise sector indicator 0.304*** 0.235*** 0.225*** 0.0713*** 0.126*** 0.112*** 0.139*** 0.338*** 0.261***
(0.0126) (0.0131) (0.0131) (0.0130) (0.0123) (0.0133) (0.0126) (0.0120) (0.0140)

WĂŐĞϴϯŽĨϴϱ

Share of hours reallocated to enterprises due to the BTA
Initial share of hours in the household business sector
2.7

0.050
0.597

Manuf.
(2)
5.0
3.5

5.3

0.086
0.615

Textiles and
apparel
(3)
5.0
3.9

1.8

0.053
0.380

Ho Chi Minh
City and
Dong Nai
(4)
3.3
2.6

Notes: The productivity gap for the average revenue product of labor is the ratio of revenue per worker in the enterprise sector to
revenue per worker in the household business sector. In column 1, we report the ratio for private enterprises versus household
businesses as calculated from the business module in the 2006 VHLSS. In columns 2 through 4, we report the ratio for all
enterprises, as calculated using the 2005 enterprise data, versus household businesses from the 2006 VHLSS. See section 6 and
Appendix B for further details on the calculations and data sources.

2.4

0.050
0.597

Productivity gap
Productivity gap adjusted by hours worked & human capital

Annual growth in revenue per hour worked (%)

Manuf.
(2006
VHLSS)
(1)
3.6
2.8

Appendix Table B.4: Productivity gap between the enterprise and household business sectors in manufacturing in
2005
Average revenue product of labor

WĂŐĞϴϰŽĨϴϱ

Measurement error
Annual
growth
ARPL gap rate (%)
6.0
3.5
4.2
3.0
3.7
2.8
4.9
3.2
5.6
3.4

Measurement error
and output-labor
elasticity
Annual
growth
MRPL gap rate (%)
4.0
2.1
2.8
1.7
2.5
1.5
3.2
1.9
3.8
2.1

Notes: The table reports the ARPL gap between the enterprise and household business sectors adjusted for measurement error
and differences in output-labor elasticities across sectors. Each row is based on the adjustment described in the row and all
adjustments in previous rows. It also reports the annual growth rate of hourly labor productivity associated with each adjusted
ARPL gap.

Adjusted for hours and human capital
+ Adjusted for underreporting of microenterprise revenue by 30%
+ Adjusted for hours worked at full effort
+ Adjusted for revenue from included private enterprises
+ Adjusted for hours worked in a secondary job

Adjusted for:

Appendix Table B.5: Adjusting the average revenue product of labor gap

WĂŐĞϴϱŽĨϴϱ

4.1
3.4
2.0

0.049
0.648

0.9

0.049
0.648

6.9
5.4
2.9

0.085
0.664

1.7

0.085
0.664

2.7
2.3
1.2

0.053
0.395

0.4

0.053
0.395

Notes: The labor productivity gap reported in columns 1, 3, and 5 is based on the average revenue product of labor and subsequent
adjustments. The average revenue product of labor is the ratio of revenue per worker in the enterprise sector to revenue per worker in the
household business sector. The labor productivity gap reported in columns 2, 4, and 6 is based on the ratio of annual earnings per worker
in the enterprise sector to annual earnings per worker in the household business sector, plus subsequent adjustments. The difference in
output-labor elasticity allow the MRPL and ARPL gaps to differ. See section 6 and Appendix B for further details on the calculations and
data sources.

Annual growth (%)
Adjusted by human capital
+ measurement error in revenue and hours worked
+ differences in output-labor elasticity

Share of workers reallocated to enterprises due to the BTA
Initial share of workers in the household business sector

Appendix Table B.6: Productivity gap per worker between the enterprise and household business sectors in manufacturing
Ho Chi Minh City
and Dong Nai
Manufacturing
Textiles and apparel
Revenue Wage Revenue Wage Revenue Wage
based
based
based
based
based
based
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Productivity gap
Unadjusted
9.0
1.82
6.6
1.70
7.0
1.48
Adjusted by human capital
7.5
1.47
5.8
1.51
5.9
1.20
+ measurement error in revenue and hours worked
4.6
3.6
3.7
+ differences in output-labor elasticity
3.1
2.4
2.4

