NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX MORALE
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Monica Singhal
Working Paper 20458
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20458

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We thank Tim Taylor, David Autor, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Ulrike Malmendier for many helpful comments
and Elizabeth Spink for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Tax Morale
Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 20458
September 2014
JEL No. H26,O17
ABSTRACT
Standard economic models of tax compliance have focused on enforcement-driven compliance. Notably,
tax administrators also tend to place a great deal of emphasis on the importance of improving “tax
morale” by encouraging voluntary compliance, creating a culture of compliance, and changing social
norms. Tax morale does indeed appear to be an important component of compliance decisions, and
there is strong evidence that tax morale operates through a variety of underlying channels. There is
less evidence - to date - that indicates we know how to leverage these channels to improve compliance
and revenue collection in a consistently successful way.

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
6106 Rockefeller Center, Room 305
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Erzo.FP.Luttmer@Dartmouth.Edu
Monica Singhal
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
monica_singhal@harvard.edu

For over 40 years, the benchmark economic model of tax evasion has been the
Allingham and Sandmo (1972) model, in which self-interested taxpayers choose how much
income to report to the tax authority by trading off the benefits of evasion (lower tax
payments) against the costs of evasion (the possibility of being caught and punished). The
key policy parameters affecting tax evasion are the tax rate, the detection probability, and
the penalty imposed conditional on the evasion being detected.
However, there is an apparent disconnect between much of the academic literature
on tax compliance and the administration of tax policy. While tax administrators are
obviously concerned about enforcement, they also tend to place a great deal of emphasis on
improving “tax morale,” by which they generally mean increasing voluntary compliance
with tax laws and creating a social norm of compliance. The OECD, for example, noted that
“[t]he promotion of voluntary compliance should be a primary concern of revenue
authorities” in its principles for good tax administration (OECD 2001) and has highlighted
the importance of tax morale more generally (OECD 2013).
Tax authorities around the world pursue policies that reflect their belief that
nonpecuniary factors are important in tax compliance decisions. More than half of US
states have or have had “name and shame” programs in which the names of top tax debtors
are revealed publicly on state websites. In a more colorful example, the city of Patna in
Bihar, India, deployed “singing eunuchs” to shame shopkeepers into paying their taxes
(BBC News 2006).1 An alternative to shaming tax evaders is to recognize compliant or
high-paying taxpayers publicly, a strategy adopted by an increasing number of developing
countries. Some nations have instituted public campaigns to change attitudes towards tax
evasion. For example, recent television and print advertising campaigns in Italy have
highlighted the need to reduce widespread tax evasion in order to better cope with the
European debt crisis (Povoledo 2011).
The term “tax morale” is often used in reference to these types of influences on tax
compliance. We will define tax morale broadly as an umbrella term capturing nonpecuniary
motivations for tax compliance as well as factors that fall outside the standard expected
utility framework. For example, individuals may have some intrinsic motivation to pay
taxes or feel guilt or shame for failure to comply. They may comply due to reciprocal
motivations: the willingness to pay taxes in exchange for benefits that the state provides to
them or to others even though their pecuniary payoff would be higher if they didn’t pay
taxes. Individuals may be influenced by peer behavior and the possibility of social
recognition or sanctions from peers. Cultural or social norms can affect the strength of
these intrinsic motivations, reciprocal motivations, or the sensitivity to peers. We will also
1

Note that the article uses the term “eunuch” for the community in South Asia referred to as “hijras” who are
not necessarily eunuchs in the technical sense.

2

include deviations from standard expected utility maximization, such as loss aversion, in
our definition of tax morale.
Michael Waweru (2004), then the head of Kenya’s revenue authority, captured
many of the tax morale channels we have in mind during a presentation to the President of
Kenya. Waweru said:
KRA [Kenya Revenue Authority] has organised a Taxpayers’ week from 18th to 23rd
October throughout the country. The period was carefully chosen to coincide with
Kenyatta Day celebrations in honour of our national heroes. The running theme
throughout the celebrations will be “Kulipa Ushuru ni kulinda Uhuru” or “Pay your
Taxes and set your country free” as a way of paying glowing tribute to those who
dedicated their lives to free our beloved country from the humiliation of
colonialism. Present taxpayers are taking a leading role in freeing their country from
donor dependency to economic independence. The climax of these celebrations will
be on 21st October 2004, when we will be recognizing Distinguished Taxpayers.
The linkage of tax compliance with honoring national heroes is clearly meant to prompt
intrinsically motivated compliance, and the reference to compliance reducing donor
dependence highlights the notion that tax payments have a direct benefit for society. The
potential importance of peer effects and social norms is illustrated through the decision to
recognize “Distinguished Taxpayers” and the adoption of a slogan that seems designed to
change the overall social attitude toward tax compliance. Note that some of these policies
may confer private pecuniary rewards. For example, public recognition could improve
firms' reputations and therefore revenues. Isolating the components of behavior that are
attributable to tax morale is therefore an empirical challenge.
We argue that tax morale is indeed an important component of tax compliance
decisions, though we view enforcement as the primary driver of compliance. We then
demonstrate that tax morale operates through a variety of underlying mechanisms,
drawing on evidence from laboratory studies, natural experiments, and an emerging
literature employing randomized field experiments. We do not attempt to provide a
comprehensive review of the literature. Rather, we highlight a few studies that illustrate
specific channels through which tax morale can affect compliance behavior. Finally, we
consider the implications for tax policy and attempt to understand why recent
interventions designed to improve morale and thereby compliance have had mixed results
to date.

3

How Important is Tax Morale?
The standard Allingham and Sandmo model (1972) is a straightforward application
of the Becker (1968) model of crime to the tax-evasion context: risk-averse individuals
weigh the utility benefits and costs of evasion to optimize their compliance behavior. The
model yields intuitive comparative statics—for example, that a larger penalty or a greater
probability of detection should lead to a reduction in tax evasion. However, Allingham and
Sandmo were the first to recognize that their model does not capture all motivations for tax
compliance, writing: “This is a very simple theory, and it may perhaps be criticized for
giving too little attention to nonpecuniary factors in the taxpayer’s decision on whether or
not to evade taxes.” We use the term tax morale as a shorthand for any such nonpecuniary
factors as well as deviations from expected utility maximization.
A natural question is how important tax morale is for compliance – is it a major
determinant of compliance or does it only have a trivial impact? A first sense of the
importance of tax morale comes from surveys that directly ask individuals about attitudes
towards tax evasion. For example, the World Values Survey asks respondents to rate the
justifiability of “cheating on taxes if you have a chance.” Over 60 percent of respondents
worldwide answer that cheating is never justifiable and over 80 percent give a response of
8 or higher on a ten-point scale where 10 denotes that cheating is never justifiable.2
Similarly, over 80 percent of respondents to the 2004 wave of the European Social Survey
“agreed” or “strongly agreed” with the statement that “citizens should not cheat on their
taxes.” These survey questions indicate a strong overall view that tax evasion is wrong,
suggesting that the Allingham and Sandmo model does not capture the full range of factors
relevant for compliance.
We would of course want to know whether these self-reported attitudes translate
into actual compliance behavior. Some studies have attempted to measure evasion at the
country level and relate this to survey measures of tax morale. However, constructing valid
proxies of tax evasion across countries is very challenging. In addition, relating constructed
proxies for tax evasion to tax morale (or other predictive variables) typically requires
strong assumptions that are unlikely to hold in practice (for a detailed discussion, see
Slemrod and Weber 2012).3
2

Calculated from the 2005-2007 wave of the World Values Survey using data from 53 countries. Data from
Ghana and Serbia were omitted due to data quality issues.
3
Perhaps the most commonly used proxies of tax evasion are measures of the shadow economy constructed
using a MIMIC (Multiple Indicators Multiple Causes) approach (for example, Schneider 2005, and subsequent
measures derived from it). The resulting shadow economy measure is a weighted sum of predictors such as
per capita GDP, indicators of fiscal burden, quality of institutions, and sometimes even tax morale itself. While
this measure can be informative about variation across countries and over time, regressing the shadow
economy measure on a predictor such as tax morale leads to a mechanical relationship if tax morale was used

4

A second way to assess the importance of tax morale is indirectly, by attempting to
determine the degree of compliance that would be predicted given the characteristics of
the enforcement environment. Additional residual compliance is then attributed to tax
morale. The Allingham and Sandmo model does not take into account that audit rates could
be conditional on discrepancies between self-reported income and reports from third
parties, such as employers (Kleven et al. 2011). For example, individuals in the United
States are unlikely to evade on W2 income because they know that such evasion will be
detected with near certainty. This can lead to low observed evasion as well as low audit
and penalty rates in equilibrium. Hence, inferring tax morale as residual compliance in the
Allingham and Sandmo model is credible only in settings without third-party reporting.
Even on forms of income not subject to third-party reporting, compliance often
appears higher than would be predicted under observed audit rates, realistic penalties, and
plausible levels of risk aversion. Alm, McClelland, and Schulze (1992) calibrate the
Allingham and Sandmo model for reasonable parameter values for the United States. They
find that a mid-range estimate of the coefficient of relative risk aversion (γ = 3) implies
compliance of 13%, well below audit-based estimates of compliance for most forms of
business income (where third-party reporting is limited) in the United States. For example,
compliance on non-farm proprietor income in 2001 was 43% (Slemrod 2007). A recent
audit study in Denmark was able to distinguish third-party and self-reported income at the
line-item level (Kleven et al. 2011). They found even higher compliance (in the range of 8095%) for most sources of self-reported income. To put this in context, the Alm, McClelland,
and Schulze (1992) calibrations require the coefficient of relative risk aversion to be quite
high (γ = 5) to achieve 44 percent compliance and extraordinarily high (γ = 10) to achieve
71 percent compliance.4
There are at least three caveats to these calibration exercises. First, audit studies
reveal detected evasion, which is likely to be a lower bound on true evasion. Second,
underreporting income or overreporting deductions is likely to invite scrutiny by the tax
authorities, even absent third-party reporting, so that audit rates are not random but
rather a function of misreporting. Finally, some residual compliance could be driven by
private pecuniary benefits from compliance, such as improved access to credit or
to construct the shadow economy variable. Even if tax morale isn’t used to construct the shadow economy
measure, this regression ultimately uncovers a correlation between one predictor (tax morale) and other
predictors of the shadow economy (that is, a weighted average of predictors such as GDP, fiscal burden and
quality of institutions).
4 To illustrate the degree of risk aversion an individual exhibits at γ =5 and γ=10, consider whether an
individual is willing to take a gamble that offers a 50% chance of doubling one’s income and a 50% chance of
losing X% of income. The individual with γ=5 finds this gamble too risky to accept if X ≥ 16% whereas an
individual with γ=10 declines this gamble whenever X ≥8%.”

5

productivity gains from not needing to keep double books. Nevertheless, these calibration
exercises do suggest a non-trivial role for nonpecuniary factors.
A third avenue for learning about the importance of tax morale is by examining
compliance behavior in environments where tax enforcement is limited or non-existent
and private pecuniary benefits of compliance are likely to be minimal. One such
environment is studied by Dwenger et al. (2014), who consider compliance with the local
Protestant church tax in a metropolitan area in Bavaria. When collecting the local church
tax, the Protestant church makes clear that this tax is legally obligated as specified by the
German tax code. However, this tax is not enforced and knowledge of the lack of
enforcement appears widespread: a treatment in which the collection letter explicitly
stated that collection would not be enforced had no statistically or economically significant
effect on compliance. Despite the lack of enforcement, about 20 percent of individuals pay
at least as much tax as is owed, indicating an important role for tax morale driven
compliance in this setting.
Whether this finding generalizes is unclear for at least two reasons (which work in
opposite directions). First, the use of funds from the local church tax is associated with a
particular type of service, which individuals may value more than the services funded by
other types of taxes. Second, the fact that there was zero enforcement, despite the fact that
the tax is easily enforceable, is unusual. It could signal to individuals that, while the church
tax is technically a legal obligation, the church/government does not actually consider it an
important civic obligation. This in turn could undermine tax morale.
A fourth way to shed light on the importance of tax morale on compliance is to
examine compliance behavior of taxpayers that measurably differ in tax morale but all face
the same enforcement environment. DeBacker, Heim, and Tran (2012) relate corporate tax
evasion of foreign-held corporations in the United States to corruption levels in the owners'
countries of origin. Given that the enforcement environment is common, the corruption
levels in the countries of origin can affect compliance only through a tax morale channel. An
important strength of this study is that it uses data from over 25,000 IRS corporate tax
audits, making the paper a rare example of a case in which information on tax evasion is
available at the taxpayer level and is derived from actual audit data. They find that
corporations with owners from more corrupt countries evade more US tax. This effect is
both statistically significant and economically sizeable: an average-sized firm with an
owner from a country with the level of corruption of Nigeria has an evasion level that is 8
percent of the tax obligation higher than a similar firm with an owner from a country with
the level of corruption of Sweden. The authors control for firm characteristics and a
number of other source-country characteristics (such as per capita GDP), reducing the
scope for omitted variable bias to drive their results. Given that corruption in the country
6

of origin does not capture all aspects of the owner’s tax morale (e.g., owners from the same
country may have different tax morale), the estimated magnitude of tax morale is likely to
be a lower bound of the total effect of tax morale. Hence, this study suggests a sizeable role
for tax morale in compliance decisions.
Our reading of these four sources of evidence taken together is that tax morale plays
a meaningful role in tax compliance behavior, at least in the developed country settings on
which this evidence was largely based. It would be very appealing to quantify the
importance of tax morale relative to the importance of tax enforcement. Implementing such
a decomposition faces both conceptual and practical challenges. Conceptually, the
importance of tax morale depends on the enforcement environment because tax morale
and enforcement generally interact. At one extreme, if enforcement is so draconian that
compliance is perfect, there is no role for tax morale. At the other extreme of no
enforcement whatsoever, tax morale may be eroded because the lack of enforcement
efforts signals that compliance is unimportant.
One practical challenge is that - even in the absence of enforcement interactions we would expect the relative importance of tax morale to vary across countries and even
across types of taxes within a country. Even in the rare cases in which we are able to
measure the role of tax morale (for example, in the church tax case), resulting estimates are
unlikely to generalize. A further challenge when attempting to decompose cross-country
variation in compliance is that we measure tax morale on a scale that does not have a welldefined zero. In the DeBacker, Heim, and Tran (2012) study mentioned above, for example,
we can compare compliance at different observed levels of tax morale but cannot assess
what compliance would have been if tax morale were zero. While we cannot quantify the
relative importance of enforcement and tax morale, our view is that enforcement is the
primary driver of tax compliance but that tax morale meaningfully enhances compliance.
It is important to note that what matters for policy is not so much what role tax
morale plays in current compliance, but whether it is feasible to improve tax morale on the
margin and whether a given increase in compliance can be achieved at a lower cost by
improving tax morale than by increasing enforcement. Before considering which policies
could affect tax morale, it is therefore important to understand the mechanisms through
which tax morale may operate.

Tax Morale Mechanisms
While tax morale is commonly used as a single concept, it can be more accurately
thought of as a set of underlying motivations for tax compliance. Identifying the channels
7

through which tax morale operates is both important for understanding individual
preferences and for designing appropriate policy responses. We consider five broadly
defined potential mechanisms through which tax morale could operate, recognizing that
these channels are not mutually exclusive and are in fact likely to overlap and interact with
each other.
The five classes of mechanisms are: 1) intrinsic motivation, which can be viewed as
an additional term in the utility function that increases in the amount of taxes that the
individual decides to pay (with, possibly, a discontinuous upward jump for paying the
required amount); 2) reciprocity, in which an additional utility term for paying taxes
depends in some way on the individual’s relationship to the state (for example, on public
goods provided by the state or perceptions about the fairness of the tax system); 3) peer
effects and social influences, in which the additional utility term for paying taxes depends on
views or behaviors of other individuals; 4) long-run cultural factors may affect the
willingness to pay taxes; and 5) information imperfections and deviations from utility
maximization (for example, individuals may misperceive the probability of being detected
in evading taxes or may exhibit loss aversion).
Forms of Intrinsic Motivation
When considering how tax morale might influence taxpayer decisions, one
possibility is forms of intrinsic motivation that may induce people to comply with laws and
expectations. Other forms of intrinsic motivation are feelings of pride and positive selfimage that are often associated with honesty and the fulfillment of civic duties, and
altruism toward others, which could result in a willingness to contribute to public goods
through the tax system. Cheating on taxes may cause feelings of guilt or shame (Andreoni,
Erard, and Feinstein 1998).
Direct evidence on the role of intrinsic motivations comes from Dwenger et al.
(2014). As discussed above, this study documents some degree of compliance with the local
German Protestant church tax, even in an environment in which both actual and perceived
enforcement is non-existent. While this overall compliance effect could be driven by
several underlying components of tax morale, we see sharp bunching at the exact level of
owed tax. One interpretation of this bunching (if individuals are truly unconcerned about
enforcement) is that it reflects one specific form of intrinsic motivation: a desire to comply
with the law.
Indirect evidence on the role of intrinsic motivations comes from field experiments
that have attempted to prime intrinsic motivations. These interventions take the form of
“moral suasion” letters to taxpayers that include text emphasizing various elements of tax
8

morale. The effects of these letters are generally compared to some type of baseline letter
to address the possibility that receiving a letter related to taxes might directly affect
compliance by signaling a change in the enforcement regime. If we observe treatment
effects in response to such letters, this indicates that the particular underlying channel of
tax morale that was primed is operating. However, it is important to stress that a lack of
treatment effects does not necessarily imply that the underlying channel does not influence
compliance: it may simply be that it exists but is inelastic to the particular intervention.
Indeed, many field interventions that have attempted to prime tax morale have
failed to find effects on compliance. An example of an intervention approximating pure
moral suasion is an experiment conducted by Fellner, Sausgruber, and Traxler (2013) who
examine evasion of TV and radio licensing fees in Austria. One of the treatment arms added
the following language to a baseline letter: “Those who do not conscientiously register their
broadcasting receivers not only violate the law, but also harm all honest households.
Hence, registering is also a matter of fairness.” The study found that this moral suasion
letter did not improve compliance relative to the baseline letter. Other studies using this
methodology include information about how tax revenues are used or about the
compliance of others. Since these interventions seek to trigger motives like reciprocity or
peer effects, we will discuss them in the subsections below.
If tax payments are partially intrinsically motivated, then the extrinsic incentives of
tax enforcement could potentially crowd out intrinsic motivation. This possibility is
predicted by theoretical models in which external incentives crowd out prosocial behavior
(for example, Bénabou and Tirole 2006). It is also consistent with the authors’ own
conversations with tax officials in developing countries, in which the officials repeatedly
expressed the view that heavy-handed tax enforcement could backfire by reducing
“voluntary” compliance. But at least in the context of local German church taxes—where we
see clear evidence of intrinsically motivated payment—enforcement interventions indicate
that this type of crowd out appears limited. Dwenger et al. (2014) show that interventions
with audit threats increase compliance of those who evaded in the prior year but do not
have a significant effect on payments by those initially paying at or above the owed
amount. Boyer et al. (2014) conduct a related randomized evaluation, in a setting similar to
Dwenger et al., but focusing on the local Catholic church tax rather than the local Protestant
church tax. Letters emphasizing that the church tax is a compulsory payment rather than a
donation appear to result in some crowd out for individuals who donated infrequently in
previous years but have a small and insignificant effect on those who consistently donated
in the past.
While we do not wish to generalize too far from this specific context, the church tax
findings overall do suggest that enforcement does not erode intrinsic motivation. It thus
9

can be a useful tool for compliance including in settings where some individuals are
intrinsically motivated. In theory, enforcement could even amplify intrinsic motivation by
signaling that tax compliance is an important legal or civic duty, although field
interventions to date have not been designed in a way that would allow us to test for such
effects.
Reciprocity
We use the term reciprocity broadly for situations in which willingness to pay taxes
depends on the individual’s relationship with the state, other than direct tax-benefit
linkages (where a tax payment directly causes benefits to the individual to increase).
Individuals may view taxes as part of a social contract: tax payments are made in exchange
for services provided by the state. This view of tax compliance suggests that compliance
may be affected by perceptions of the legitimacy of the state (Levi 1989) as well as by
attitudes toward government or perceptions about the fairness of the tax schedule (for
example, Feld and Frey 2002; Hofmann, Hoelzl, and Kirchler 2008). Compliance may also
be affected by the types of government services that are funded by tax revenues and how
these are viewed by the taxpayer.5
A number of studies have documented positive correlations between survey
measures of institutional quality, trust in government, and satisfaction with public services
and survey measures of tax morale (for a review, see OECD 2013) as well as relationships
between institutions and tax morale (for example, Torgler, 2005). However, specific causal
channels can be difficult to isolate. Some studies have manipulated these elements in a
laboratory setting using student subjects, with parameters approximating the US income
tax system, and have found that participants are less likely to evade taxes when funds are
given to an organization that they support and when they feel active in the decision-making
process (e.g., Alm, Jackson, and McKee 1993).
Changing the decision-making process or actual use of tax revenues is obviously
much more challenging outside the laboratory setting. Existing randomized field studies
have therefore attempted to prime reciprocal motivations by highlighting the beneficial
uses of tax revenues. One early study included a treatment arm that described the types of
social programs on which tax revenues in Minnesota are spent, noting that “when
taxpayers do not pay what they owe, the entire community suffers” (Blumenthal, Christian,
and Slemrod 2001). Dwenger et al. (2014) included a treatment arm emphasizing that local
5

One channel that we include with reciprocity is the possibility that the individual’s willingness to comply
depends on the use of raised revenue. This channel could operate because the individual feels “pure” altruism
towards the beneficiaries of government spending. Despite the fact that pure altruism is strictly speaking an
intrinsic motivation, we discuss this channel in the current subsection because we cannot empirically
distinguish it from reciprocal motivations.

10

German church tax revenues fund work in the parish, and Castro and Scarscatini (2013)
gave taxpayers in Argentina information about specific public goods in their community
that had recently been provided by the local government. None of these studies found
significant effects of these treatments on tax compliance.
Together with the Fellner, Sausgruber, and Traxler (2013) findings, the literature to
date thus suggests limited power of a variety of types of moral suasion. Ariel (2012) even
finds suggestive evidence of moral suasion letters backfiring in a field experiment on VAT
compliance by small corporations in Israel. However, there are some counterexamples.
Bott et al. (2014) examine compliance with foreign-income reporting requirements in a
field experiment on Norwegian taxpayers who had evaded taxes on foreign income in a
prior year. They find positive effects when the results of their four moral suasion
treatments are pooled. Three of these treatments highlighted the public goods on which tax
revenues are spent while the fourth noted that the majority of taxpayers comply fully, so
compliance is a matter of fairness. Hence, these treatments may have triggered other
aspects of tax morale in addition to reciprocal motivations. Finally, Hallsworth et al. (2014)
examine a different margin of compliance, showing that late payment of taxes in the United
Kingdom falls in response to reminder letters that emphasize the ways in which tax
revenue finances public goods.
One interpretation of the predominance of null findings is that reciprocal
motivations have little relevance for tax compliance decisions outside the laboratory.
However, it is also possible - and in our view, likely - that such interventions are often not
powerful enough to affect compliance. Individuals’ views of the competence of the
government and the value of the public services it provides are formed through a lifetime
of personal experience: a few lines of text in a mailed letter may just not be sufficient to
cause taxpayers to update their beliefs or attitudes in many contexts.
Manipulating other potential reciprocal motivations, such as attitudes about the
fairness of the tax system or trust in government, is difficult to do in the context of a
laboratory or field experiment. Some direct evidence on perceptions of fairness and tax
compliance comes from Besley, Jensen, and Persson (2014), who examine the poll tax
imposed in the United Kingdom starting in 1989-1990 under the Thatcher government.
The poll tax replaced a tax based on property values. A massive backlash against this tax
forced its repeal only three years later and resulted in a return to a property-value based
tax (the “council tax”). The authors argue that the backlash reflected a widespread
perception that the poll tax system was unfair, due to its lack of relation to ability to pay,
and document a sharp spike in evasion at the time the poll tax was introduced.
While the move to a poll tax is perhaps an extreme example, the findings do suggest
11

that compliance decisions can be affected by government policy, conditional on a given
enforcement environment. If tax payment is motivated—at least in part—by the benefits
provided by taxation or perceptions of the legitimacy of the state, the possibility of multiple
equilibria arises. Weak tax morale could lead to low compliance, low revenue, and poor
state capacity and provision of services, thereby further reducing tax morale.
Peer Effects and Social Influences
We now turn to ways in which an individual’s compliance could be directly affected
by others. Individuals may wish to conform to the behavior of others, so that peer
compliance directly affects the individual’s own compliance. Individuals may also wish to
signal something about their type to their peers through their compliance behavior. The
value of this signal may depend on peer compliance: for example, paying taxes may only be
a positive signal to others who are also compliant, or inference about type could depend on
the number of compliant taxpayers. Finally, if individuals imperfectly perceive the
enforcement environment, the behavior of peers may influence individuals’ own beliefs
about the consequences of tax evasion.
One implication of these models is that a shock to individual compliance can be
amplified through social influences. The Besley, Jensen, and Persson (2014) study of
Britain’s poll tax presents a model that includes both reciprocity arising from perceptions
of fairness of the tax schedule (defined as intrinsic motivation by the authors) as well as a
social norm effect arising from a desire to signal pro-social motivations to others. As noted
above, the temporary shift to a poll tax sharply increases evasion, arguably due to a
reduction in reciprocity motivations. However, higher levels of evasion persist well after
the poll tax is replaced with the property-value based council tax, particularly in councils
that had high evasion during the poll tax period, consistent with a social norm effect.
These findings raise the question of whether governments have the capacity to
influence social norms for compliance in a positive way. As discussed in the introduction,
tax authorities around the world have undertaken policies with this goal in mind. A recent
set of field experiments has begun to evaluate the causal impact of such interventions on
compliance. A first channel through which governments could leverage social interactions
is by providing information on peer behavior. However, field experiments in highcompliance contexts notifying taxpayers that over 90 percent of individuals comply have
failed to find significant treatment effects (Blumenthal, Christian, and Slemrod 2001;
Fellner, Sausgruber, Traxler 2013).
It is possible that these studies have not found treatment effects because individuals
already had a clear sense of overall compliance. One study that examines this possibility is
12

Del Carpio (2014). In a field experiment on property tax collection in Peru, she also
collected perceptions of tax compliance and enforcement in the treatment and control
groups after the interventions had been administered.6 She finds that an intervention
combining information about peer compliance and a payment reminder leads to a small
and statistically insignificant increase in compliance relative to a baseline intervention
consisting of only a payment reminder. However, this combined intervention did not
significantly influence perceptions of peer compliance relative to the baseline intervention.
At least in this experiment, it is plausible that information on peer compliance failed to
affect own compliance because this information did not sufficiently alter perceptions of
peer compliance.
One study that did find effects of providing information on peer behavior is
Hallsworth et al. (2014), who examine the effects of a variety of interventions on the timely
payment of taxes in the UK. In addition to the “reciprocity” interventions discussed above,
this study included several messages about compliance norms, informing participants that
“9 out of 10 people pay their tax on time”; “9 out of 10 people in the U.K. pay their tax on
time”; and “9 out of 10 people in the U.K. pay their tax on time. You are currently in the very
small minority of people who have not paid us yet.” They find significant effects on early
payment from all three messages, with the largest effects from the final message. In a
subsequent experiment, the authors test the “descriptive” norms from the first experiment
(what other individuals are doing) against “injunctive” norms (what others believe should
be done) and find that descriptive norms appear to be more powerful overall. It is possible
that these interventions did change individual priors in this context; it may also be that this
compliance margin (timely payment) is more sensitive to such treatments than the evasion
decision.
Another way in which governments could leverage social forces is to facilitate social
recognition for compliant taxpayers. Emerging evidence from field experiments suggests
that recognition can in fact encourage compliance, at least under some conditions. Dwenger
et al. (2014) include a treatment arm in which those paying at least the required amount of
church tax have a probability of having their names published in a local newspaper if they
wish to do so. This treatment reduces payments for those who had evaded the church tax in
the past, indicating that social recognition can backfire for those who lack intrinsic
motivation to pay the church tax. In contrast, they find suggestive evidence that the
treatment further increases payments among those who were already motivated to pay
more than the required amount in the past.
6

Examining responses relative to priors is also important because of the possibility of perverse effects. If
individuals realize that compliance is actually lower than they thought, they may reduce their own
compliance behavior. This possibility is particularly important in developing economies, where tax
compliance is often low.

13

These heterogeneous findings are perhaps not surprising: we would expect the
effects of social norms and recognition to depend on how individuals update their priors
about peer compliance and how they view the signaling value of compliance. These factors
may vary both across contexts and across types of taxpayers. Treatment effects may also
cancel out in aggregate, if, for example, an intervention causes some taxpayers to positively
update their views about compliance but causes others to update negatively. We view this
body of evidence as indicative of a role for peer effects and social influences in tax
compliance but much remains to be learned about the circumstances under which
interventions targeting these motivations are effective in changing behavior.
Culture
Culture refers to broad social norms that persist over long periods of time and
across generations. Such persistence is one of the primary characteristics that distinguishes
“culture” from contemporaneous peer effects, though the two are obviously related. The
parameters of the additional utility term for paying taxes, whether it is conditional on the
state’s behavior or on the behaviors and views of other individuals, can be considered part
of one’s culture if these parameters reflect (internalized) social norms that persist over
long periods and across generations.
The obvious empirical challenge in discerning a causal effect of culture is to separate
the effects of culture from other aspects of the environment. Studies examining the effect of
culture on tax compliance have therefore attempted to examine the behavior of individuals
from different cultural backgrounds when placed in a similar environment. One strand of
literature has compared tax evasion in similar laboratory experiments across two or three
countries (for example, Alm, Sanchez, and de Juan 1995; Cummings et al. 2009; Gërxhani
and Schram 2006; Lefebvre et al. 2011). These studies generally find differences across
countries in tax evasion despite similar subject pools and experimental protocols. However,
given the limited number of countries in each of these studies (three at most), these studies
cannot credibly relate country-level evasion to any measure of country-level tax morale.
Hence, they measure culture as a “residual”—that is, attribute whatever gap cannot be
explained by the observable factors in their study to the effect of culture or tax morale.
An alternative strategy to examine the effect of culture is to exploit variation arising
from individuals who reside in the same country (and are therefore arguably subject to the
same current institutions and environment) but have varying countries of origin. Using
survey-based measures of tax morale, Halla (2012) finds that American-born individuals in
the United States have higher tax morale when their country of ancestry has higher average
tax morale, controlling for individual demographics. Individuals in the United States with
14

ancestors from a country with a 10-percentage point higher tax morale have about a 4percentage point higher tax morale, where both tax-morale questions are measured as
binary variables. Kountouris and Remoundou (2013) find similarly sized effects among
first-generation immigrants in a large sample of European countries. A potential concern
with these findings is that culture could simply affect the interpretation of or response to
such survey questions. Thus, evidence on the role of culture is more credible when tax
morale can be related to other outcome measures, ideally direct measures of tax evasion.7
The DeBacker, Heim, and Tran (2012) study, discussed above, is able to relate culture to
actual compliance behavior in an analogous setting. Their finding that corruption in firm
owners’ countries of origin affects evasion even in a common enforcement environment is
a convincing demonstration that culture does influence real behavior.
Taken together, these results suggest that there are indeed cultural differences
across countries, both in attitudes toward evasion and compliance behavior. This implies
that we may see persistent differences in compliance across countries even if they have
similar enforcement environments.
Information Imperfections and Deviations from Expected Utility
Information imperfections and decision-making biases are not always considered in
the context of tax morale, but they clearly represent deviations from a fully rational model
of tax compliance. Such factors could affect individuals making compliance decisions in
several ways: taxpayers might misperceive parameters of the optimization problem (for
example, the likelihood or consequences of an audit); fail to comply due to limited attention
or costs of complexity; or be subject to systematic biases in their decision process (for
example, loss aversion or overweighting of small probabilities).
Most tax authorities deliberately limit information on their auditing and
enforcement procedures. It would therefore not be surprising for individuals to have
incomplete information about true audit rates or penalties. Using matched IRS-survey data
from the United States, Scholz and Pinney (1995) find that individuals report a subjective
probability of getting caught (conditional on underreporting income) that is on average an
order of magnitude higher than the probability that the IRS will actually audit an
7

Because Halla (2012) has no measures of tax evasion of his General Social Survey respondents, he cannot
directly relate culture to outcomes for respondents. However, he ingeniously uses a “reverse” strategy. He
examines whether current evasion outcomes in the countries of ancestry can be explained by tax morale as
measured by respondents in the United States from the corresponding countries of ancestry. As a proxy for
evasion, he uses a widely-used measure of underground production (also referred to as “shadow economy”).
However, as we noted earlier in footnote 3, it is generally not valid to relate measures of the shadow economy
that are constructed as combinations of predictors to measures of tax morale. The particular measure of the
shadow economy that Halla borrows from the literature is constructed using tax morale data, so regressing it
on tax morale can uncover a mechanical relationship.

15

individual’s return. Further, they find that variation in actual audit probabilities across
individuals is not predictive of the variation in subjective probabilities of getting caught.
However, these results come with a caveat: the subjective probabilities of getting caught
were based on a hypothetical case where the individual underreports income, which were
then compared to IRS audit probabilities that were based on all tax returns, not just those
with underreported incomes. Naturally, the objective IRS audit probabilities would likely
have been higher if they had been based on tax returns with underreported income.
In contrast, the Del Carpio (2014) study mentioned earlier finds that individuals in
Peru perceive tax enforcement to be weaker than it actually is, which implies that
disclosure of true enforcement could enhance tax collection. Del Carpio finds that a
combination of a payment reminder and information about enforcement of a local property
tax both increases perceived enforcement and results in increased tax compliance.
Interestingly, the effects appear to be largely driven by the payment reminder, which
suggests a failure of individual optimization due to limited attention rather than through
misperceptions of the probability of enforcement efforts.8 This is consistent with
Hallsworth et al. (2014) who find a direct effect of payment reminders on timely
remittance of owed taxes. A role for limited attention is also found by Dwenger et al.
(2014). A “salience” treatment that shortens the standard church tax mailing and increases
the focus on the church tax payment obligation, schedules, and deadline significantly
decreases the fraction of people who evade the church tax. Together, these results suggest
that tax payment may be subject to the same types of behavioral biases we observe in many
other contexts: individuals may simply forget to make payments or procrastinate in
remitting owed taxes. In very low-enforcement environments, such behavior not only
delays tax payments but may in fact reduce overall revenue collection if the tax authority
lacks the capacity to follow up with non-payers. Individuals may also have limited
information about the rules of the tax code. Recent testimony to Congress from the US
General Accountability Office, for example, argued that complexity contributes to the "tax
gap" between what tax is owed and what is paid (GAO 2011). However, it is difficult to
know the extent to which complexity leads to honest errors in reporting versus facilitates
deliberate evasion.
Finally, people may in some cases deviate from the behavior predicted by expectedutility theory in the Allingham and Sandmo (1972) model. A first indication of such
deviations comes from Alm, McClelland, and Schulze (1992), who find in a laboratory
setting that student subjects react remarkably strongly to a small audit probability and that
8

Another possible interpretation is that the payment reminder itself increased enforcement perceptions and
the specific enforcement information did not have an incremental effect. Del Carpio (2014) finds that the
payment reminder on its own did not significantly increase perceived enforcement, although it is possible
that the lack of significance reflects lack of power in measured perceptions.

16

their behavior cannot be rationally explained at any level of risk-aversion. Of course, the
notion that individuals may overweight small probabilities is predicted by prospect theory.
More recently, two studies using large administrative datasets find evidence that
individuals are much more likely to seek tax shelters if they have a balance due than if they
are to receive a tax refund. Rees-Jones (2014) finds a shift in the mass of the balance due
distribution in the United States away from positive amounts. This shift is particularly
pronounced for taxpayers with greater access to tax shelters. The author demonstrates that
such behavior could be driven by loss-averse individuals pursuing sheltering options more
aggressively when they have a balance due and rules out other plausible explanations for
the observed patterns. While tax sheltering need not imply illegality, it seems likely that at
least some of the increased use of tax shelters stems from tax evasion. Engström et al.
(2013) pursue a related strategy using data from Sweden. They demonstrate that the
balance due prior to adjustments affects the rate at which individuals claim deductions for
“other expenses for earning employment income” in a manner predicted by a model of loss
aversion. This type of deduction is a plausible proxy for tax evasion because it is notorious
for high rates of claimed deductions that are rejected if audited (around 90 percent of
audited deductions in this category are disallowed).

Policy Lessons
What policy lessons can we draw from the evidence on tax morale? The most
obvious lesson is that the extent of tax evasion can be affected by policies beyond the
probabilities and magnitude of standard tax enforcement actions. Clearly, an Allingham
and Sandmo type model does not fully capture individual motivations for tax compliance.
This should not be surprising: channels such as intrinsic motivation, social norms, peer
effects, and limits to rationality are known to be important in a variety of other domains,
including in the contexts of charitable giving and private provision of public goods, which
are closely related to tax compliance.
The potential importance of tax morale in determining evasion suggests that
policymakers may have access to a broader range of instruments to affect compliance than
under a standard enforcement model. Simple nudges to taxpayers, such as presenting
information in a more accessible form or providing payment reminders, can reduce tax
evasion (for example, Del Carpio 2014; Dwenger et al. 2014; Hallsworth et al., 2014). In
addition, some evidence suggests directions for policy even though the effect of the policy
itself has not yet been directly tested. For example, the evidence from Engström et al.
(2013) and Rees-Jones (2014) on loss aversion indicates that tax compliance could
potentially be improved through over-withholding—because those who are likely to
17

receive refunds are less likely be motivated by loss aversion to seek out tax shelters.
On the other hand, the direct evidence from field experiments that have attempted
to manipulate intrinsic motivation, reciprocity, and social norms to improve tax compliance
have had decidedly mixed results. To the extent that such interventions have been
successful in changing behavior, they often appear to act primarily on “small stakes”
decisions, like paying taxes on time or paying relatively small taxes and fees. There are
several ways to interpret these findings.
First, it could be that these channels do exist but are small in magnitude relative to
the factors in the standard model. As discussed, assessing relative magnitudes is very
challenging. While many of the field experiments include an enforcement treatment, it is
generally extremely difficult to compare the “strength” of the enforcement versus tax
morale interventions or to know how they shift individuals’ beliefs relative to their priors.
Note that it is also important to be cautious when comparing the costs and benefits of
threats of enforcement and social notifications. Threat-of-audit letters (or more generally,
letters that prime individuals to focus on enforcement) are often not backed up by actual
increases in enforcement. While threatening enforcement is cheap, such threats must
ultimately be backed up by greater and potentially quite costly enforcement in equilibrium.
In contrast, social interventions may be relatively cheap in equilibrium.
Second, it could be that tax morale is important, but fairly inelastic. For example, in a
model with honest taxpayers and strategic taxpayers, intrinsic motivation may have a large
effect on overall compliance (for the honest taxpayers), but social moral suasion
interventions may not affect behavior for either group. Also, many tax morale channels may
be inelastic to the types of interventions that are feasible for researchers to test
experimentally. For example, designing field experiments to affect culture would be very
difficult. Interventions may also not be powerful enough to overcome individual priors: a
letter arguing that tax revenue is important for funding public goods may not be effective if
individuals have a strong (and perhaps accurate) belief that revenues are often
expropriated or inefficiently spent. However, these arguments do not imply that tax morale
cannot be affected by actual policies undertaken by governments: as the Besley, Jensen, and
Persson (2014) paper on the poll tax experience in the United Kingdom indicates, even
temporary policies that affect tax morale can have lasting effects on compliance.
Finally, the evidence strongly indicates heterogeneous treatment effects in response
to interventions intended to affect tax morale. The effects of these interventions appear to
be influenced by both the context (for example, are existing levels of compliance high or
low?) as well as characteristics of the individual taxpayer (for example, does the taxpayer
appear to be intrinsically or extrinsically motivated?). Obviously, heterogeneity makes
18

designing appropriate policy responses challenging: interventions targeting tax morale
could be ineffective or potentially even have perverse effects in some environments or for
some population subgroups, and identifying the groups for which interventions are likely
to be effective (for example, the intrinsically motivated) may be quite difficult in practice.
More broadly, what does it mean for tax policy if tax morale exists as a determinant
of compliance and can be affected by government decisions? Conditional on a given
enforcement environment, there is at least the possibility for tax morale to improve
compliance. However, we do not see the potential importance of tax morale as being
limited solely to reducing the tax gap between what is owed and what is paid: the
possibility of tax morale driven compliance has broader implications for optimal tax policy.
For example, the structure of the tax schedule itself could influence compliance through a
tax morale channel, as indicated in the poll tax study. While the switch to a poll tax is an
extreme example, this study suggests that perceived fairness of the tax schedule can affect
compliance. This finding may hold true more generally, even in cases in which isolating the
causal effect of the tax schedule on compliance is challenging. Tax morale could also affect
how behavior responds to taxation, depending on the specific channel of tax morale. If the
channel is pure altruism, for example, then individuals receive a direct utility benefit from
an additional tax payment, which at least partly offsets the utility loss of the consumption
reduction due to the additional tax payment. Thus, pure altruism can reduce labor supply
responses to taxes. Tax morale driven compliance could also reduce individuals’ incentives
to engage in costly behavior to avoid or evade taxes.

Directions for Future Research
Policy-makers, practitioners, and researchers are developing a better understanding
of the channels through which policies can leverage tax morale to improve compliance, but
there is clearly still much to learn. Here, we emphasize some of the areas that could prove
especially productive for research.
First, it would be useful to examine why similar interventions have produced
varying results in different contexts. In many cases, it is difficult to determine whether the
lack of effect of an intervention resulted because the intervention was too weak to affect
tax morale or because there truly was no meaningful effect of this tax morale channel on
compliance.
Second, field studies of tax morale to date have been one-shot in nature. From an
academic perspective, observing dynamic effects could help to provide direct evidence on
specific channels of tax morale. From a policy perspective, the potential of ratchet effects
19

alters the cost-benefit calculus of tax morale (and potentially enforcement) interventions.
For example, increases in compliance could be reinforced if individuals feel that they are
getting better public services or if they respond positively to peer compliance. Similarly,
negative shocks to morale or to compliance could lead to a downward spiral in tax morale
and compliance.
Third, some of the most important channels of tax morale may be inelastic to the
types of interventions that are feasible in randomized trials, but elastic to actual policies
undertaken by governments. We applaud the recent move towards field experiments
conducted in collaboration with tax authorities around the world. However, researchers
should also consider other approaches to investigate components of tax morale,
particularly those that cannot be easily manipulated in the field. Some examples discussed
in this paper include taking advantage of natural experiments, as in the Besley, Jensen, and
Persson (2014) study of the United Kingdom poll tax, and other creative identification
strategies, like the paper by DeBacker, Heim, and Tran (2012) that used variation in firm
ownership to identify a culture channel of tax morale.
Finally, existing empirical studies of tax morale have generally not attempted to
estimate the welfare effects of tax morale—which is unsurprising given that welfare
analysis can be challenging in settings where utility maximization does not fully explain
behavior or where the utility function depends on social effects. Moreover, the welfare
effects likely depend on the exact channels through which tax morale operates; for
example, do peer effects operate by giving people more warm-glow utility from paying
taxes or do they operate through a social sanction on being caught evading? Despite the
challenges of welfare analysis in the context of tax morale, we see this as an important area
for further research.

20

References
Allingham, Michael G. and Agnar Sandmo, “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis,”
Journal of Public Economics, 1972, 1 (3-4), 323-338.
Alm, James, Isabel Sanchez, and Ana de Juan, “Economic and Noneconomic Factors in Tax
Compliance,” Kyklos, 1995, 48 (1), 3-18.
Alm, James, Betty R. Jackson, and Michael McKee, “Fiscal Exchange, Collective Decision
Institutions, and Tax Compliance,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1993,
22, 285-303.
Alm, James, Gary H. McClelland, and William D. Schulze, “Why Do People Pay Taxes?”
Journal of Public Economics, 1992, 48 (1), 21-38.
Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein, “Tax Compliance,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 1998, 36 (2), 818-860.
Ariel, Barak, “Deterrence And Moral Persuasion Effects On Corporate Tax Compliance:
Findings From A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Criminology, 2012, 50 (1), 27-69.
BBC News, “India eunuchs turn tax collectors,” November 9, 2006,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/6134032.stm.
Becker, Gary S., “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1968, 76 (2), 169-217.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior," American Economic
Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1652-1678.
Besley, Timothy, Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson, “Norms, Enforcement, and Tax
Evasion,” Unpublished Manuscript, LSE, 2014,
http://people.su.se/~tpers/papers/Draft_140302.pdf.
Blumenthal, Marsha, Charles Christian, and Joel Slemrod, “Do Normative Appeals Affect Tax
Compliance? Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota,” National Tax Journal,
2001, 54 (1), 125-138.
Bott, Kristina, Alexander W. Cappelen, Erik Ø. Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden, “You've Got
Mail: A Randomized Field Experiment on Tax Evasion,” Discussion Paper 26/2014,
Department of Economics, Norwegian School of Economics, 2014.
21

Boyer, Pierre, Nadja Dwenger, and Johannes Rincke, “Do Taxes Crowd Out Intrinsic
Motivation? Field-Experimental Evidence from Germany,” Unpublished manuscript,
University of Mannheim, 2014.
Castro, Lucio, and Carlos Scartascini, “Tax Compliance and Enforcement in the Pampas:
Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper 472,
2013.
Cummings, Ronald G., Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, Michael McKee, and Benno Torgler, “Tax
Morale Affects Tax Compliance: Evidence from Surveys and an Artefactual Field
Experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2009, 70 (3), 447-457.
DeBacker, Jason, Bradley T. Heim, and Anh Tran, “Importing Corruption Culture From
Overseas: Evidence From Corporate Tax Evasion in the United States,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2012, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2012.11.009.
Del Carpio, Lucia, “Are the Neighbors Cheating? Evidence from a Social Norm Experiment
on Property Taxes in Peru,” Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University, 2014,
http://scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/Are_the_neighbors_cheating_Apr2014_0.p
df.
Dwenger, Nadja, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Imran Rasul, and Johannes Rincke, “Extrinsic and
Intrinsic Motivations for Tax Compliance: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Germany,”
LSE Working Paper, 2014,
http://personal.lse.ac.uk/kleven/Downloads/MyPapers/WorkingPapers/dwenger-klevenrasul-rincke_may2014.pdf.
Engström, Per, Katarina Nordblom, Henry Ohlsson, and Annika Persson, “Tax Compliance
and Loss Aversion,” Unpublished Manuscript, Uppsala University, 2013,
http://econ.au.dk/fileadmin/site_files/filer_oekonomi/seminarer/Economics/loss_AEJ_rev
ision.pdf.
Feld, Lars P., and Bruno S. Frey, “Trust Breeds Trust: How Taxpayers are Treated,”
Economics of Governance, 2002, 3 (2), 87-99.
Fellner, Gerlinde, Rupert Sausgruber, and Christian Traxler, “Testing Enforcement
Strategies in the Field: Threat, Moral Appeal and Social Information,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 2013, 11 (3), 634-660.
GAO, “Tax Gap: Complexity and Taxpayer Compliance,” United State Government
22

Accountability Office, 2011.
Gërxhani, Klarita, and Arthur Schram, “Tax Evasion and Income Source: A Comparative
Experimental Study,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2006, 27 (3), 402-422.
Halla, Martin, “Tax Morale and Compliance Behavior: First Evidence on a Causal Link,” The
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2012, 12 (1), Article 13.
Hallsworth, Michael, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Ivo Vlaev, “The Behavioralist As Tax
Collector: Using Natural Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance,” NBER Working
Paper 20007, 2014.
Hofmann, Eva, Erik Hoelzl, and Erich Kirchler, “Preconditions of Voluntary Tax Compliance:
Knowledge and Evaluation of Taxation, Norms, Fairness, and Motivation to Cooperate,”
Journal of Psychology, 2008, 216 (4), 209-217.
Kleven, Henrik J., Martin Knudsen, Claus T. Kreiner, Søren L. Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez,
“Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,”
Econometrica, 2011, 79 (3), 651-692.
Kountouris, Yiannis, and Kyriaki Remoundou, “Is There a Cultural Component in Tax
Morale? Evidence from Immigrants in Europe,” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 2013, 96, 104-119.
Lefebvre, Mathieu, Pierre Pestieau, Arno Riedl, and Marie Claire Villeval, “Tax Evasion,
Welfare Fraud, and ‘the Broken Windows’ Effect: An Experiment in Belgium, France and the
Netherlands,” IZA discussion paper No. 5609, 2011.
Levi, Margaret, “Of Rule and Revenue,” University of California Press, 1989.
OECD, “Principles of Good Tax Administration - Practice Note,” Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development, 2001.
OECD, “Tax and Development: What Drives Tax Morale?” Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2013, http://www.oecd.org/ctp/taxglobal/TaxMorale_march13.pdf.
Povoledo, Elisabetta, “Italy Tries to Get Tax Cheats to Pay Up.” New York Times. August 8,
2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/09/business/global/italy-tries-to-get-taxcheats-to-pay-up.html?_r=0.

23

Rees-Jones, Alex, “Loss Aversion Motivates Tax Sheltering: Evidence From U.S. Tax
Returns,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania, 2014.
Schneider, Friedrich, “Shadow Economies Around the World: What Do We Really Know?”
European Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 21 (3), 598-642.
Scholz, John T., and Neil Pinney, “Duty, Fear, and Tax Compliance: The Heuristic Basis of
Citizenship Behavior,” American Journal of Political Science, 1995, 39 (2), 490-512.
Slemrod, Joel, “Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (1), 25-48.
Slemrod, Joel, and Caroline Weber, “Evidence of the Invisible? Measurement Issues in
Analyzing Tax Evasion and the Informal Economy,” International Tax and Public Finance,
2012, 19 (1), 25-53.
Torgler, Benno, “Tax Morale and Direct Democracy,” European Journal of Political Economy,
2005, 21 (2), 525-531.
Waweru, Michael, “Remarks by Commissioner General Of Kenya Revenue Authority Mr. M.
G. Waweru. “ Kenya Revenue Authority. October 8, 2004,
http://www.revenue.go.ke/speeches/cgspeechnationaldisasterfund081004.htm.

24

