NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ALTERNATIVE LIBERALIZATION STRATEGIES

Robert E. Baldwin

Working Paper No. 2045

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2045
October 1986

Alternative Liberalization Strategies

ABSTRACT

This paper examines various strategies that have been
proposed for halting the recent drift toward protectionism and
restoring a more liberal trading regime. A number of groups and
individuals propose a multilateral approach aimed at immediately

reducing all forms of import barriers and export subsidies on a
nondiscriminatory basis across all commodities.

Others, who

doubt that all major countries are prepared at this time to
pursue this approach, favor a bilateral and regional strategy in

which those countries willing to liberalize conclude agreements
that are left open for others to join.

They believe that this

approach will eventually lead to multilateral liberalization.
Some groups believe that neither of these approaches will succeed
and that an aggressive stategy of quickly retaliating against the

unfair trade practices of other countries is the best way to

bring countries to the bargaining table for multilateral
negotiations.

The merits and problems of these various strategies are
considered as well as their prospects for implementation. The
importance of other conditions necesary for trade liberalization

such as satisfactory domestic and international macroeconomic
conditions are also discussed.
Robert E. Baldwin
Department of Economcs
University of Wisconsin

Madison, WI 53706

ALTERNATIVE LIBERALIZATION STRATEGIES

Robert E. Baldwin, University of Wisconsin-Madison

All the major trading blocs have expressed dissatisfaction

with the iiliberality of the present international

trading

system. The United States complains that most other nations have

failed to open their markets to the extent it has and that many

nations artificially promote exports to the United States by
unfair subsidization and dumping.
Members of the European
Community contend they are unable to penetrate the markets of
Japan and many developin6j countries because of protectionist

policies while at the same time Europe is being flooded with
exports of manufactured goods from these same countries.

In

response, Japan maintains that its competitive ability is based
on free market forces and that, with few exceptions, its markets

are as open as those of other major industrial nations.

The

smaller industrial nations also complain about the lack of open
markets in many countries, and the land-abundant members of this

grnup join the United States in strongly protesting the
protection given agriculture in the European Community and Japan.

The developing countries object to the high barriers erected in
the industrial nations against such labor-intensive manufactured

goods as textiles and to the high effective rates of protection
1

on many processed natural resource products.

This dissatisfaction with the existing trading system has
led to a number of proposals for halting the protectionist trend

of recent years and restoring a more liberal international
trading regime.

The proposals differ in three major ways: (I)

the economic, political, and social factors deemed important in

analyzing the prospects of greater liberalization;

(ii) the

degree of liberalization which their proponents seek; and (iii)
the extent to which they address the alleged causes of breakdown
of the postwar liberal trading order.

It is the purpose of this

paper to analyze and evaluate a selected number of these
proposals.

The first section of the paper considers two broad analyses
of

trading regimes

that emphasize different

factors in

understanding the prospects for a return to a more liberal
trading order: one stresses the economic power relationships
among trading nations and the second stresses the legal framework

in which trade and other economic institutions operate. Section

two discusses the importance of satisfactory domestic and
international macroeconomic conditions and• the next three
sections focus on alternative trade policy strategies for moving

toward a more liberal trading regime.

Section three analyzes

proposals for utilizing a multilateral approach, and section four

sets forth the arguments for proceeding on a bilateral and
regional basis toward more open trade.

The fifth section

considers a trade strategy of aggressive retaliation with
2

discriminatory taxes and subsidies to force certain countries to

abandon their beggar—thy-neighbor policies and accept a liberal
multilateral trading order.

The sixth section evaluates the

three approaches by considering the likelihood of their being
implemented and the extent to which, if adopted, they will serve
to move the trading community toward multilateral liberalization.

The last section puts forth another alternative, namely, holding
a negotiation on subsidies and other unfair trade practices, for

halting the spread of protectionism and setting the stage for
multilateral liberalization.

I. THE STRUCTURE OF NATIONAL ECONOMIC POWER, LEGAL RESTRAINTS ON
TRADE POLICYMAKING, AND THE LIBERAL TRADING ORDER

According to the theory of hegemonic stability associated

with such writers as Kindleberger (1973), Gilpin (1975), and
Krasner (1976), when a nation emerges as the dominant and most
economically efficient world power

as did the United Kingdom in

the 19th century and the United States in the years following
World War II -

that

nation finds it in its economic and political

interests to promote the collective good of global stability
through a liberal international trading and monetary regime.
When the hegemon begins to lose its dominant position, however-

as the United States has since the mid-1960s - the free rides
given to smaller states by the hegemonts liberal trade policy,
coupled with the most—favored-nation principle that this policy

involves, are no longer politically tolerable to domestic
3

economic interests.

Consequently, the early versions of this

theory predicted the inevitable collapse of the liberal postwar
trading regime and a return to general protectionism.

When the dire initial predictions of the formulators of the

hegemonic explanation of regime change failed to materialize,
modifications in the theory appeared. Keohane (1984) argues, for
example,

that independent states have complementary self-

interests that enable cooperation to take place within a
nonhegemonic environment.

Moreover, international institutions

such as the GATT facilitate such cooperation.

In his view, we

are now in a period of transition between the hegemonic
cooperation of the postwar period and a new state of affairs
characterized either by the current discord or by post-hegemonic
cooperation.

Whether discord or cooperation prevails in trade

matters depends, according to Keohane, on how well governments
take advantage of existing international institutions to make new

agreements on trade matters and to ensure compliance with old
ones.

He points to the Muitifiber Arrangement, however, as

evidence that the cooperative approach does not necessarily imply
the choice of liberal trade policies.

The late Jan Tumlir also viewed the problem of achieving
greater trade liberalization in broad political and legal terms.

According to Tumlir (1984), the disintegration of the postwar

liberal trading regime

is

due to legislatures'

improper

delegation of power to the executive branch of government,
coupled with the lack of either international or domestic legal
4

cont:rol over

the executive's international economic policies.

Tumlir criticizes the diplomatic authors of the GATT on the
grounds they misstated the case for a liberal trade regime by
emphasizing that the benefits would stem from the "concessions"

of other countries rather than from the efficiency effects of
lower import prices and they conceived of the GATT as a universal

organization in which the wishes of all members should be
satisfied.

In Tumlir's view, the constant negotiation required

to keep members satisfied has eroded the basic rules of the
organization.

While Tumlir was pessimistic about the prospect of returning

to a truly liberal international trading order, he observed some
offsetting tendencies to the excessive delegation of power to the

executive branch, for example, the increasing use by private

individuals of the courts to complain of the arbitrary and
unreasonable exercise of trade—regulatory powers delegated to
national executives.

He welcomed the U.S. Supreme Court's

decision in the Chadha case which declared the legislative veto

to be inconsistent with the constitutional division of powers

between the executive and legislative branches of the U.S.
government, seeing it as a step that will force Congress to be
more careful when it delegates powers to the executive branch.

II. MACROECONOMIC POLICIES AND LIBERALIZATION
While policy-oriented economists recognize the importance of

the political and legal foundations of an international economic
5

regime, most believe that it is possible to make a significant
move toward a more liberal international trading order through

practicable changes in existing economic institutions and
policies.

However, many economists, such as Bhagwati (1983),

Bergsten (1984), Donges (1984), Hufbauer and Schott (1985), and
Aho

and Aronson (1985) argue that this effort must involve much

more than simply changes in the trade area.

Because of the

increasing interdependence of the world economy, the prospects

for reducing protectionism depend not only on satisfactory
international monetary and capital—transfer conditions but on
domestic monetary, fiscal and regulatory conditions within the
major trading nations.

Current protectionist pressures in the United States
highlight the importance of understanding the interrelationships

between domestic macroeconomic policies and trade policy.

The

huge U.S. trade deficit, which reached $140 billion in 1985, has

sparked the introduction of some 200 trade bills in the U.S.
Congress, most of which their sponsors justify on the grounds
that they will help reduce this deficit. The Trade Emergency and
Export Promotion Act, introduced by Congressman Richard Gephardt

and Congressman Dan Rostenkowski, who chairs the Ways and Means

Committee which is the key House committee dealing with trade
legislation, typifies these bills.

The purpose of the measure,

according to its authors, is to "reverse the enormous shortfafl

in our balance of trade,'t which they attribute to "1) the
overvalued U.S. dollar,

2) the persistent growth of foreign
6

unfair trade barriers, and 3) the lack of a coherent U.S. trade
policy" (Rostenkowski and Gephardt, 1985). The bill mandates the

imposition of a 2596 duty on any major U.S. trading partner
(defined as a country that has over $7 billion in annual trade
with the United States) whose exports to the United States exceed

its imports from the United States by 6596 or its exports to the
world exceeded its imports from the world by 5096, excluding oil
trade.

The Senate version of the bill also requires the U.S.

Trade Representative to apply countersubsidies on exports of
agricultural products when other countries are subsidizing their
agricultural exports.

Unfortunately, the Congressmen's explanation of the causes

of the U.S. trade deficit is incomplete and flawed.

What is

worse, there is no reason to expect that the import—restricting

and export-promoting actions mandated in the bill would reduce
the U.S. trade deficit. As economists have been pointing out for
many years, trade deficits or surpluses are largely determined by

macroeconomic conditions.

The difference between a country's

total exports and imports of goods and services represents its

foreign investment which, together with domestic investment,
equals its aggregate investment.

Aggregate investment is, in

turn, by definition equal to aggregate saving, which is composed

of private saving plus the difference between government taxes
and government expenditures, in other words, government saving.

The U.S. trade deficit has its roots in a significant fall in

aggregate saving brought about by the increase in federal
7

government expenditures relative to tax collections.

Since

private saving has not increased to offset this decline in

government saving, the effect of the increased government
expenditures must be to crowd out either domestic investment or

net foreign investment.

The rise of interest rates as the

government has bid for funds to finance its deficit in an
environment of tight monetary policy has not only tended to
discourage private investment but has led to a return of U.S.

funds previously invested abroad and an inflow of foreign
capital.

Consequently,

the

trade balance

has

turned

significantly negative and the value of the dollar has risen
substantially compared to the late 1970s as the international
demand for dollars has increased.

Fortunately, within the last

year the dollar has depreciated significantly, a development that

is likely to reduce the pressures for protectionism considerably
once its trade—balance effects occur.

Unfair trade practices and the lack of a coherent U.S. trade

policy have had only a minimal effect on the U.S. trade balance,
since they have little effect on aggregate savings or investment.

Unfair trade practices can, of course, cause trade-balance
deficits in particular product sectors.

But under a flexible

exchange rate system, these deficits lead to

a marginal

depreciation of the dollar and thus offsetting marginal increases
in exports and decreases in imports in other sectors.
Similarly,

the

import surcharges required under the

Rostenkowski-Gephardt bill are unlikely to have an appreciable
8

effect on the U.S. trade balance. The increased profits and thus

saving by

import—competing industries which benefit from

protection will tend to be offset by lower profits and saving in

export sectors that are harmed by the protection. Furthermore,

most estimates of the revenue implications of proposals for
import surcharges conclude that any favorable balance—of-trade
effects will be offset by a further appreciation of the dollar.

Retaliatory actions by other countries would also make the
deficit problem worse.

While the U.S. domestic policies that have brought about the
t:rade

deficit have benefited export industries in other

countries, the outflow of capital from these countries represents

funds that might otherwise have gone for domestic investment
purposes. Furthermore, the high level of U.S. interest rates has

forced other countries to maintain higher interest rates than
they desire in order to control the capital outflow.

This has

depressed investment in such sectors as construction and thereby
further exacerbated their unemployment problem.

In Europe and

other areas where unemployment is a serious problem, it seems
clear

that better employment conditions •are a political

prerequisite to any significant trade liberalization.
A number of economists, besides emphasizing the need for the
better international coordination of domestic policies as part of

a strategy for significant trade liberalization, also argue that

trade—liberalizing efforts must be linked to international
monetary reform,

aimed at

limiting the risk of severe
9

misalignment of the exchange rates of the major countries,
reducing the volatility of these rates, and at achieving a long-

run solution to the debt problem of many developing countries.
They welcome the recent successfully coordinated efforts of the
major trading nations to bring down the value of the dollar and

reduce interest rates,
arrangements.

but

they advocate more

formal

Bhagwati (1983) and others also believe that

liberalization by the developing countries is unlikely unless
larger financial resources are made available to them to ease
their short—run debt repayment pressures. Some suggest tying at

least part of this increased financial assistance to trade—
liberalizing actions by the recipients.

III. THE MULTILATERAL APPROACH TO TRADE LIBERALIZATION

Proponents of the multilateral approach to liberalization,
including such recent articulators of this position as the GATT

"Wisemen's" Group (1985), the Scott Study Group of the Trade
Policy Research Centre (1984), Curzon and Price (1985), Aho and

Aronson (1985), Donges (1984), and Preeg (1985), believe that
reductions in all forms of import barriers and export subsidies
on a nondiscriminatory basis across all commodities will create
the most favorable conditions for high, sustained rates of income

and employment growth throughout the world economy and for
harmonious political relations among nations.

They view the

increased use of trade—distorting measures in recent years as a

regrettable consequence of governments' unwise macroeconomic
10

policies and reacting to political pressures from particular
economically inefficient industries, and they maintain that only
through a politically bold program of significant liberalization
in all trading sectors can the present creeping protectionism be
reversed.

Most advocates of this approach favor certain

institutional and policy changes to facilitate the liberalization
process and prevent the recurrence of protectionism.

Elimination of the use of voluntary export restraint
agreements (VERs) and orderly marketing agreements (OMAs) is high

on the agenda of proponents of multilateral liberalization.
These measures to protect domestic industries from injurious
import competition are condemned because they curtail trade on a
selective country basis and they involve the use of quantitative
restrictions. Advocates of multilateral liberalism would require

all safeguard actions to be brought within the most-favored-

nation framework of the GATT.

Most also argue that the

protection granted under such actions should only be in the form

of tariffs, and any tariff increases should be temporary and
degressive.
There

is,

however,

a general recognition that some

modifications in safeguard procedures are needed to moderate the

pressure to resort to selective protection. There is widespread

agreement on no longer requiring the country that increases
protection under GATT safeguard provisions to compensate other

countries with cuts in duties on other products, provided the
protection is temporary and degressive.
11

Retaliation would also

be ruled out in these circumstances.

More effective measures to facilitate the adjustment of
workers and capital owners in import—injured industries are also

advocated to ease the pressures for selective protection.

At

only the United States and Canada have special

present,

assistance programs specifically aimed

at

import-injured

industries, and recently a number of writers, such as Hufbauer
and Rosen (1986), Mutti (1985), Schultz and Schumacher (1984),
—.-..-

Q A I Li

rLi Q

£

ALL.

Q A ALL

T

4.-..-.
Al

Li .J. ¼.

/ iIUfQ
¼.) J ,

making these more effective.

£I

-....-.
QV

..-...4LA ¼.

4-t..

J. ¼.) 4. ¼. Al

£ ¼.)

._..-....
Li Q.-.1
.L

1. ¼.) £

A novel feature of some of these

proposals is that the adjustment assistance to workers would be

financed by converting existing quotas to tariffs or by
auctioning off the quotas.

To overcome the criticism that

additional unemployment payments encourage displaced workers to
remain unemployed for longer periods, Mutti (1985) and Lawrence

and Litan

(1986)

propose that,

in addition to extended

unemployment insurance payments and job retraining programs,

workers be given the incentive to take new jobs by partially

compensating them if their earnings are lower in their new
employment.

The Reagan Administration proposed in 1984 that

displaced workers be given wage vouchers that would enable
employers who hired them to claim a direct cash subsidy for a
specified percentage of the wages paid the workers. While more
evidence

is needed to reach a firm conclusion on the

effectiveness of this approach, one American experiment with wage

vouchers proved very disappointing (see Burtless, 1985).
12

In

addition to speciai assistance to workers displaced by import

competition, most proposals also include provisions, such as
relaxed merger standards, to encourage the restructuring of the
injured industry to enable it to become more efficient.

Supporters of multilateral liberalization regard the highly

protected textile and apparel sector as a prime candidate for
structural adjustment.

They would use the occasion of the

expiration of the Multifiber Arrangement III in 1986 to set in

place the procedures for bringing this industry back within
normal GATT rules.

World steel trade, which is becoming

increasingly subject to discriminatory quantitative restrictions,

would be liberalized.

Agriculture also stands out as a sector

where both domestic and international measures distort world

trade to a significant degree, and advocates of general
liberalization would progessively enlarge the scope for the
interplay of market forces in trade in agriculture. An initial

step would be to extend the GATT ban on export subsidies to
agricultural products.

Those who advocate a return to stricter enforcement of the

unconditional most—favored—nation principle have some
disagreement on the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). The

GATT Wisemen's Group and the Scott Group believe that these
tariff preferences have been of limited value to developing
countries and, indeed, have acted to divert the efforts of these

countries from reciprocal negotiations that would have yielded
them greater benefits.

Others, such as Preeg, are willing to
13

"graduate" the more advanced developing nations from tariff
preference and other forms of special and differential treatment
hut are reluctant to eliminate such treatment entirely.

There seems little doubt that a return to multilateral
liberalization cannot be effective without greater international

consensus on the appropriate use of domestic subsidies.

Most

U.S. officials and business leaders believe, for example, that

many countries are unfairly subsidizing their industrial
production, thereby causing disruptive import surges in U.S.
markets.

In response, these countries claim they are using

domestic aids for legitimate development or adjustment purposes.

The new Subsidies Code negotiated in the Tokyo Round is

considered by many to be too general to be of much use in
settling disputes that arise on this issue.

Complaining about

the subsidizing actions of other countries, the U.S. points to
the part of the Code in which signatories agree to seek to avoid
the use of subsidies that "may cause or threaten to cause injury

to a domestic industry of another signatory or seriously
prejudice the interests of another signatory or may nullify or
impair benefits accruing to another signatory under the General

Agreement." Other nations, in support of the use of subsidies,

point to the following statement in the Code: "Signatories
recognize that subsidies other than export subsidies are widely

used as important instruments for the promotion of social and

economic policy objectives and do not intend to restrict the
right of signatories to use such subsidies to achieve these and
14

other important policy objectives which they consider desirable."
As the GATT Wisemen's Group pointed out, there is a pressing need
for revision and clarification of the GATT rules on subsidies.

Besides calling for a strengthening of the subsidies code
and other codes negotiated in the Tokyo Round, proponents of a

revitalized multilateral approach to liberalization press for

various institutional reforms in the GATT.

Improved dispute

settlement procedures stand high on their list of needed reforms.

To replace the current practice of giving preference to
government officials as members of dispute settlement panels, it
has been proposed that members be drawn from a small list of non-

governmental experts who over time would be able to develop a
harmonious body of case law covering various types of disputes.

It has also been proposed that the countries involved in a
dispute no longer have the right to veto the acceptance of a
panel report by the members as a whole.

In addition, speedier

and more detailed reporting procedures have often been called for

as a means of increasing confidence in this method of settling
trade disputes.

Granting greater authority to the Director—General is
frequently proposed for a better-functioning GATT. For example,

the GATT Secretariat might be given the authority to collect
information on the extent of protection, monitor trade policies
for possible violations of GATT rules, and enter the negotiations
over disputes at an early stage.

In addition to strengthening existing GATT rules, those
15

pressing for a return to a more liberal multilateral approach
generally favor broadening the scope of trade covered by GATT
rules.

Services trade is the most frequently mentioned area for

'the extension of GATT rules, but trade in intellectual property
and high technology items and trade—related investment issues are

other fields proposed for greater coverage by GATT.

The

objective would be to reduce the use of many trade—distorting
practices that have arisen in these areas and thereby widen the

support for liberalization.

Negotiating new codes of good

conduct, as was done in the Tokyo Round for subsidies and
government procurement policies, is the most frequently suggested
technique for dealing with these subjects.

IV. THE BILATERAL AND REGIONAL APPROACH TO LIBERALIZATION

Some observers of the trade policy scene, such as Hufbauer

(1984) and Hufbauer and Schott (1985), believe that the
multilateral approach would have little impact

on the deeply

embedded distortions existing in the present world trading
system.

In their view, bilateral and pluriJ.ateral. initiatives

should be welcomed on the grounds that they will eventually
mature into multilateral liberalization. Aho and Aronson (1985)

and others favor efforts to liberalize on a multilateral basis

but are prepared to fall back to a bilateral and regional
approach if multilateralism fails.

All recognize that there has been a significant increase in
bilateralism and regionalism over the last forty years. The most
16

important regional trading organization is, of course, the
European Community (EC). Starting out with six member countries
in 1957, it now includes, with the recent admission to membership

of Portugal and Spain, twelve countries. Moreover, the Community

has negotiated special free trade arrangements with members of
the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) and with the former African,

Caribbean, and Pacific colonies of Community members.

Various

free trade groupings of developing countries, such as the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Latin

American Free Trade Area (LAFTA), have also been formed.
Recently the United States has also moved in this direction with

the Caribbean Basin Initiative, the free trade arrangement with
Israel, and the launching of negotiations aimed at a free trade

agreement with Canada, as have Australia and New Zealand with
their Closer Economic Relations Agreement.

The extension of

tariff preferences to the developing countries by the industrial

countries and the negotiation of nontariff trade barrier (NTB)

codes during the Tokyo Round that apply only to those members
that sign them are other illustrations of the abandonment of the
multilateral approach in dealing with trade isèues.

Advocates of the bilateral and regional approach, either as

a first-best or second—best means of achieving liberalization,
would build upon previous uses of this technique. For example,
given the strong opposition of some countries to the inclusion of

such issues as services trade and trade—related investment
requirements on the agenda of the next GATT round, they suggest
17

seeking selective agreements such as the Tokyo Round NTB codes

or, if this path is blocked, negotiating bilaterally on these
matters, using the threat of selective retaliation under national

laws to bring about such negotiations. Agreements reached would
be open-ended in the sense that any country would gain the trade

benefits of the liberalization which reduced its own barriers.

The hope is that, as these benefits increase with increasing
membership in an agreement, those reluctant to participate would
1
ICIJ.flu
I .fS
L

2_S_...__S.1. U JUl11
_2_ ——
111.L.L_2...
ieii ill
SC).Lt..,.S.
tI1

eventually

.L._

is multilateralized.

L.t_
L11 1L_..._11__.L.!_
Ii L)tIdI ILd 110fl

Even if this does not come

about, the proponents of the regional approach maintain that it
would produce greater liberalization than would efforts to pursue
multilateral liberalization directly.

V. THE AGGRESSIVE APPROACH TO LIBERALIZATION
Critics

of

the

bilateral

and regional

approach

to

liberalization fear that it encourages further breakdowns in the

multilateral system and the politicization of world trade.
Citing, for example, the resistance of the developing countries

to multilateral tariff reductions that gradually erode the
diversionary value of their tariff preferences, they point out

that vested interests quickly emerge to protect the economic
inefficiencies implicit in bilateral and regional arrangements,

making it difficult to turn such agreements into liberal
multilateral arrangements.

They further argue that some of the

countries taking advantage of the present lack of reciprocity in
18

t:he trading system will choose to remain outside of bilateral and

regional agreements that require them to open their markets to a
greater extent.

An aggressive approach to liberalization is therefore
proposed, and Democratic and Republican leaders in the U.S.
Congress are its most vocal proponents, as Ahearn and Reifman
(1986) point out.

The Rostenkowski-Gephardt bill outlined in

Section II illustrates this aggressive approach.

Congressional

leaders and, in fact, most members of Congress, believe that the

only way to restore open markets is, first,

to threaten

retaliation against countries that do not provide access to their

markets that is substantially equivalent to that offered by the
United States, and then to carry through with the retaliation if

they do not respond in an appropriate manner.

The retaliation

would take the form of discriminatory increases in U.S.
protection.

The existence of a substantial trade deficit with another

country or the failure of exports and imports to grow at
approximately the same rate from a particular base period is
regarded as sufficient evidence that the other country is not
providing equivalent market access.

As Cline (1983) points out,

this new notion of reciprocity is unilateral in nature and means
scrapping trade commitments agreed on in previous negotiations.

Another important element in the aggressive approach to

liberalization is vigorous retaliation against unfair trade
practices.

For example, although GATT rules do not presently
19

regard subsidizing agricultural exports as unfair, most members

of Congress favor matching the EC's subsidies of agricultural
exports with subsidies for U.S. agricultural products.

Various

forms of assistance to domestic sectors such as subsidies to high

tech industries or financial aid to depressed firms would be met
either by equivalent subsidies to U.S. manufacturers of the same

goods or by discriminatory protection that denies U.S. markets
for the products of these sectors.

The premise behind the aggressive approach to liberalization

is that making it impossible for countries to increase their

export markets by engaging in unfair trade practices will
eventually eliminate such "beggar—thy-neighbor" activities, since

the instigators will have nothing to gain by these actions. At

that point, each country will come to see that only through a
policy of open and reciprocal trade is it possible to obtain the

income and employment benefits of trade.

Defenders of the

aggressive approach maintain that the enforcement of current GATT

rules is now so lax and the rules so vague that it pays some

countries to try to avoid granting full reciprocity and to
undertake unfair trade practices.

VI. AN EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO LIBERALIZATION
The majority of economists in the industrialized nations and

many economists in the developing countries strongly favor
significant trade liberalization on a multilateral basis.

In

their view, historical experience and economic analysis clearly
20

indicate that multilateral liberalization promotes world economic

prosperity and growth whereas restrictionism is associated with
sluggish economic performance and periodic balance-of--payments
crises.

How then do we explain the existence of so much

protectionism and discrimination?

Economists frequently attribute it to the lack of political

will on the part of governments.

The implication is that while

governments may know that liberal trade policies are best for
promoting long-run economic welfare, they lack the resolve to
forego the political support of narrow special interest groups

who may lose in the short run from liberalization.

Although

there is merit in this explanation, the matter appears to be
considerably more complex than "lack of political will" suggests.

This explanation is also usually put forth with a finality that

discourages further research into the process of political
decision making and it may delude economists into believing the
solution to thwarting protectionism is easier than is in fact the
case.

On the basis of the political-will hypothesis, one tends

to conclude that greater efforts to educate public officials and
the public generally on the advantages of liberal trade policies

are the best way to restore multilateral liberalism.

However,

empirical work in the area of the political economy of trade

policy, such as that of Cheh (1974), Caves (1976), Lavergne
(1983), Baldwin (1985), and Anderson and Baldwin (1986), supports

the view that public officials support protectionism not only
because of political pressures from special groups but also out
21

of concern for equity and the adjustment problems workers face as

a result of industry—injuring shocks, perceived unfair trade
practices by other countries, and the need to maintain a strong
domestic industrial base. Consequently, to better understand how

liberal trade policies can be implemented, economists must

analyze the economic and political forces that shape the
pressures for protectionism.

The protectionism currently threatening the international

trading regime has its roots in the significant structural
changes in world production that have brought about a decline in

the dominant economic position of the United States,

a

concomitant rise of the European Community and Japan to
international economic prominence, and the emergence of a highly

competitive group of newly industrializing countries.

After

World War II the trading regime expected to develop involved a

sharing of responsibility by the major economic powers for
maintaining open and stable trading conditions.

However, the

unexpected magnitude of the immediate postwar economic and
political problems thrust the United States into a hegemonic
role.

U.S. economic dominance manifested itself in the trade,

finance, and energy fields, and enabled American producers to
establish predominant export and investment positions abroad.

Then by facilitating the reconstruction and development of
Western Europe and Japan and the industrialization of some of the
developing countries, U.S. hegemonic activities led eventually to

a marked decline in the American share of world exports and a
22

significant rise of import competition in both labor—intensive

sectors and certain o]igopolistically organized industries.
These developments also significantly diminished the leadership
authority of the United States.

Most governments in Western Europe responded to the shifts

in comparative advantage by providing injured manufacturing
industries with subsidies and injured agricultural sectors with

greater import protection and export subsidies.

Such behavior

was consistent with the active role played by the governments of
these countries in promoting reconstruction and development.

For the United States, where intervention to assist injured

industries was not accepted government policy, the adjustment
process has been difficult.

When the pressures for adjustment

first became noticeable in the late 1950s and early 1960s, it was

thought they could be handled by pressing for greater
liberalization to reduce the trade—diversionary impact of the
formation of the European Community and also to open markets in
Japan and the developing countries. After this proved, however,
to provide no more than temporary relief from the need for major

restructuring, and especially after U.S. macroeconomic policies

led to a substantial appreciation of the dollar,

government,

business, labor, and agricultural leaders began to adopt the now-

prevalent view that unfair trade practices are a major cause of
U.S. competitive problems.

By urging more vigorous enforcement

of U.S. statutes and GATT rules on unfair trade, they are able to

press for import protection and still claim support for the open
23

trading regime the United
World War II.

States did much to establish after

It is clear, however, that the U.S. government is

riot now prepared to begin the process of dismantling protection

in such key sectors as textiles and apparel or in steel.

There

is pressure for reform in agriculture but this is an export
sector for the United States.

It is not even evident what the

U.S. position on selectivity will be.

Nor can much in the way of real pressure for multilateral
liberalization be expected from the Community. Most members face

severe structural adjustment and unemployment problems, and a
strong ideological commitment to free market policies is lacking

in all but a few countries.

This means that chances are very

slim that the Community will agree to significant changes in the
GATT rules on agriculture. Reductions in Community subsidies for
depressed industries and for the development of high tech sectors

also appear unlikely in the foreseeable future.

The way the Community is organized works against the
development of any major initiative on liberalization. Although

its members negotiate as a group through the European Economic
Commission, the real power remains in the hands of the individual

states, any one of which can block major change in trade policy.

Given the highly divergent political, social, and economic

conditions of the member countries, particularly with the
addition of Greece and now Portugal and Spain, it is almost

impossible for the Community to take the lead in restoring
multilateral liberalism or, indeed, to support this initiative.
24

Japan is ]ikely to support significant liberalization but
not to initiate a move in this direction. Like the United States

in the 1920s, it is performing as a major trading power on the

export side but not on the import side.

Conventional barriers

appear reasonably low, but the existence of large companies that
cover a wide variety of industries and the tradition of consumer

loyalty to these companies make it difficult to break into the
Japanese industrial market.

Attitudes of "Buy Japanese' that

stem from efforts of this natural resource—poor country to become

a major industrial power,

an apparent aversion to unfamiliar

products, especially foreign goods, and language and cultural
differences further contribute to the difficulty in penetrating
Japan's markets for manufactured goods.

Thus, it is not clear

that traditional liberalization measures will, in fact, do much
to open Japanese markets.

The developing countries are still unwilling to undertake
significant liberalization themselves.

They are likely to

continue to push for further "special and differential treatment"
from the developed countries rather than for major liberalization

actions by them. The strong opposition of the developing nations

to efforts to liberalize trade in services or reduce traderelated investment requirements will also limit the scope of any
agreements on these issues in the next GATT negotiating round.

These positions of the major trading blocs make it unlikely

that we will see significant liberalization in the foreseeable
future.

To expect that, under present international economic
25

relationships, countries will somehow find the "political will"
to undertake this action seems to be wishful thinking.

Another

round of GATT trade negotiations is likely to begin shortly, but

other than extending GATT rules to services trade, counterfeiting, and intellectual property and introducing some changes
in the dispute settlement procedures, the main benefit from the
negotiations may be simply to hold back further protectionism.

At the same time GATT-sponsored multilateral negotiations
are proceeding, there are likely to be additional bilateral and
regional agreements negotiated.

The greater use of bilateral

negotiation to settle disputes seems to be a positive step in
maintaining an open and fair trading system.

The GATT dispute-

settlement procedures have proved too cumbersome for dealing with

the dozens of disputes on nontariff issues that exist at any one
time and mainly concern only a few countries. Some countries seem

to take advantage of this fact by engaging in clearly unfair
trade practices in the hope that the injured countries will be

discouraged from utilizing GATT dispute-settlement procedures
because of their time-consuming and costly nature. Responding on

a bilateral level to such actions and threatening retaliation
unless the dispute is settled quickly has proved a useful way to
deal with this problem.

In contrast,

the efficacy of bilateral and regional

agreements as a means of promoting greater liberalization is more
problematical.

In my view, these are not to be welcomed as a

step toward multilateral liberalization.
26

The motivation for

bilateral or regional agreements is usually not to achieve mutual
economic gains through liberalization but to strengthen political

ties through greater trade.

It is a way for nations to band

together to achieve greater collective political and economic
power.

There seems to be a strong desire to expand the size of

regional groupings in order to display greater political and
economic strength vis—à—vis other large economic powers, but
there is resistance to merging the major groupings to achieve

multilateral liberalization because this would undermine the
political identities that are the reason for the creation of the
trading blocs.

Thus, in the end these agreements may act as a

barrier to multilateral liberalization.

Pursuit of the aggressive trade policy approach also
involves considerable risk for achieving an open trading system.

This is most apparent in attempts of the large trading blocs to
effect change in each others' behavior by threatened retaliation.
To make a threat of retaliation credible, it is usually necessary

to publicize the alleged unfairness of the other's actions.

In

turn, the other trading power tends to publicize the threatened
action and its unfairness to deter the retaliation.

Typically,

the news media tend to give wide and sympathetic circulation to

their own country's national viewpoint and the dispute quickly
becomes a matter of national pride. It then is politically very
difficult for the government of a major trading power to accept

retaliation and discontinue the practices that provoked it.
Counter-retaliation is the most likely response. While a
27

retaliatory war may not necessarily result, the outcome is almost

surely not greater liberalization; an equilibrium with greater
distortion of world trade is more likely.

The retaliatory approach may be effective for a large
trading power when it is used against a small country. A small

country is generally unable to cause economic injury by
retaliating against a large trading nation, hut can be badly hurt

itself by aggressive actions by the large power. The difficulty
with such aggressive action is that, while it may force a small
country to stop certain practices, it is at the cost of worsening

political relations with the small countries that see it as
exploitation.

Large countries are often reluctant to pay this

political price since they rely on the support of small countries
in their power struggle against other large powers.

VI. A NEGOTIATION ON SUBSIDIES AND OTHER UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICES
The preceding evaluation of the main proposals for achieving

multilateral liberalization leads one to conclude that the most

likely scenario for the rest of the 1980s is a continued drift

toward further distortions of world trade and greater use of
discriminatory measures.

The main reason for this pessimism is

that the United States

the traditional leader of the push for

multilaerdl trade liberalization —-

is

in danger of abandoning

this role and concentrating on bilateral and plurilateral
agreements coupled with an aggressive trade policy stance toward
outsiders.

Given the unlikelihood that the European Community,
28

Japan,

or the developing countries will provide any real

leadership for multilateral liberalization, the

trading

world

will most likely be divided into large trading blocs supported by

special (often distortionary) relationships and with trade
between these blocs being regulated to a considerable degree.

As I have suggested elsewhere (Baldwin, 1985), another

strategy that might prevent this outcome is to channel the
dissatisfaction of the United States and other countries with the

present regime into a multilateral negotiation that deals
directly with the sources of this dissatisfaction.

This would

involve a comprehensive negotiation covering subsidies and other

unfair practices, such as those dealing with technical barriers

to trade and government procurement policies, that would be
conducted in a manner similar to the item-by-item technique
formerly used in tariff negotiations and in the determination of
items to be covered by the government procurement code.

In the

crucial area of subsidies, the objective would be to phase out
particular subsidies gradually, bind their level for specified

periods of time, or perhaps introduce export taxes (where
permitted) to offset the export—subsidizing element in domestic
subsidies.

The incentives for a country to engage in such

negotiations would be 1) the prospect of reductions in others'

subsidies in return for its willingness to reduce its own
subsidies, and 2) the threat that others will carry out the
countervailing duty actions permitted by GATT rules.

Each country would undertake a comprehensive evaluation of
29

all the subsidizing and other unfair practices of other countries

that it believes are causing material injury to any of its
industries, seriously prejudicing its interests, or nullifying or

impairing its GATT benefits.

Each participant would then make

specific requests of other countries on the reduction or offset
of these practices.

At the same time, each would announce the

countervailing duty and other actions it was prepared to initiate

if bilateral or multilateral negotiations were not successful.
If past experience is any guide, most countries would be willing

to enter into serious negotiations given the possibility that
many other countries may impose countervailing duties or other
restrictive actions against their exports.

The negotiations would begin with the "confrontation and
justification" procedure used in the Kennedy Round for claiming

exceptions to the 50 percent linear—cut rule.

Countries that

thought, for example, that a particular subsidy by another
participant was inconsistent with GATT rules would present their

evidence in a GATT meeting.

The subsidizing country would be

asked to explain the purpose of the subsidy, any government plans
to phase it out or modify it, and why it believed the subsidy was

consistent with the rules. After any changes in request lists or

plans for retaliation resulting from the confrontation and
justification procedure, the negotiating process would begin with

an exchange of offer lists specifying what,

if anything,

countries were willing to do to phase out particular subsidies,
bind other subsidies, impose export taxes to offset their injury—
30

(:ausing effects, or take other appropriate action to respond to

the concerns of other participants.

At this stage either a

"confronter' or "justifier on a particular subsidy could also

call for the formation of a GATT panel of experts to render a
non—binding decision on whether the subsidy was consistent with
GATT rules.

The negotiation would then proceed on both a multilateral

and bilateral basis with any participant having the right to
request a meeting with other participants to discuss a particular

subsidy or other allegedly unfair trade practice.

In some

instances, several countries would meet with a particular country

to seek its agreement to phase out, reduce, or otherwise modify
an allegedly unfair practice to meet the concerns of the others.
In

other

circumstances,

bilateral meetings may be more

appropriate, even if the impact of the practice extends to more
than one country. The GATT Secretariat would play an active role

in coordinating the negotiation and ensuring that all promising
lines of agreement were explored.

After these negotiations, each country would decide the
extent to which it was prepared to (1) modify its subsidizing and

other allegedly unfair practices and (2) proceed with counter-

vailing duty and other retaliatory actions against other
countries and particular practices.

For example, even if two

countries believed their subsidies on certain products were
consistent with GATT rules, they may each be willing to phase out
their subsidy in return for the phasing out of the subsidy by the
31

nther country.

For the United States, any such agreements

reached would be submitted by the President to the Congress for

approval and would include the necessary domestic implementing
legislation.

Industries covered by the agreements would be

precluded from seeking countervailing duties during the time
period covered by the agreements, just as industries covered by
the reciprocal tariff agreements negotiated in the 1930s were not

subject to the provisions of the 1930 Tariff Act that required

the President to set tariffs that equalized the cost of
production of U.S. and foreign producers.

The escape clause

provisions of Article XIX would still apply, however.

When

countervailing duties are imposed, they would be presented as
technical adjustments consistent with GATT rules rather than as
political actions involving matters of national pride.

A greater consensus on the proper role of subsidies may
emerge from the negotiating process that would lead to modifications in the Subsidies Code.

In particular, there seems to be a

need to better distinguish between domestic subsidies of the

beggar-thy-neighbor type and those that contribute to the
efficient growth of the world economy or can be justified for

export—oriented industries on the same adjustment grounds as

protection introduced for import—competing industries under
Article XIX.

Temporary and degressive subsidies should be

considered for export—oriented industries that are seriously
injured by export competition in third markets. A more difficult

problem is distinguishing between subsidies justifiable from an
32

economic viewpoint on infant-industry grounds and those aimed
simply at shifting market shares at the expense of collective
income in the trading community.

Most trade officials would

require that any permissible subsidies in this group be
temporary, degressive, and carefully monitored by the GATT
Subsidies Committee.

The negotiations may also lead to improve-

ments in the Standards and Government Procurement Codes and to
agreement on a new Safeguards Code strengthening Article XIX.

In conclusion, there are several reasons for considering a

GATT—sponsored negotiation on subsidies and other unfair trade
practices.

Most important, such a negotiation could channel the

present dissatisfaction of most countries with the existing
trading regime in a constructive direction that leads to multi-

lateral efforts to reform the system and away from the
destructive, go-it--alone direction in which many countries seem

to be headed.

The United States would at last get the

opportunity to deal directly and comprehensively with the
fundamental issue that is of most concern to many officials.

Executive branch officials are continually bombarded with
complaints from members of Congress and the business and labor
communities about the unfair trade practices of other countries

but, in many instances, have a difficult time coming up with
specifics that permit actions under GATT rules. They would be
able to deal with these pressures in a systematic fashion in such
a negotiation.

Japan and the European Community, who believe that most of
33

the complaints by other countries are unfounded, would be able to

confront the complainants before the international trading
community and force them to come up with substantive objections
instead of vague rhetoric. The power of the other members of the
GATT to force both the U.S. and the EC to modify what these other

countries regarded as unacceptably selfish positions was clearly

demonstrated in the Tokyo Round negotiations on the tariffreducing rule.

The developing countries and the smaller

industrial countries should welcome such a negotiation since it
will give them an opportunity to band together as a group to try
to modify certain market—contracting subsidizing practices of the
large trading powers.

The increasing use of bilateral negotia-

tions by the large trading blocs has put the developing countries

in a very weak negotiating position.

As a group, they will be

better able to defend their own subsidizing practices.

There are, however, significant risks in undertaking a
negotiation on subsidies and other unfair trade practices.
Failure to reach agreements that meet the main concerns of the
participants on the fairness issue could touch off a series of

countervailing and retaliatory actions that produce a trading

regime less satisfactory to all than the present one.

The

possibility of this outcome should be weighed not only against

the chances for a successful negotiation but against the
prospects for the trading system if no such action is taken.

34

REFERENCES

Ahearn, Raymond J., and Alfred Reifman (1986), "US Trade
Policy: Congress Sends a Message," in R. E. Baldwin and J. D.
Richardson (eds.), Current U.S. Trade Policy: Analysis1 Agend
and Administration (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.)

Aho, C. Michael, and Jonathan D. Aronson (1985), Trade Talks;
America Better Listen! (New York: Council on Foreign Relations).

and Robert E. Baldwin (forthcoming), "The
Kym,
Political Market for Protection in Industrial Countries," in All
M. El-Agraa (ed.), Conflict,__Cooperation__Economic Development,
and Integration: Essays in Honour of Professor Hiroshi Kitamura
(London: Macmillan Press).
Anderson,

Baldwin, Robert E. (1985), The Political Economy of U.S. Im_port
Poligy (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

Bergsten, C. Fred (1984), "An Agenda For The London Summit,"
Statement Before The Joint Economic Committee of the United
States Congress, May 14, 1984.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1983), "Rethinking Global Negotiations" in

Rethinkig Global_jiations, International Economics Research
Center,
Columbia
(New York;
Current Policy Papers, No.1
University, Center for the Social Sciences)

Burtless, Gary (1985), "Are Targeted Wage Subsidies Harmful?
Evidence from a Voucher Experiment,"
Industrial and Labor
Review, 39, No.1 (October), 105—114.

Caves, Richard E. (1976), "Economic Models of Political Choice;
Canada's Tariff Structure,"
Canadian Journal of Economics, 9,
No.2, 278—300.

Cheh, J. H. (1974), "United States Concessions in the Kennedy
Round and Short-Run Adjustment Costs," Journal of International
Economics, 4:323—340.

Cline, William R. (1983), "Reciprocity': A New Approach to World
Trade Policy?" in William R. Clirie (ed.), Trade Policy in the
1980s (Washington, D.C.; Institute for International Economics.)

Curzon, Gerard, and Victoria Price (1984),

"Is Protection

Inevitable?", Ordo, Band 35, 121—136.

Donges, Juergen B. (1984), "The International Trading Order at
the Crossroads," Working Paper No. 199, Kiel Institute of World
Economics.

Powe_nd the Multinational
Corporation: The_Political of Foreign Direct Investment (New
Gilpin,

Robert

(1975),

U.S.

York: Basic Books).

Hufbauer, Gary C. (1984), "The Unconditional Most—Favored-Nation

Principle: Should It Be Revived, Retired or Recast?", Monash
University, Department of Economics and Centre of Policy Studies,
Paper Presented at Conference on International Trade Problems and
Policies, Melbourne, Australia, February 13—14, 1984.

Hufbauer, Gary C., and Jeffrey J. Schott (1985), Trading for
Growth: The Next Roun of_1de_Negotiations, Policy Analyses in
International Economics, No. 11 (Washington, D.C. : Institute for
International Economics)

Hufbauer, Gary C., and Howard Rosen (1986), Trade Policy for

Troubled Industries, Policy Analyses in International Economics,
No. 15 (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics).

Keohane, Robert 0. (1984), After Hegemony: Cooperation and
Discord in the World Political Econojy (Princeton: Princeton
University Press)

Kindleberger, Charles P. (1973), The World in Depression, 19291939 (Berkeley: University of California Press).

Krasner, Stephen (1976), "State Power and the Structure of
International Trade," World Politics, 28, April.
Lavergne, R. P. (1983), The Political Economy of U.S. Tariffs: An

ElAl (New York: Academic Press).

Lawrence, Robert E., and Robert E. Litan (1986), Pragmatic

roaches for_Preservin9_Trade

(Washington, D.C.: The Brookings

Institution)

Leutwiler, Fritz, et al. (1985), Trade Policies for a Better

ure:__gposals for Action (Geneva: General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade)

Policies in Trade—Impacted
Industries (Washington, D.C.: National Planning Association).

Mutti, John (1985), U.S. Adjustment

Preeg, Ernest H. (1985), "Overview: An Agenda for U.S. Trade
Policy Toward Developing Countries" in Ernest Preeg (ed.), Hard
Bagaining Ahead: U.S. Trade _olicy and Developing Countries
(Washington, D.C. : Overseas Development Council).

Rostenkowski, Dan, and Richard A. Gephardt (1985), "Introduction

of Trade Emergency and Export Expansion Act,"

Letter to

CoLleagues, July 14.

Schultz, Siegfried, and Dieter Schumacher (1984), "The Re—
Liberalization of World Trade,"
Journal of World Trade, 18,

No.3, June/July.

Scott, Brian (1984), Has the Cavalry Arrived?, Special Report,
No. 6 (London: Trade Policy Research Centre)

Tumlir, Jan (1984), "International Trade Regimes and Private
Property Rights," mimeographed.

