                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INCENTIVE PAY AND BANK RISK-TAKING:
               EVIDENCE FROM AUSTRIAN, GERMAN, AND SWISS BANKS

                                           Matthias Efing
                                             Harald Hau
                                         Patrick Kampkötter
                                        Johannes Steinbrecher

                                        Working Paper 20468
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20468


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014




We thank Anil Kashyap and Thorsten Beck for their helpful comments at the NBER 2014 International
Seminar in Macroeconomics in Riga, Latvia. We are also grateful to the participants of the SFI research
day in Gerzensee and in particular to Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Philipp Krüger, Stevan Ongena, René Stulz,
Alexander Wagner for their helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Matthias Efing, Harald Hau, Patrick Kampkötter, and Johannes Steinbrecher. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Incentive Pay and Bank Risk-Taking: ¸˛Evidence from Austrian, German, and Swiss Banks
Matthias Efing, Harald Hau, Patrick Kampkötter, and Johannes Steinbrecher
NBER Working Paper No. 20468
September 2014
JEL No. D22,G01,G20,G21,G38

                                              ABSTRACT

We use payroll data on 1.2 million bank employee years in the Austrian, German, and Swiss banking
sector to identify incentive pay in the critical banking segments of treasury/capital market management
and investment banking for 66 banks. We document an economically significant correlation of incentive
pay with both the level and volatility of bank trading income–particularly for the pre-crisis period
2003—7 for which incentive pay was strongest. This result is robust if we instrument the bonus share
in the capital markets divisions with the strength of incentive pay in unrelated bank divisions like retail
banking. Moreover, pre-crisis incentive pay appears too strong for an optimal trade-off between trading
income and risk which maximizes the NPV of trading income.


Matthias Efing                                       Patrick Kampkötter
University of Geneva, GFRI                           University of Cologne
 & Swiss Finance Institute                           Albertus-Magnus-Platz
Bâtiment Pignon                                      50923 Cologne
40 Bd du Pont d’Arve                                 Germany
1211 Genève 4                                        patrick.kampkoetter@uni-koeln.de
Switzerland
matthias.efing@unige.ch                              Johannes Steinbrecher
                                                     Ifo Dresden
Harald Hau                                           Einsteinstrasse 3
University of Geneva, GFRI                           01069 Dresden
 & Swiss Finance Institute                           Germany
Bâtiment Pignon                                      steinbrecher@ifo.de
40 Bd du Pont d'Arve
1211 Genèva 4
Switzerland
prof@haraldhau.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20468
1     Introduction
In 2013 the European Parliament proposed new EU-wide legislation on bank bonuses. Likewise,
executive pay was scrutinized in the U.S. in the post-crisis years (e.g. the Say-on-Pay rule
included in the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act). Large bonus payments for employees in the banks’
financial market divisions were allegedly responsible for excessive risk taking. Limits on bonus
payments were justified as a way to curb risk-taking incentives (e.g. Dunning, 2010).
    Yet there is only scarce empirical evidence about the nexus between the proportion of per-
formance contingent pay and the amount of risk taking in financial institutions. One obstacle
to such an analysis is the lack of information about the bank’s internal incentive and bonus
systems. Reporting requirements are typically limited only to the CEO and board members
who may neither earn the highest bonuses nor make the most pertinent risk choices. This paper
exploits a large payroll data set on 12 million bank employee years to extract incentive pay
measures for 66 banks in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland in the period 2004—11. In partic-
ular, we are able to measure performance contingent pay in the most critical bank segments of
Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Markets at all levels of the bank hierarchy.
    Our analysis pursues four objectives. First, we document the importance of bonus payments
across bank functions and hierarchies in the Austrian, German, and Swiss banking systems for
the period 2004—11. We show that the Bonus Share defined as the average bonus relative to
the total salary decreased by roughly 20% across bank functions in the crisis period 2008—11
relative to the pre-crisis period 2004—7. The decrease is much stronger at approximately 40% for
the employees in the Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Market segments, even though
overall trading income did not decrease during the crisis period 2008—11.
    Second, we document the robust correlation of pay incentives with the bank’s trading income
and its volatility. On average, trading income in our sample amounts to 9% of the gross interest
income of a bank and shows a systematic correlation with both the equally and hierarchy-
weighted strengths of bonus payments in a bank. This positive correlation is particularly
pronounced in the pre-crisis period and extends to the volatility of trading income. By averaging
our pay incentive measure over a four-year period we attempt to mitigate concerns for reverse
causality whereby favorable trading profit realizations generate higher pay-outs of performance-



                                               1
contingent contracts. Nevertheless, averaging the incentive pay by itself is unlikely to solve the
endogeneity problem completely.
   A third contribution consists in a causal analysis for which we propose two instruments: If
banks vary exogenously in the degree to which they feature an "incentive culture", we can use
the bonus share in other bank segments, like retail banking or corporate banking, as proxies for
pay incentives in the bank’s capital market segment. To further validate this instrument, we
show that the bonus share in these functionally unrelated bank segments shows no significant
intertemporal correlation with annual trading income, which suggests that bank bonus pools are
indeed segment-specific. A second instrument consists in the share of employment outside the
capital market divisions relative to total employment. A bank with a large retail, private, and
corporate banking segment might monitor its traders with a diﬀerent intensity than banks whose
core business is investment banking. Previous research has found weaker bank governance to be
related to higher incentive pay (Fahlenbrach, 2009) and bank risk (Hau and Thum, 2009). Our
two instruments show a strong first stage correlation with the bonus share of a bank’s capital
market employees. The instrumental variable regressions generally produce larger coeﬃcients
for the role of incentive pay than the corresponding OLS regressions–suggesting that high
incentive pay causes both a high level and a high volatility of trading income.
   In a fourth step we analyze the trade-oﬀ between trading income and its volatility. It
is straightforward to show that, if trading revenue is generated mostly through self-financing
trading strategies without net capital requirements, the net present value (NPV) maximization
of the risk-adjusted cash flow of trading is equivalent to the maximization of its Sharpe ratio.
From the perspective of NPV (or asset value) maximization, the optimal incentive pay for a
bank’s trading operation should maximize the Sharpe ratio of trading income, defined as the
ratio of trading returns and their standard deviation.
   Our regression analysis suggests that bonuses paid to traders did not maximize the Sharpe
ratio of trading income in the pre-crisis period. Instead, large bonus payments seem to have
incentivized risk-taking that was excessive from the perspective of NPV maximization. Limited
liability of shareholders in combination with high bank leverage can rationalize this finding
whereby incentive pay aligns employee interests with that of shareholders in pursuit of equity
value rather than bank asset value maximization. Yet we cannot exclude that risk-taking


                                                2
incentives in some banks may have been excessive even from a shareholder perspective.
    For the crisis period 2008-11 we find that high-powered incentives are no longer associated
with a lower Sharpe ratio of trading income. The moderation of incentive pay following external
political pressure after 2008 may have contributed to a better value maximization of bank assets.
If pay moderation increased the value of bank assets, it should have served the public interest
even more so, assuming negative risk externalities under public bank guarantees.
    A limitation of the analysis is that we cannot observe the exact type of speculative activity
a bank engages in and compare risk-taking across a specific trading activity. We cannot exclude
the possibility that banks sort into heterogeneous types of trading activity that might require
diﬀerent optimal incentive pay structures. Yet if such specialization across diﬀerent capital
market activities underlies the observed correlation between trading income (and its volatility)
and incentive pay, it is unclear why our instruments of "incentive culture" in non-capital market
segments should correlate strongly with such a specialization. While a more conditional analysis
of bank risk-taking is certainly desirable, better microeconomic data on the speculative activity
within each bank is needed to undertake it. Unfortunately, the very limited public reporting
requirements of the banks in our sample do not allow such an analysis of individual bank asset
positions.
    The discussion of the literature in the next section and the tested hypotheses in Section
3 are followed by a description of the data in Section 4. Section 5 explores the structure of
incentive pay at employee level and aggregate bank level. Section 6 begins by characterizing
the correlation between pay incentives and the level and volatility of trading income. This is
followed by instrumental variable regressions about the causal link, and an estimation of the
marginal eﬀect of incentive pay on the Sharpe ratio of trading income. Section 7 concludes.


2     Literature
The 2007-8 financial crisis has ignited a political debate about what is often termed “exces-
sive” bank compensation practices. In Europe this has even resulted in EU-wide legislation
to cap the bonus pay of bank executives (European Parliament, 2013, page 201). A popular
referendum in Switzerland has tried to cap the highest executive pay package at 12 times the



                                                3
lowest salary (Federal Assembly, 2013).1 Financial sector pay has become a particular focus of
public discontent, because a substantial increase in compensation in the financial industry can
be observed in the run-up to the recent crisis (e.g. Philippon and Reshef, 2012, for the U.S.
banking industry). Moreover, Bell and Van Reenen (2010) document that about 60% of the
increase in pre-crisis extreme wage inequalities in the U.K. was due to the financial sector.
      The political debate is related to a broader academic dispute about the determinants of
executive pay in general, with two opposing views. A technological explanation in defense of
high remuneration focuses on changes in the marginal productivity of corporate leadership in a
competitive labor market for executives (Gabaix and Landier, 2006). This view is supported by
new cross-sectional evidence of CEO sorting by ability, pay, and firm size in Sweden (Adams,
Keloharju and Knüpfer, 2014). Philippon and Reshef (2012) argue that increased wages in the
financial industry may simply reflect changes in the working environment including an increase
in skill intensity, job complexity, and earning risks. Recent theoretical research focuses on
the competition for talented workers as a key factor of high salaries in the financial industry
(Célérier and Vallée, 2013). Bannier et al. (2013) suggest that bonus payments are increasing
in the intensity of competition for managerial talent. Moreover, companies seem to raise their
executives’ pay after losing executives to other firms (Gao et al., 2014). An opposing view
relates executive pay to corporate governance problems and the weakness of shareholder rights.
Hakenes and Schnabel (2014) suggest that bail-out expectations may induce steeper incentive
schemes, whereas bonus schemes become flatter if problems of eﬀort arise. While excessive
risk-taking may only manifest itself in the long run, short-run cash payouts can be enormous
and performance measures may not properly account for long-term risks. The pay of bank
executives in particular seems to have largely over-compensated top managers for what turned
out to be disastrous long-run equity returns (Bebchuk et al., 2010; Bhagat and Bolton, 2014).
      The issue of optimal incentive pay is particularly relevant for banks because of their high
leverage. Given bankruptcy costs or public guarantees for too-big-to-fail banks, even an incen-
tive contract that is optimal from the shareholder perspective (by maximizing the bank equity
value) may not maximize a bank’s total asset value and thus imply excessive risk-taking from a
welfare perspective (Bolton et al., 2014). While higher bank capital requirements appear to be
  1
      The proposition to curb executive pay was rejected by two-thirds of the voters.



                                                        4
the first-best regulatory intervention (Admati et al., 2010), restrictions on bankers’ equity pay
component have also been considered as a means of dealing with limited liability externalities
(Thanassoulis, 2012, Acharya et al., 2013, Bannier et al., 2013).
   Much of the U.S. literature has focused on equity compensation for CEOs and executive
board members, which generally implies a strong alignment of shareholder and executive inter-
ests. Bankers’ pay outside the U.S. and the U.K., and for lower-ranked employees relies much
more on performance-contingent bonus payments. These may feature pay-oﬀ functions of either
higher or lower convexity than shareholder equity. In both cases, risk-taking incentives may be
larger than is optimal for the maximization of bank asset value. Generally, the public interest
should coincide with the objective of bank value maximization if a functioning bank resolution
system can avoid public subsidies through eﬀective creditor bail-ins.
   Some research has also highlighted the role of governance frictions for a bank’s incentive
culture. Fahlenbrach (2009) shows that banks with weak corporate governance structures tend
to allow contracts with larger pay-for-performance components. Yet, weak governance could
also influence the quality of risk managements and thus impact bank risk taking and crisis
performance more directly. The nexus between weak bank governance and losses during the
financial crisis is examined by Hau and Thum (2009), who find considerably higher write-downs
for German banks with less competent boards.
   The empirical literature generally confirms a link between performance-contingent pay and
corporate risk. DeYoung et al. (2013) find larger systematic and idiosyncratic risk for cor-
porations with more performance-sensitive CEO compensation and Hagendorﬀ and Vallascas
(2011) show that they are more likely to engage in risk-inducing mergers. The evidence of
correlation may reflect a causal link between incentive pay and risk-taking or alternatively
follow from optimal contracts that stipulate more high-powered incentives in a high-risk en-
vironment. Evidence of this correlation is also available for the financial sector: Cheng et al.
(2010) show that total executive compensation is positively correlated with pre-crisis subprime
market exposure; Chesney et al. (2012) document that the pre-crisis incentive structures of
CEOs of U.S. financial institutions significantly aﬀected bank write-downs during the crisis.
Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2011) point out that stronger equity incentives for the CEO before the
crisis are (weakly) associated with worse performance during the crisis. At the very least, more


                                               5
high-powered equity incentives for CEOs do not seem to correlate with better management of
downside risks.
    Most of the literature has focused on CEO and board compensation in U.S. companies.
Yet, it is far from clear that most risk choices in the financial sector are made by top exec-
utives. Empirical evidence for non-financial industries suggests that non-executive incentives
matter for corporate outcomes (Oyer, 1998; Bova et al., 2013; Gill et al., 2013; Larkin, 2014).
Non-executive incentives may matter even more in finance where success is predicated upon
information asymmetries. Acharya et al. (2014) show that higher non-executive compensation
elasticities are associated with higher subsequent bank risk and lower subsequent bank value.
Bogaard and Svejnar (2013) examine the link between incentive pay and productivity in a
Central-East European bank. They find a positive correlation between diﬀerentiated incentive
pay and productivity, although the evidence for the quality of sales is mixed. Two special
financial functions have received extensive research about the link between incentive pay and
risk-taking, namely bank loan oﬃcers and fund managers. The introduction of volume-based
pay for loan oﬃcers is found to be associated with higher output and default rates (Agarwal
and Wang, 2009; Agarwal and Ben-David, 2013). Tzioumis and Gee (2013) reveal that non-
linear incentive designs for lower-level employees influence their actions, with adverse eﬀects
on organizational eﬃciency. On the other hand, Cole et al. (2011) point out that loan oﬃcers
facing high-powered incentives are more likely to outperform statistical credit-scoring models.
Empirical evidence on fund performance suggests that higher incentives correlate with riskier
investment strategies (Massa and Patgiri, 2009) as well as with superior performance (Agarwal
et al., 2009; Massa and Patgiri, 2009).


3     Hypotheses
This study focuses on the incentives of non-executives in the two bank functions of Trea-
sury/Capital Markets and Investment Banking. Considerable regulatory eﬀort is exerted to
isolate and limit the risk in these two functions from ordinary deposit-taking activity (e.g.
Dodd-Frank-Act, Chapter VII; or EU Regulation No. 648/2012). While the trading profits
are on average large, they also feature a high degree of volatility. Recurring large losses by



                                              6
“rogue traders” have invited additional public scrutiny of these bank functions and have also
triggered new theoretical work on optimal incentives for bank traders (Bijlsma et al., 2012;
Glode and Lowery, 2013).2 Yet, to our knowledge, there has been no empirical examination
of the relationship between non-executive incentives in capital market divisions and trading
profits.
       In a first step, we explore the existence of a positive relationship between high-powered
incentives and the level of bank trading income and distinguish two possible underlying chan-
nels. First, high-powered incentives may be required in a trading environment in which work
performance is highly dependent on eﬀort levels. Unlike eﬀort, trading income can be measured
and serve as a contractible outcome for the incentive contract. Second, bank incentive cultures
can vary for exogenous reasons related to bank governance, labor market characteristics of the
employees or the bank’s risk management quality. Any exogenous determinant of a bank’s
incentive culture should simultaneously influence the bonus shares in other (non-capital mar-
ket related) bank segments like retail banking, corporate banking and private banking. We can
measure the latter and use it as an instrument to capture a bank’s incentive culture. We expect
to find a positive eﬀect on the average trading income.

       Hypothesis 1: Pay incentives and average trading income

         a) Bonus payments in the capital market segment correlate positively with higher
         average trading income.

         b) A stronger incentive culture in a bank increases average trading income.


       The relationship in part a) between profitability-contingent incentive pay and trading prof-
itability is certainly influenced by reverse causality. High and highly variable trading income
will generally raise the measured bonus payments for almost any option-like incentive contract.
We seek to exclude (or at least reduce) such reverse causality in part b) by instrumenting the
Bonus Share in the capital market segment with the corresponding bonus share in the non-
capital market segments and the relative size of the non-capital market segments in the same
bank (see Section 6.3).
   2
    For example, the French bank Société Générale lost approximately 4.8 billion through the gambling of one
of their traders in 2008. Three years later, the Swiss bank UBS similarly lost approximately CHF 1.7 billion.

                                                     7
   In a second step, we explore the existence of a positive relationship between high-powered
incentives and the volatility of bank trading income.


     Hypothesis 2: Pay incentives and volatility of trading income

     a) Bonus payments in the capital market segment correlate positively with a higher
     volatility of trading income.

     b) A stronger incentive culture in a bank increases the volatility of trading income.


   Optimal contracting in a high-risk trading environment might necessitate higher pay in-
centives to ensure that employees stay vigilant and curb the risk to the corporation. This
explanation is consistent with a positive correlation predicted in part a). Alternatively, the
incentive culture of a bank (proxied by the bank’s Bonus Share outside the capital market seg-
ment) may exogenously influence if traders face high pay incentives. Those may entice traders
to increase profitability not (or not only) by higher eﬀort levels, but also by taking more risky
positions, which are, on average, compensated by higher expected returns.
   In a third step, we evaluate the trade-oﬀ between trading income and its volatility and
explore whether incentives are excessive, in the sense that they tilt investment choices toward
more risk and higher expected returns without increasing the total asset value of the bank.
In the absence of externalities, value maximization of corporate asset is the socially desirable
managerial choice. Let  denote the capital needed to finance the banks’ trading infrastructure,
which can generate (without leverage) an expected annual trading income (Π) growing at rate
, and a standard deviation of return on investment  Π = (Π). The net present value of
the trading business follows as
                                                 (Π)
                                     Π =                                                   (1)
                                            0 −  +  Π 
where 0 and  denote the risk-free rate and the market premium, respectively;  represents
the standard deviation of market returns; and  characterizes the correlation between trading
returns and market returns.
   Writing the risk equity premium in equation (1) in terms of the return variance Π illustrates
that the firm value is proportional to the Sharpe Ratio (Π)( Π ) or trading income whenever


                                                 8
the growth rate of expected trading income equals the risk free rates, hence 0 − = 0 But even
if we do not want to assume 0 =  we can argue that trading operations are special compared
to other corporate activity in the sense that both their expected income (Π) and the volatility
of that income Π are exceptionally large compared to either invested capital or labor costs.
According to the U.S. Commerce Department, the average ratio of annual corporate income
to total employment compensation for all U.S. firms has increased from 14% in 2000 to 23%
in 2011.3 Yet, the banks in our sample generate a median trading income of 119% of total
employee compensation in the respective trading division. The variability of trading income
relative to total compensation is also extremely volatile across years and banks.4 Similar to
most service sector activities, the physical capital required for trading operations is even more
negligible than labor costs. A bank’s trading position itself is generally highly leveraged: Under
normal pre-crisis conditions, a dealer bank might have financed trading positions mostly with
overnight repos with an average haircut of under 2%, thus allowing an eﬀective leverage ratio
of at least 50 (Duﬃe, 2011, page 32).
       It is straightforward to show that under conditions of leverage, value maximization for
the trading operation becomes equivalent to maximizing the Sharpe Ratio if expected trading
income, along with the standard deviation  Π , can be scaled by a leverage factor  À 1 so that
(0 − ) ≈ 0 Using (Π ) =  × (Π) and Π =  × Π  we obtain
                              (Π)        (Π)      (Π )
                 Π =   0 −         ≈          =          =  Sharpe Ratio
                          
                              + 
                                 Π
                                         Π      (Π )

where we define a constant term  =     0
       Value maximization of bank assets calls for pay incentives that maximize the Sharpe Ratio
of trading income. Yet limited liability of shareholders under excessive bank leverage may imply
that shareholders seek value maximization of their equity claim rather than total firm assets.5
As a consequence, bonus incentives may feature a much larger convexity of payoﬀs than is
socially desirable. Provided that the Sharpe Ratio is a concave unimodal function of incentive
pay, the optimal incentive contract is characterized by a zero marginal eﬀect of incentive pay
   3
     See http://www.politifact.com/corporatewages/.
   4
     The trading income relative to total compensation varies from −150% to 1920% for the 10% to the 90%
quantile, respectively.
   5
     Statements by bank CEOs about maximization of return on equity (rather than return on total assets) hint
at this conflict of interest.

                                                     9
on the Sharpe Ratio. By contrast, a negative (positive) marginal eﬀect of incentive pay on the
Sharpe Ratio signifies excessive (insuﬃcient) pay incentives from the social point of view:


          Hypothesis 3: Pay incentives and bank asset value maximization

          Bonus incentives conflict with bank asset value maximization if the marginal eﬀect
          of a bonus increase on the Sharpe Ratio of trading income is negative.


        We highlight that the problem of excessive pay incentives may be exacerbated if banks
can socialize the costs of risk-taking. For example, if a bank acquires a too-big-to-fail status
and/or private bank resolution fails because of political constraints, the bank may promise
larger bonuses to traders to influence their risk choices.6 Therefore, in cases in which incentive
pay appears excessive from point of view of bank asset value maximization, it is very likely to be
also excessive from a welfare perspective. If the marginal eﬀect of incentive pay on the Sharpe
Ratio is negative, bonus moderation should always be in the public interest. We examine the
evidence for excessive incentive pay in more detail in Section 6.4.


4         Data
4.1        Compensation Data

This paper draws on a large payroll data set from the financial service sectors of Austria,
Germany, and Switzerland. The data were collected by a major international pay consulting
firm from human resource departments of more than 120 banks in the three countries. The
banks surveyed include most of the largest ones. In the year 2008, for instance, our sample
comprises 24 Austrian, 68 German, and 31 Swiss institutions, which represent approximately
30%, 74% and 73% of all bank assets in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, respectively.7
    6
     See Bolton et al. (2014). Yet such non-resolvability should not apply to the large majority of banks in our
sample.
   7
     Our analysis observed strict confidentiality requirements; all employee-level data were analyzed only at the
premises of the pay consultant in a secured data room.




                                                       10
   The compensation data cover at least 80% of all employees in any bank and record the
contractual fixed Base Salary as well as the short-term performance-related Bonus payment
made to each employee. The employee data includes age, employment tenure, bonus eligibility,
hierarchy level, and the bank division in which the employee works. Unfortunately, the data
lack a unique employee identifier, which would allow us to track the employees from year to
year. Each employee is assigned to one of seven hierarchical levels and into either one of six
bank segments (Investment Banking, Treasury/Capital Markets, Asset Management, Corporate
Banking, Private Banking, Retail Banking) or various bank service functions (e.g. human
resources, communication, or IT services).
   The original compensation data extend from 2004 to 2011 and cover more than 127 mil-
lion bank employee years. We apply three filters to the raw data. First, we discard 681 455
observations for employees in bank service functions like IT services, communication, human
resources, etc. Second, a further 67 960 observations were not eligible for bonus payments and
are therefore ignored. These restrictions may apply to recently recruited employees in particu-
lar. By contrast, employees eligible for bonus payments are retained and their bonus is assumed
to be zero if the bonus payment is recorded as missing. Third, we discard 4 708 extremely low
compensation levels with a base salary below 24 000. These positions correspond to low-paid
service functions like contact center employees and are excluded from our analysis. In order to
discard data outliers that might be simple reporting errors, we also winsorize the 10 smallest
and largest observations for Age, Tenure, Base Salary, and Bonus.
   Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the retained sample, which covers annual observa-
tions (obs.) for Austria (31 673), Germany (372 151), and Switzerland (112 662). Our analysis
focuses on the two most critical banking functions from a risk management perspective, namely
Investment Banking (12 343 obs.) and Treasury/Capital Market (34 977 obs.). We refer to
these as the capital market segments; they generate a bank’s trading income. By contrast, the
banks’ Asset Management segments (21 188 obs.) manage client accounts. Other bank seg-
ments of lesser importance for a bank’s risk management are Corporate Banking (53 685 obs.),
Private Banking (75 547 obs.) and Retail Banking (318 746 obs.); all three feature weaker
incentive pay structures.
   The yearly Total Salary is defined as the sum of Base Salary and (cash) Bonus. A simple


                                              11
proxy for the strength of incentive pay is the Bonus Share, as the ratio between the (end of the
year) Bonus and the yearly Total Salary. The average Bonus Share increases from 5% for the
lowest Hierarchy Level 1 to 46% for the highest Hierarchy Level 7.
   The Bonus Share varies considerably across bank segments. In Retail Banking, the bonus
payment accounts for only 8% of the total salary, whereas the Bonus Share is 15% in Corporate
Banking, 19% in Private Banking, and reaches an average of 23%, 23%, and 24% in the segments
Investment Banking, Treasury/Capital Markets and Asset Management, respectively. We also
note that the standard deviation of the Bonus Share is highest at 20% in the Investment
Banking and Treasury/Capital Markets segments.
   Unlike in the U.S., granting stock options to middle and senior bank management is not
generally practiced in Austria, Germany, or Switzerland. However, some of the larger listed
Swiss banks pay out part of their bonuses in bank shares at a discount. Such stock grants
are not part of our Bonus statistics, which are defined as the annual, short-term performance-
related cash component paid out. We ignore additional equity-based incentives as less than 1%
of employees are entitled to pay in the form of equity shares.
   During the 2007—8 financial crisis, banks faced considerable public criticism about their
incentive systems. Large bonus payments in particular came under political attack. Figure
1 plots the Bonus Share for all 47 320 employee-year observations in the two capital market
segments (i.e. Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Markets) as a function of the Base
Salary on a log scale. Observations for the pre-crisis years 2004—7 are plotted in blue and crisis
(or post-crisis) observations in red. Two observations follow directly from visual inspection.
First, the dispersion of the Bonus Share along with the average bonus share increases (almost
linearly) in the (log) Base Salary. Second, two quadratic functions fitted to pre-crisis and crisis
observations, respectively, show a roughly 40% lower slope for the latter period. The Bonus
Share diminishes for all bank employees in the capital market segments in similar proportions,
which amounts to a much larger total salary loss for employees with a high base salary. The
2007—8 financial crisis brought about a substantial adjustment of incentive pay in the capital
market segments of banking.
   Table 2, Panel A, reports aggregate statistics for capital market segments and tests for
diﬀerences between the pre-crisis years 2004—7 and the crisis years 2008—11. The average Base


                                                12
Salary increased by 8 109 or 22%, whereas the average Bonus decreased by 33 961 or 50%.
These changes are statistically highly significant and justify a separate analysis of the nexus
between incentive pay and risk-taking focused on the pre-crisis period. It is interesting to
highlight that the substantial decrease in the Bonus Share did not occur against a decrease
in trading income. Table 2, Panel B, compares the (log of the) average trading income for
the pre-crisis period with the crisis years and Figure 2 provides the corresponding graphical
representation. Average trading income did not decrease in spite of the drastic reduction in
Bonus Share. This suggests, that the incentive pay moderation in Investment Banking and
Treasury/Capital Market segments occurred mostly under external political pressure. In the
following section, we discuss the trading income data in more detail.


4.2       Bank Trading Income and its Volatility

In this paper we focus on Trading Income as a function of a bank’s incentive pay structure.
The capital market activity of a bank provides numerous trade-oﬀs between risk and return–
hence trading income and its variability amount to a proxy of bank risk-taking in financial
markets. Our initial bank sample is extracted from Bankscope and includes all reporting
Austrian, German, and Swiss banks with total assets above 300 million in the year 2008. The
Bankscope sample covers a slightly larger period than our payroll data set and also includes
the year 2003. The sample overlap comprises 66 banks that report compensation data and
annual relative trading income for at least one year in 2003—11. Table 3 provides the summary
statistics on this bank sample. The relative trading income is available for a total of 365 bank
years. The bank size ranges from approximately 400 million for the smallest bank to more
than 15 trillion for the largest with an average size of 101 billion in bank assets.8
       Trading income can be expected to increase in the scale of the financial market activity of a
bank. We use the Gross Interest Income as denominator for Trading Income.9 In the absence of
any own account trading, Trading Income as a percentage of Gross Interest Income should be
   8
     Reported extreme asset values here are rounded in order not to disclose the identity of the banks in our
sample.
   9
     The banks in our sample follow diﬀerent accounting standards, which makes total bank assets a problematic
denominator for comparison. The income-orientated normalization based on gross interest income should be a
better procedure for scaling Trading Income and is applied in other recent studies (Moshirian et al., 2011).



                                                     13
zero. Trading Income is on average positive for the 365 bank-year observations in our sample,
with a mean of 859% of Gross Interest Income. Relative Trading Income is also highly volatile,
with a standard deviation of 2096. The ratio is highly positively skewed, which suggests that
a logarithmic transformation should oﬀer better small-sample properties in a linear model that
relates relative trading profits to pay incentives. We therefore define the dependent variable
Log Relative Trading Income as the (natural) log of (Relative Trading Income + ), where the
parameter  = 1824 is chosen to reduce the skewness of the relative income ratio to zero.
Table 2, Panel B, reports the test statistics for a comparison of Log Relative Trading Income
across the pre-crisis and crisis period. The 179 yearly observations of the crisis period suggest
a slightly higher average log trading income at 314 compared to 311 for 186 observations in
the pre-crisis period, but the diﬀerence is statistically insignificant.
   The volatility of Trading Income relative to Gross Interest Income is calculated as the
standard deviation of Relative Trading Income over the pre-crisis period (2003—7) and the
crisis period (2008—11), respectively. Any value computed on the basis of fewer than three
observations is set to missing. Positive skewness of the standard deviation of relative trading
income again suggests a logarithmic transformation. We thus define the Log Standard Deviation
(SD) of Relative Trading Income as the natural logarithm of (standard deviation of Relative
Trading Income + ), where a parameter  = 005 implies a logarithmic transformation to a
zero skewness of the volatility measure.
   While a higher trading income is desirable from a shareholder perspective, its volatility is
clearly undesirable if the corresponding return contains a systematic component. How much
systematic risk is embodied in the banks’ trading income is diﬃcult to measure because trading
income for most banks is reported only at an annual frequency. We can nevertheless report a
pooled estimate of 0404 (0530) for the correlation  between annual relative trading income
returns and the German (European) benchmark index DAX (Eurostoxx50). Both point esti-
mates are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero and support the assumption that trading
income embodies a significant systematic risk component for which shareholders will demand
a higher expected return.




                                                 14
5     Incentive Pay Structures
5.1    Incentive Pay at the Employee Level

Before aggregating employee level pay incentives, it is interesting to examine them across bank
segments and hierarchy levels. Table 4 reports employee-level regressions for the Bonus Share
separately for the pre-crisis years 2004—7 and the crisis (and post-crisis) years 2008—11. Columns
(1) to (4) use the full sample with observations from all six bank segments, while columns (5)
and (6) use only observations from the two capital market segments Treasury/Capital Market
and Investment Banking.
    Columns (1) and (2) estimate the relationship between the Bonus Share and the Log Base
Salary for the pre-crisis period 2004—7 and the consecutive crisis years 2008—11. The specifica-
tion includes the quadratic term Log Base Salary Squared, but no fixed eﬀects. Specifications
(3) and (4) document the incentive pay structure along fixed eﬀects for each of the six bank
segments and along bank hierarchy levels. All fixed eﬀects capture diﬀerences in Asset Manage-
ment and Hierarchy Level 1 as the reference groups without a dummy. Variations of the Bonus
Share in terms of year of observation, employee age and tenure are captured by additional dum-
mies, not reported. During the pre-crisis period 2004-7 represented in column (3), the Bonus
Share (relative to Asset Management) is more than 79% and 76% lower in the Retail Banking
and Corporate Banking segments, respectively. By contrast, Private Banking and Investment
Banking show statistically insignificant diﬀerences to the incentive pay in Asset Management.
Only employment in Treasury/Capital Markets secured, on average, a 34% higher bonus share.
The financial crisis changed this ranking. As column (4) shows, Asset Management becomes
the bank segment with the highest Bonus Share for the period 2008—11; Investment Banking
and Treasury/Capital Markets trail behind by a 43% and 5% lower Bonus Share, respectively.
Yet the three latter bank segments preserve a more than 4% higher Bonus Share than Retail
Banking and Corporate Banking. Diﬀerentiation of the Bonus Share is still stronger across
hierarchy levels. The hierarchy fixed eﬀects climb from 3% for Hierarchy Level 3 to 457% for
Hierarchy Level 7 in the pre-crisis data. This steep hierarchical structure of incentive pay is
flattened for the period 2008—11, in which the top Hierarchy Level 7 is associated with a Bonus
Share top-up of (only) 256%.


                                               15
    The regressions reported in columns (5) and (6) focus only on employees in the two capital
market segments; only observations in Investment Banking are marked by a dummy. The
specifications include Log Base Salary and its squared value as additional control variables. We
note that the Log Base Salary is a statistically insignificant control for the Bonus Share after
controlling for the other fixed eﬀects listed in Table 4. A higher Log Base Salary translates into
a higher bonus (for any given Bonus Share), but not automatically into a higher Bonus Share
conditional on the other fixed eﬀects. A roughly 2% lower Bonus Share for Investment Banking
employees relative to those in the Treasury/Capital Markets segment during the pre-crisis period
is confirmed. However, this incentive diﬀerence vanishes during the 2008—11 period. Similarly,
the average Bonus Share top-up associated with the highest Hierarchy Level 7 diminishes from
142% to 111% within the reference group of employees in the capital market segment. We also
note that the explanatory power of our observed variable drops from an R-squared of 442%
in the pre-crisis period to only 257% for the crisis period. This suggests that incentive pay
diﬀerentiation not captured by our regressors increased considerably.


5.2      Incentive Pay at the Bank and Bank Segment Level

Most of the empirical literature on bank risk-taking is based on compensation data from board
members or CEOs because of the corresponding reporting requirements. Yet in practice, most
material risk-taking decisions are likely to be taken at a lower level of the bank hierarchy. The
data from compensation surveys used in this paper allow for a much broader measurement of
incentive pay using base pay and bonus pay data from all bank hierarchy levels. Our objective
is to aggregate the employee data to a sensible measure of risk-taking incentives at the bank
level.
    The most straightforward approach consists of defining an Equally-Weighted Bonus Share
and an Equally-Weighted Base Salary as

                                                 1       X
                      (  ) =                         ()
                                                
                                                       ∈( )
                                                 1       X
                      (  ) =                         ()
                                                
                                                       ∈( )


respectively. The terms  () and  () denote a survey observation 


                                               16
from the set (  ) of all  bank employee observations in the Investment Banking and
Treasury/Capital Market segments of bank  sampled during one of the two periods  which
represent the four pre-crisis years 2004—7 and the four (post-)crisis years 2008—11. The year-
to-year variation in the bank-level bonus share may reflect less the strength of the (ex-ante)
incentive system than the favorable realization of bank profits. Defining the bank-level bonus
share as the time average over the four consecutive years reduces this reverse causality from
bank profitability to the measured bonus share.
   A second measure of the bank-level risk incentives may account for the fact that the influence
on risk-taking decisions may increase with the hierarchy level of an employee. If we are willing
to assume that his/her relative influence on bank risk-taking is proportional to the average
hierarchy-specific total salary, we can define hierarchy weights (  ) accordingly. For the
aggregate weight sum
                                              X
                                    =               (()  )
                                            ∈( )

of all employee observations in the Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Market segments
of bank  in period  we can define the Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share and the Hierarchy-
Weighted Base Salary as

                                         1        X
              (  ) =                         (()  ) ×  ()
                                        
                                                ∈( )
                                      1           X
               (  ) =                        (()  ) ×  ()
                                     
                                                ∈( )

respectively. These latter definitions put more weight on the Bonus Share of employees at
higher levels of responsibility. The underlying assumption here is that marginal influence on
risk choices corresponds to the total salary of the bank employee. The following regressions
use the (EW or HW ) Bonus Shares averaged over the pre-crisis period 2004—7 and the crisis
period 2008—11 as the main variable of interest. As dependent variables we use either the annual
(relative) trading income or the volatility of trading income computed as its standard deviation
within the two periods. To enlarge the sample by one year, we add information about trading
income in 2003.
   Figure 3 is a graphical representation of the bonus share in investment banking and capital
management for 57 banks, with pre-crisis values on the x-axis and crisis values on the y-

                                                 17
axis. The Equally-Weighted (EW) and Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Bonus Shares are depicted
in Figures 2a and 2b, respectively. Bank-level Bonus Shares are predominantly below the 45-
degree line for both measures of the bonus share. Yet we find considerable persistence of the
bank-level bonus share across both periods with a time correlation of 055 (EW Bonus Share)
and 057 (HW Bonus Share). Also notable is the wide dispersion of the bank-level bonus
share, which ranges from almost zero to a maximum above 60%. The correlation between the
Equally-Weighted and Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share is very high at 097.
   Most of the literature has focused on CEO or board incentives. It is therefore interest-
ing to measure the correlation between the CEO or management board bonus share and the
Equally-Weighted or Hierarchy-Weighted Bank Bonus Share. We use hand-collected data to
calculate the average bonus share for a total of 24 bank CEOs and 29 management boards.
The correlation of the bonus share of the management board with the Equally-Weighted and
the Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share at the bank level is 047 and 050, respectively. For the
CEO bonus share, this correlation drops to only 037 and 043 for the Equally-Weighted and
Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share at the bank level, respectively. Hence, measuring incentive
pay exclusively at the level of the management board or CEO does not proxy bank-level risk
incentives very well.


5.3    Bank Incentive Culture and its Covariates

What determines the large cross-sectional variation in Bonus Share shown in Figure 3? This
section discusses some simple hypotheses related to the covariates of a bank’s bonus culture.
First, we characterize the incentive culture of a bank in terms of the EW Bonus Share in the
capital market (Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Markets) and in non-capital markets
segments (Retail Banking, Corporate Banking, Private Banking), respectively. In addition, we
define the bank-internal standard deviation of the bonus share across all employees (STD Bonus
Share) for both the capital market and non-capital market segments. The STD Bonus Share
captures the diﬀerentiation of the bonus payments within a bank segment.
   Table 5 reports (below the diagonal) the univariate correlations between these four dimen-
sions of a bank’s incentive culture in rows and columns (1) to (4). The number of observations
for each correlation are stated in the upper triangle of the matrix and correlations significantly


                                               18
diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level are reported in bold print. The EW Bonus Share in the cap-
ital market functions correlates at 059 strongly with the EW Bonus Share in the non-capital
market segments. It also features a strong correlation at 053 and 060 with the variability of
incentive pay across bank employees (STD Bonus Share) in the capital and non-capital market
segment, respectively. Strong performance related pay therefore transcends bank divisions and
correlates with internal diﬀerentiation of bonus pay. If bank trading desks engage in similar
activities, then theories of optimal contracting are diﬃcult to reconcile with the large observed
variation of incentive pay across banks and its strong correlation across diﬀerent business seg-
ments within a bank.
   One plausible determinant of incentive pay is bank governance, which we characterized by a
State Bank Dummy (row 5), by the variables Financial Experience Supervisory Board (row 6),
Foreign Experience Supervisory Board (row 7), Capital Market Experience Management Board
(row 8), share of directors with Political Aﬃliations on the executive board (row 9) and Em-
ployment Other Segments (row 10) as the employment share of non-trading divisions relative to
total bank employment. Our proxies for Financial Experience, Foreign Experience and Capital
Market Experience of the supervisory or management board are based on biographical informa-
tion and are averaged over all board members as explained in Hau and Thum (2009). Generally,
proxies for better governance correlate negatively with the Bonus Share in the capital market
segment, which mirrors the finding in Fahlenbrach (2009). Missing observations for many banks
imply that these correlations are often not statistically significant at the conventional 5% level.
   Employee labor market characteristics can also influence the role of incentive pay. Younger
and more mobile bank employees (with marketable skills) might command a higher bonus share
either to be hired or retained. We therefore measure the Average Age (row 11) and Average Job
Tenure (row 12) of all reported employees in the capital market segment. Both measures show
a statistically significant negative correlation with the EW Bonus Share at −040 and −028,
respectively.
   Ellul and Yerramilli (2013, p. 1763) argue that executive incentive pay and the quality of
risk management are complementary if the latter provides a hedge or insurance against excessive
risk taking. We measure the influence of risk managers by their average total compensation
(Average Compensation of RM, row 13) and their average hierarchy level (Average Hierarchy


                                                19
Level of RM, row 14). Both variables should proxy the power of risk managers within the
bank and correlate strongly with the role of incentive pay in the capital market division. Thus,
we confirm the complementarity of high-powered pay incentives in trading and human capital
investment in risk management.


6     Incentive Pay and Trading Income
6.1    Trading Income Levels

In a first step we seek to explore the relationship between incentive pay and the average prof-
itability of a bank’s trading operation. The dependent variable is the Relative Trading Income,
defined as the logarithmic transformation of the ratio of annual Trading Income and Gross
Interest Income in the same year. The independent variables are the bank-level Bonus Share
and the Base Salary. Additional control variables are bank size, measured by Log Assets, and
the Net Loans/Asset ratio as a control for bank structure. Robust standard errors are clustered
at the bank level.
    Table 6, Panel A, reports the regression results for the Equally-Weighted (EW) Bonus Share
and the Equally-Weighted (EW) Base Salary and Panel B reports the corresponding hierarchy-
weighted (HW) pay statistics. Columns (1) to (3) in Table 6 focus on the pre-crisis period
2003—7, while columns (4) and (5) use the full sample of income observations from 2003—11. As
the bank-level Bonus Share and Base Salary might be measured more precisely for banks with
a large number of survey observations, we also use weighted ordinary least squares (WOLS)
with bank weights equal to the square root of the number of bank observations in a bank’s
capital market division in any period. This also amounts to giving more weight to large banks
with more employees in their capital market divisions.
    For the pre-crisis period 2003—7, the OLS regression in Table 6, Panel A, column (1) shows
a positive and statistically significant coeﬃcient of 2028 for the Equally-Weighted Bonus Share
and a negative coeﬃcient of −1501 for the Equally-Weighted Base Salary. The correlation
between the Relative Trading Income and the Bonus Share is economically significant: A one-
standard deviation increase in the Equally-Weighted Bonus Share (= 014) is associated with




                                              20
an increase in Relative Trading Income by more than two-thirds of one standard deviation.10
The weighted ordinary least squares (WOLS) specification in column (2) shows a very similar
coeﬃcient of 191, which is also statistically significant–suggesting that the positive correlation
between trading profits and pay incentives is as pronounced among larger banks. The coeﬃcient
for Log Assets in column (1) is statistically significantly negative with a value of −0103 A
bank size increase by one standard deviation (= 185) reduces the Relative Trading Income
by almost 50% of one standard deviation. Thus, Relative Trading Income features decreasing
economies of scale. Qualitatively similar evidence based on actual trading data is provided by
Hau (2001) in a study of own-account trading by German bank dealers. This finding mirrors
a negative correlation between fund size and fund performance found in some mutual fund
research (Chen et al., 2004).
       The random eﬀects specification in column (3) produces very similar point estimates for the
coeﬃcients even though the standard errors are slightly higher.
       The regression results for the extended period 2003—11 reported in columns (4) and (5)
show statistically weaker results for a positive relationship between Relative Trading Income
and the Equally-Weighted Bonus Share in spite of a larger number of observations. However,
the relationship remains significant at the 1% level for the weighted OLS regression in column
(5). A weaker link may be due to much tighter risk controls during the crisis or diminished pay
incentives documented in Section 5.
       Table 6, Panel B, repeats the regressions in Panel A for the Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Bonus
Share and Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Base Salary. The standard deviation of the Hierarchy-
Weighted Bonus Share is at 016 for the period 2003—7 and approximately 14% higher than
the standard deviation of the Equally-Weighted Bonus Share, which implies that the smaller
coeﬃcient of 1853 in column (1) implies the same level of economic significance. Overall, the
equally weighted and hierarchy-weighted incentive measures give very similar results. This is
not surprising, considering their high correlation.
  10
    In the pre-crisis period, the standard deviations of EW Bonus Share and of (Log) Relative Trading Income
are 014 and 040, respectively. Hence: 2028 · 014040 = 071 ≥ 23




                                                    21
6.2       Variability of Trading Income

It has long been recognized that high leverage typical of banks in combination with the limited
liability of shareholders implies that the latter prefer excessive bank risk (Admati et al. 2010),
which no longer maximizes a bank’s total asset value but shareholder value. Incentive pay
is often regarded as the tool by which shareholders align their interests with those of bank
employees. It is therefore interesting to examine the correlation between incentive pay for the
Log SD of Relative Trading Income. At this stage we do not propose a causal interpretation:
More risk-taking might increase the volatility of trading income, but the reverse causality of
higher volatility aﬀecting the average Bonus Share is also plausible. Without valid instruments
for the Bonus Share, this section is limited to reporting conditional correlations.
       Table 7, Panel A, reports the regression results for the Equally-Weighted Bonus Share and
Panel B reports the Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share. For the pre-crisis data, columns (1) and
(2) in Panel A feature the OLS and WOLS regressions, respectively. The coeﬃcient for the
Equally-Weighted Bonus Share is statistically significant at the 1% level in both specifications.
The OLS coeﬃcient of 12235 implies that an increase in the EW Bonus Share by one standard
deviation (= 014) increases the Log SD of Relative Trading Income by almost one standard
deviation.11 The Bonus Share therefore correlates economically even more strongly with the
second moment of trading profitability than with the first. Results for the extended sample
period 2003—11 imply much lower point estimates for the EW Bonus Share eﬀect for both the
OLS and WOLS specification; however, the statistical significance remains at least at the 5%
level. A positive fixed eﬀect for the crisis period (Crisis Dummy) is statistically significant and
indicates that the Log SD of Relative Trading Income is higher by about 60% of one standard
deviation relative to the pre-crisis years.
       In Table 7, Panel B, the Equally-Weighted Bonus Share and Equally-Weighted Base Salary
are replaced by the corresponding hierarchy-weighted measures. The coeﬃcients for the pre-
crisis period in columns (1) and (2) are again approximately twice as large as those for the full
sample in columns (3) and (4). The statistical significance of the coeﬃcient for the Bonus Share
is very similar irrespective of whether we aggregate the employee bonus shares with equal or
  11
    In the pre-crisis period, the sample standard deviations of EW Bonus Share and of (Log) SD of Relative
Trading Income are 014 and 170, respectively. Hence: 12235 · 014170 = 1



                                                   22
hierarchy weights.


6.3    Instrumental Variable Regression

Performance-contingent incentive contracts for employees should generally imply that trading
income influences the Bonus Share as well as its variability. By averaging the Bonus Share over
multiple years for both the equally weighted and hierarchy weighted measure, we are able to
greatly attenuate this reverse causality, but it is unlikely to be eliminated. A better means of
establishing a causal eﬀect between pay incentives and risk-taking is to take an instrumental
variable approach, where we seek variables  correlated with the Bonus Share and the expected
(or average) trading income in a period, but uncorrelated with the regression residuals.
   A first instrument consists of the bonus share in other bank segments unrelated to bank
trading (EW Bonus Share Other Segments). A bank might have a general "bonus culture"
that extends to all segments of the bank business. In this case the bonus share in Retail
Banking, Private Banking and Corporate Banking should be correlated with the bonus share in
the Treasury/Capital Market and Investment Banking segments as shown in Table 5. Evidence
that a bank’s history might determine its bonus culture is provided by Fields and Fraser (1999),
who document that the entry of U.S. commercial banks into investment banking in the late
1980s did not lead to an adjustment of pay-performance sensitivities to a level common among
investment banks, but continued to resemble the bonus culture observed in commercial banking.
   A second instrument relates to bank structure and governance: If employment in the bank
segments unrelated to trading and investment banking is large relative to the capital market
segment, then corporate boards might focus more on the non-trading divisions and the capital
market division might face less supervision from the executive board and fewer constraints on
its bonus share (Fahlenbrach, 2009). We therefore define Employment Other Segments as the
employment share of non-trading divisions relative to total bank employment.
   The first-stage regression, which explains the EW Bonus Share as a function of these two
instruments and the other control variables, is reported in Table 8, Panel A. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the bank level. Both instruments feature a high correlation with the
EW Bonus Share in the pre-crisis period and in the extended sample period in columns (1)—(2)
and (3)—(4), respectively. Ceteris paribus, an increase in the EW Bonus Share Other Seg-


                                              23
ments by one standard deviation (= 007) in column (1) increases the EW Bonus Share in the
Treasury/Capital Market and Investment Banking segments by 20% relative to its mean. An
increase in the Employment Other Segments by one standard deviation (= 026) increases the
EW Bonus Share by 12% relative to its mean. The conditional correlation between Employment
Other Segments and the EW Bonus Share is therefore significantly positive even if the uncon-
ditional correlation reported in Table 6, row 10, is negative. The F-statistics for the excluded
instruments show values ranging from 1225 to 3713, which suggests strong instruments.
   An additional concern is that high trading profits might still influence bonus payments in
non-trading related bank segments, which implies that residuals of the second stage regression
cannot be orthogonal to the first instrument. This could be the case if the bonus pool is
established at the bank level and not at the bank segment level. To explore this hypothesis,
we regress the Bonus Share Other Segments onto the bank’s Relative Trading Income for the
                                                                              b is small and
same year, together with bank and year fixed eﬀects. The regression coeﬃcient 
statistically insignificant at the conventional 5% level. Hence, we find little evidence that year
to year variation in trading income correlates with a high bonus share in the non-trading related
bank segments, even if the average trading income is expected to be positively influenced by the
incentive culture proxied by EW Bonus Share other Segments. We can still go one step further
and define a filtered instrument called Filtered Bonus Share Other Segments, which subtracts
                        b × Relative Trading Income from the Bonus Share Other Segments.
the explained variation 
Such a filtered instrument may be preferable as it is more likely to fulfill the exclusion restriction.
We then repeat the first-stage regression using the filtered instrument.
   In Table 8, Panels B and C present the regressions results using instrumental variables and
filtered instrumental variables, respectively. For the pre-crisis period, Panel B column (1) shows
a statistically significant point estimate of 3180 compared to 2028 for the corresponding OLS
coeﬃcient in Table 6, Panel A, column (1). The IV estimates therefore suggest an economically
large eﬀect of higher pay incentives on average trading income. An increase of EW Bonus
Share by one standard deviation (= 014) implies an increase in the ratio of trading income
relative to interest income by 11 standard deviations. The economic eﬀect is even larger (with
a coeﬃcient of 3865) for the weighted IV regression in column (2), which puts more emphasis
on the observations for large banks. Using the alternative instrument, Filtered Bonus Share


                                                  24
Other Segments, in the instrument set produces very similar results in Panel C. This is not
surprising as the filtered and raw instrument are highly correlated at 0.95. As the EW Bonus
Share is instrumented by two variables simultaneously, we can also test the overidentification
restriction. All specifications pass the test. Figure 4(a) illustrates in a scatter plot the positive
relationship between the instrumented EW Bonus Share and the unexplained component of
the Log Relative Trading Income after accounting for the other regressors.
   The higher IV coeﬃcients for the EW Bonus Share suggest that reverse causality biases the
OLS coeﬃcients downwards. This should be the case if high trading profits tend to increase the
average EW Base Salary in the capital market segment over the four year measurement period
and thereby increase the denominator of the EW Bonus Share. The EW Base Salary as a
control variable has indeed a negative sign in Tables 6, columns (1)-(3), but its inclusion in the
OLS regression should not eliminate the OLS estimation bias unlike the use of the instrument
Bonus Share Other Segments in Table 8, Panels A and B. The latter variable is scaled by the
average base salary in the non-capital market segments, which may not increase if the capital
market segment produces high trading incomes.
   We can also use the instruments to repeat the regressions for trading income volatility.
Results for the corresponding IV regressions are reported in Table 9. Panel A provides the
first-stage regression, while Panels B and C report the IV estimates for the raw and filtered
instruments, respectively. Again we have strong instruments, as indicated by the F-test for the
excluded instruments, which has F-statistics ranging from 1168 to 2809.
   The IV estimate of 16871 for the EW Bonus Share coeﬃcient in Table 9, Panel B, column
(1), is again larger than the corresponding OLS estimate of 12235 in Table 7, Panel A. The
same applies to the weighted IV regression in column (2). This suggests a strong causal eﬀect of
higher incentive pay on the volatility of trading income: A coeﬃcient of 16871 implies that an
increase in the EW Bonus Share by one standard deviation (= 014) increases the Log Volatility
of Relative Trading Income by 1.4 standard deviations. The IV point estimates obtained for
the full period sample (2003—11) in columns (3) and (4) are smaller and statistically significant
only at the 5% level. Yet, they are still larger than the corresponding OLS point estimates in
Table 7, Panel A, columns (3) and (4). We also note that the overidentification test cannot
reject the null hypothesis of valid instruments in any specification. Overall, we find evidence


                                                 25
that banks with a general “incentive culture” proxied by the Bonus Share in other (non-capital
market) segments feature economically and statistically higher volatility in their trading income,
particularly in the pre-crisis period. As we dispose of at most two volatility observations (one
for each period) per bank; hence Figure 4(b) shows only 74 points illustrating the positive
relationship between instrumented EW Bonus Share and the unexplained component of the
Log Volatility of Relative Trading Income after accounting for the other regressors.
   As a robustness check, we use the LIML estimator as an alternative to the 2SLS estimator.
Yet the results for the point estimates and the standard errors are almost identical to those
reported in Tables 8 and 9; hence they are not reported separately. We also note that replac-
ing the second instrument Employment Other Segments with the slightly weaker instrument
Average Age Capital Market Segment (discussed in Section 4.3) produces again qualitatively
similar results.


6.4    The Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income

The instrumental variable regressions in the previous section suggest that a higher Bonus Share
increases both the level and volatility of Relative Trading Income. How can we evaluate the
trade-oﬀ between higher income and higher risk? An incentive pay system should be optimal
from a firm-value perspective if it maximizes the (risk-adjusted) present value of future trading
income. As we argued in Section 3, NPV maximization under self-financing trading strategies
amounts to maximizing the Sharpe Ratio of trading income.
   While optimal incentive contracts should maximize the Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income, it
is an empirical issue if marginal incentive pay indeed maximizes the Sharpe Ratio and there-
fore total firm value. The first-order condition implies that the change with respect to the
                          \)) has slope zero for both periods ( = 2003—7, 2008-11):
instrumented Bonus Share ((
                               "                   #
                                  Sharpe Ratio
                                               |  = 0
                                      \)
                                     (

At the optimum, and conditional on the control variables , the local average treatment eﬀect
(LATE) captured by the coeﬃcient   should be zero–implying that neither an increase nor
a decrease of the Bonus Share allows for a (locally) larger Sharpe Ratio.
   We calculate the Sharpe ratio as the ratio of the average Relative Trading Income and its

                                               26
standard deviation for each bank and each of the two periods 2003—7 (pre-crisis) and 2008-11
(crisis). The measured Sharpe ratios are then regressed on the EW Bonus Share, the interaction
term EW Bonus Share × Crisis Dummy, the Crisis Dummy itself, and the other exogenous
control variables EW Base Salary, Log Assets, and Net Loans/Assets. As instruments for
the EW Bonus Share and its interaction term we use a bank’s Bonus Share Other Segments,
and the interaction term Bonus Share Other Segments × Crisis Dummy. The substantial
decrease in incentive pay in the capital market segment during 2008-11 might best be seen as the
consequence of external political pressure to reduce bank bonus payments. This interpretation
is supported by the fact that (at the bank level) Relative Trading Income did not significantly
change during the crisis period.
   Table 10 reports the first-stage OLS regressions for the two instrumented variables in
columns (1) and (2) and the second-stage results in column (3). The F-statistics for the null
hypothesis that both first-stage OLS coeﬃcients for the two instruments are zero are 565 and
320, respectively. The Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic is 448 and not particularly high.
However, it exceeds the critical value 395 of the Stock-Yogo (2005) test that the instruments
are strong for a maximal size of 20% (with an approximate 5% significance level). At this
threshold size, we can therefore reject the weak instrument hypothesis.
   In Table 10, column (3), the IV coeﬃcient of −21404 for EW Bonus Share is negative,
which implies that banks with a culture of large Bonus Shares obtain a lower Sharpe Ratio
of Trading Income. This is indicative of excessive incentive pay that is not in line with firm
value maximization. But we note that the coeﬃcient is estimated with a relative large error
and is significant only at the 10% level. Given the low Kleibergen-Paap statistic, the coeﬃcient
is likely to be biased towards the OLS coeﬃcient reported in column (4), which is at −2797
higher (less negative). This suggests that the IV coeﬃcient is likely to be estimated with a
positive bias.
   The IV coeﬃcient for EW Bonus Share × Crisis Dummy is positive at 29472 and implies
that the greatly reduced pay incentive system of the crisis period eliminated the negative slope
of the Sharpe ratio with respect to incentive pay increases. Comparison with the OLS coeﬃcient
of 5253 in column (4) suggests a downward bias for the IV coeﬃcient. We note that the Crisis
Dummy is also positive at 7065 which suggests a further increase in the Sharpe ratio during


                                              27
the crisis period. Reduced incentive pay during the crisis period appears to come closer to the
first-order condition for a maximal Sharpe ratio of trading income. Again, the weak statistical
significance of the point estimates due to large standard errors implies that these results need
to be interpreted with caution.
    The results of Table 10 are summarized graphically in the residual plots in Figure 5. The
dashed blue line traces out the local average treatment eﬀect on the unexplained variations
in the Sharpe ratio for the pre-crisis period (2003—7). The negative slope indicates that local
variations of the Equally Weighted Bonus Share are associated with a decreasing Sharpe ratio,
suggesting misalignment of bonus incentives with shareholder value maximization. For the
consecutive crisis period (2008-11), the corresponding slope is depicted by the unbroken red
line and has a positive - though statistically insignificant - slope. Here we cannot reject the
hypothesis that incentive pay is correctly aligned with NPV maximization.


7     Conclusion
Empirical research on bank risk-taking is often constrained by the lack of appropriate compen-
sation data to measure bankers’ incentive pay. This paper draws on a large new data set on
bank compensation in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland and extracts the performance-related
bonus payments in the critical bank segments of investment banking and treasury/capital mar-
ket management.
    We contribute to a better understanding of bank pay incentives in four ways: First, we
document a substantial reduction in incentive pay that occurred in 2008-11 relative to much
larger bonus shares in 2004—7. At 40% the reduction in the Bonus Share (bonus relative to
total compensation) was particularly strong in the investment banking and treasury/capital
market segments. This substantial reduction occurred despite of the fact that the overall
trading income in our bank sample did not decrease in the crisis period. Second, trading
income as well as its volatility are positively correlated with incentive pay. These correlations
are observable for the entire sample period, but are particularly significant (both statistically
and economically) in the pre-crisis period. Third, we pursue an instrumental variable approach
to explore a possible causal relationship between the strength of pay incentives and bank risk-



                                               28
taking. We use the bonus share in bank segments unrelated to the capital market activity,
like retail banking, corporate banking, and private banking, as instruments to capture the
"bonus culture" of a bank. We find that a higher predicted bonus share in capital markets
causes both a higher Relative Trading Income and a higher Log Standard Deviation (SD) of
Relative Trading Income. Inversely, the bonus share in the non-capital market segments is
serially uncorrelated with the bonus share in the capital market segment. Fourth, we ask if the
observed incentive pay maximizes the Sharpe ratio of trading returns and, thereby, the value of
total bank assets. This requires the local average treatment eﬀect (LATE) of the Sharpe ratio
with respect to the (instrumented) Bonus Share to be zero. Instrumented incentive pay shows
a negative and weakly significant eﬀect on the Sharpe ratio of trading returns for the pre-crisis
period, which vanishes for the later crisis period. External constraints on incentive pay in the
banks’ capital market segments after 2007 appear to have increased the Sharpe ratio of trading
returns. Pre-crisis incentive pay in the capital market segments of Austrian, German, and Swiss
banks therefore appears to have been misaligned with NPV (or asset value) maximization and
by extension even more so with the public interest.




                                               29
References
 [1] Acharya, V., Pagano, M., and Volpin, P. (2013). Seeking alpha: excess risk taking and
    competition for managerial talent. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

 [2] Acharya, V., Litov, L. P., and Sepe, S. M. (2014). Seeking Alpha, Taking Risk: Evidence
    from Non-Executive Pay in U.S. Bank Holding Companies. Working Paper.

 [3] Adams, R., Keloharju, M., and Knüpfer, S. (2014). Match Made at Birth? What Traits of
    a Million Swedes Tull us about CEOs. Working Paper, Aalto University School of Business.

 [4] Admati, A., DeMarzo, P., Hellwig, M., and Pfleiderer, P. (2010). Fallacies, Irrelevant Facts,
    and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation: Why Bank Equity is Not Expensive.
    Stanford GSB Research Paper No. 2063.

 [5] Agarwal, S., and Ben-David, I. (2012). Do Loan Oﬃcers’ Incentives Lead to Lax Lending
    Standards? Working Paper.

 [6] Agarwal, S., and Wang, F. H. (2009). Perverse incentives at the banks? Evidence from a
    natural experiment. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, WP 2009-08. Chicago, Ill.: Federal
    Reserve Bank of Chicago.

 [7] Agarwal, V., Daniel, N. D., and Naik, N. Y. (2009). Role of Managerial Incentives and
    Discretion in Hedge Fund Performance. Journal of Finance, 64(5), 2221-2256.

 [8] Bannier, C. E., Feess, E., and Packham, N. (2013). Competition, Bonuses, and Risk-taking
    in the Banking Industry. Review of Finance, 17(2), 653-690.

 [9] Bebchuk, L. A., Cohen, A., and Holger, S. (2010). The Wages of Failure: Executive Com-
    pensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman 2000-2008. Yale Journal on Regulation, 27(2),
    257-282.

[10] Bell, B., and Reenen, J. V. (2010). Bankers’ pay and extreme wage inequality in the
    UK. Working Paper, Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics and
    Political Science.



                                               30
[11] Bhagat, S., and Bolton, B. (2014). Financial crisis and bank executive incentive compen-
    sation. Journal of Corporate Finance, 25(0), 313-341.

[12] Bijlsma, M., Boone, J., and Zwart, G. (2012). Competition for traders and risk. CEPR
    Discussion Paper No. DP8816.

[13] Bogaard, H., and Svejnar, J. (2013). Incentive Pay and Performance: Insider Econometrics
    in a Multi-Unit Bank. IZA Discussion Paper No. 7800.

[14] Bolton, P., Mehran, H., and Shapiro, J. (2014) Executive Compensation and Risk-Taking.
    Working Paper.

[15] Bova, F., Kolev, K., Thomas, J., and Zhang, F. (2012). Non-executive employee ownership
    and corporate risk-taking. Working Paper, University of Toronto.

[16] Célérier, C., and Vallée, B. (2013). Are Bankers Worth Their Pay? Evidence from a Talent
    Measure. Working Paper, HEC Paris.

[17] Chen, J., H. Hong, M. Huang and J. Kubik, 2004, Does Fund Size Erode Mutual Fund
    Performance? The Role of Liquidity and Organization, American Economic Review, Vol.
    94(5), 1276-1302.

[18] Cheng, I., Harrison, H., and J. Scheinkman, 2010, Yesterday’s heroes: Compensation and
    creative risk-taking. NBER Working Paper 16176.

[19] Chesney, M., Stromberg, J., and Wagner, A. F. (2012). Risk-taking incentives and losses
    in the financial crisis. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper.

[20] Cole, S., Kanz, M., and Klapper, L. (2013). Incentivizing calculated risk-taking: evidence
    from an experiment with commercial bank loan oﬃcers. Working Paper, National Bureau
    of Economic Research.

[21] DeYoung, R., Peng, E. Y., and Yan, M. (2013, 2). Executive Compensation and Business
    Policy Choices at U.S. Commercial Banks. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
    48, 165-196.



                                              31
[22] Daﬃe, D. (2011). How big banks fail and what to Do about it. Princeton University Press.

[23] Dunning, A. (2010). The Changing Landscape of Executive Compensation after Dodd-
    Frank. Review of Banking and Financial Law, 30, 580-590.

[24] European Parliament (2013). Position of the European Parliament - EP-PE_TC1-
    COD(2011)0203, Consolidated legislative document, 2013-04-16.

[25] Fahlenbrach, R. (2009). Shareholder Rights, Boards, and CEO Compensation. Review of
    Finance, 13(1), 81-113.

[26] Fahlenbrach, R., and Stulz, R. M. (2011). Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis.
    Journal of Financial Economics, 99(1), 11-26.

[27] Federal Assembly (2013). Bundesbeschluss betreﬀend die Volksinitiative "1:12 - Für
    gerechte Löhne", 2013-03-22. Available at: http://www.admin.ch/ch/d/ﬀ/2013/2473.pdf.

[28] Fields, P., and Fraser, D. (1999). On the compensation implications of commercial bank
    entry into investment banking. Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 1261-1276.

[29] Gabaix, and Landier (2008). Why has CEO Pay Increased So Much? Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 123(1), 49-100.

[30] Gao, H., Luo, J., and Tang, T. (2013). Labor Market Competition, Executive Job-hopping,
    and Compensation, Working Paper, 2013 European Finance Association Conference.

[31] Gill, D., Prowse, V., and Vlassopoulos, M. (2013). Cheating in the workplace: An exper-
    imental study of the impact of bonuses and productivity. Journal of Economic Behavior
    and Organization, 96(0), 120-134.

[32] Glode, V., and Lowery, R. (2013). Informed trading and high compensation in finance.
    Working Paper.

[33] Hagendorﬀ, J., and Vallascas, F. (2011). CEO pay incentives and risk-taking: Evidence
    from bank acquisitions. Journal of Corporate Finance, 17(4), 1078-1095.




                                             32
[34] Hakens, H., and Schnabel, I. (2014). Bank Bonuses and Bailouts. Journal of Money, Credit
    and Banking, 46(1), 259-288.

[35] Hau, H. (2001). Location Matters: An Examination of Trading Profits, Journal of Finance
    56(5), 1959-1983.

[36] Hau, H., and Thum, M. (2009). Subprime Crisis and Board (in-)Competence: Private vs.
    Public Banks in Germany, Economic Policy, 24(60), 701-751

[37] Larkin, I. (2014). The cost of high-powered incentives: Employee gaming in enterprise
    software sales. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(2), 199-227.

[38] Massa, M., and Patgiri, R. (2009). Incentives and Mutual Fund Performance: Higher
    Performance or Just Higher Risk Taking? Review of Financial Studies, 22(5), 1777-1815.

[39] Moshirian, F., Sahgal, S., and Zhang, B. (2011). Non-interest Income and Systemic Risk :
    The Role of Concentration, Working Paper.

[40] Oyer, P. (1998). Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Eﬀect on Busi-
    ness Seasonality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 149-185.

[41] Philippon, T., and Reshef, A. (2012). Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Finance
    Industry: 1909—2006. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4), 1551-1609.

[42] Stock, J. and Yogo, M. (2005). Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression. Ch.
    5 in J.H. Stock and D.W.K. Andrews (eds), Identification and Inference for Econometric
    Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg, Cambridge University Press.

[43] Thanassoulis, J. (2012). The Case for Intervening in Bankers’ Pay. Journal of Finance,
    67(3), 849-895.

[44] Tzioumis, K., and Gee, M. (2013). Nonlinear incentives and mortgage oﬃcers’ decisions.
    Journal of Financial Economics, 107(2), 436-453.




                                             33
                               Bonus Share and Base Salary
                                Capital Market Segment Employees
                  1
                  .8  .6
           Bonus Share
           .4     .2
                  0




                       24000         60000            160000                440000
                                     Base Salary (Log Scale)
                                        Pre-crisis               Crisis




Figure 1: Plotted is the Bonus Share against Base Salary (on a Log scale) for 47,320 employee-
year observations of bank employees in the capital market segments (treasury/capital manage-
ment and investment banking) of 66 Austrian, German, and Swiss banks. Observations for the
pre-crisis years 2004-7 are plotted in blue and those recorded in the crisis years 2008-11 are
depicted in red. We also fit the quadratic function from Table 4, columns (1) and (2), to the
observations of each period separately.
                                             34
                                                Log of Average Trading Income by Period
                                      5
              Crisis Period 2008-11
                                      0
                                      -5




                                           -5                      0                      5
                                                         Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7




Figure 2: Plotted are the Log of the average (absolute) trading income for each bank in the
pre-crisis period 2003—7 against the corresponding Log average (absolute) trading income for
the crisis period 2008—11.




                                                                 35
                    Bonus Share in Capital Markets Segments
                                                           (a) Equally Weighted




                                                 .8
                                                 .6
                         Crisis Period 2008-11
                                                 .4
                                                 .2
                                                 0




                                                      0   .2                .4            .6   .8
                                                               Pre-Crisis Period 2004-7

                                                          (b) Hierarchy Weighted
                                                 .8
                                                 .6
                        Crisis Period 2008-11
                                                 .4
                                                 .2
                                                 0




                                                      0   .2                .4            .6   .8

                                                               Pre-Crisis Period 2004-7




Figure 3: The (a) Equally Weighted and the (b) Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share (defined as
the ratio of bonus to total compensation) for the capital market segment employees in each
bank is plotted (as average) for the pre-crisis period 2004-7 (x-axis) against the corresponding
Bonus Share in the crisis period 2008-11 (y-axis).

                                                                       36
             Trading Income and its Volatility by Instrumented Incentive Pay

                                                                                         (a) Log Relative Trading Income

                                                                2
              Unexplained Log Relative Trading Income
                                                                1
                                                                0
                                                                -1




                                                                            0                 .2                    .4                  .6
                                                                                             Instrumented EW Bonus Share

                                                                                (b) Log Standard Deviation of Relative Trading Income
                       Unexplained Log SD of Relative Trading Income
                                                                       10
                                                                       8
                                                                       6
                                                                       4
                                                                       2
                                                                       0




                                                                            0                  .2                    .4                      .6
                                                                                             Instrumented EW Bonus Share




Figure 4: The components of (a) the Log Relative Trading Income and (b) the Log Standard
Deviation of Relative Trading Income that are unexplained by the control variables are plotted
against the predicted (instrumented) Equally Weighted (EW) Bonus Share (in the Investment
Banking and Treasury/Capital Market segments) of each bank. The residual plots represent the
2SLS regression of Table 7, Panel B, column (1) and Table 8, Panel B, column (1), respectively.

                                                                                                      37
                                                                        Sharpe Ratio by Instrumented Incentive Pay
                                                              5
              Unexplained Sharpe Ratio of Rel. Trading Inc.
                                                              0
                                                              -5
                                                              -10




                                                                              2003-2007
                                                                              2008-2011
                                                              -15




                                                                    0                 .2            .4               .6


                                                                               Instrumented EW Bonus Share




Figure 5: The component of the Sharpe ratios that is unexplained by the control variables is
plotted against the instrumented EW Bonus Share of each bank, as estimated by the IV regres-
sion in Table 9. The slope of the blue (dashed) and red (unbroken) line equal the correlation
between instrumented bonus share and the unexplained component of the Sharpe ratio in the
pre-crisis and crisis period, respectively.




                                                                                           38
                           Table 1: Summary Statistics for Employee Level Incentives

Reported are summary statistics on employee characteristics and their individual compensation in a given year. The
variables are subject to the following cleaning procedures: First, 681 455 observations from service divisions and
cross-divisional functions are dropped. Second, 67 960 observations of employees not eligible for a bonus are dropped.
Finally, we discard 4 708 observations with base salaries below 24 000. We winsorize the 10 largest and 10 smallest
observations of the variables Age, Tenure, Base, and Bonus. Bonus Share is defined as the ratio of Bonus over the
sum of Bonus and Base Salary. Age and Tenure are recoded as categorical variables.


                                                Obs.      Mean         S.D.     Skew.    Min          Max
             Employee Information

             Age                               436 826      397         95    007        18             66
             Age Missing                       521 194      016          −       −         −              −
             Tenure                            494 675      137        100    072         0             47
             Tenure Missing                    521 194      005          −       −         −              −
             Base Salary                       516 486   61 862     26 372    200   24 000       418 000
             Bonus                             521 194   15 709     47 760   1791         0    2 662 500
             Total Salary                      516 486   77 706     65 669    997   24 000    3 065 640


             Bonus Share by Country

             Austria                            31 673        005     007     325          0         076
             Germany                           372 151        012     011     225          0         095
             Switzerland                       112 662        018     015     116          0         095

             Bonus Share by Bank Segment

             Investment Banking                 12 343        023     020     092          0         094
             Treasury/Capital Market            34 977        023     020     094          0         095

             Asset Management                   21 188        024     016     067          0         092
             Corporate Banking                  53 685        015     011     123          0         092
             Private Banking                    75 547        019     014     101          0         092
             Retail Banking                    318 746        008     007     178          0         085

             Bonus Share by Hierarchy Level

             Hierarchy   Level   1 (Lowest)     42 042        005     004     159          0         057
             Hierarchy   Level   2             123 028        006     005     174          0         079
             Hierarchy   Level   3             117 826        009     007     208          0         087
             Hierarchy   Level   4             130 913        014     011     158          0         090
             Hierarchy   Level   5              78 354        023     015     081          0         095
             Hierarchy   Level   6              23 377        033     018     035          0         095
             Hierarchy   Level   7 (Highest)        946        046     025    −016          0         094

             All                               516 486        013     012     194          0         095




                                                          39
                Table 2: Incentive Pay and Trading Income Before and During the Crisis
We report separately for the pre-crisis period (2003-7) and the crisis period (2008-11) the individual employee-
compensation for performance across capital market segments (Panel A) as well as the Log Period-Average Relative
Trading Income, computed as the natural logarithm of the period-average of Trading Income in percent of Interest
Income, the Log Standard Deviation of Relative Trading Income, and the Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income (Panel B).
The symbols *,**, and *** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% in two-sample t-tests. We use Wilcoxon
rank-sum tests to check if variables are distributed the same before and during the crisis (H0) and report the p-values.

                             Panel A: Employee Compensation Capital Market Segments

                                                      Obs.       Mean         S.D.      Skew.      Min          Max
  Base Salary

  Pre-Crisis Period                                  26 046      82 896     32 427     162   24 100       418 000
  Crisis Period                                      21 274      91 005     39 969     161   24 444       418 000
  Diﬀerence                                                    −8 109∗∗∗
  Wilcoxon (p-value)                                                 000

  Bonus

  Pre-Crisis Period                                  26 070       68 017   154 617     733           0   2 662 500
  Crisis Period                                      21 276       34 056    73 279     727           0   2 164 453
  Diﬀerence                                                     33 961∗∗∗
  Wilcoxon (p-value)                                                  000

  Bonus Share

  Pre-Crisis Period                                  26 046         028       021      071           0         095
  Crisis Period                                      21 274         017       017      122           0         095
  Diﬀerence                                                       011∗∗∗
  Wilcoxon (p-value)                                                 000

                                               Panel B: Trading Income

                                                      Obs.       Mean         S.D.      Skew.      Min          Max
  Log Period-Average Relative Trading Income

  Pre-Crisis Period                                       62       0936       2404    −0282   −4461           5482
  Crisis Period                                           56       0997       2392    −0399   −4826           4956
  Diﬀerence                                                       −0061
  Wilcoxon (p-value)                                                080

  Log SD of Relative Trading Income

  Pre-Crisis Period                                       40       0137       1700     0062   −2942           3413
  Crisis Period                                           40       0836       1763    −0097   −2501           4478
  Diﬀerence                                                     −0699∗∗
  Wilcoxon (p-value)                                                010

  Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income

  Pre-Crisis Period                                       39        1793      1931     0790   −1213           7092
  Crisis Period                                           40        0837      1096     0571   −1793           4297
  Diﬀerence                                                      0956∗∗∗
  Wilcoxon (p-value)                                                 004



                                                          40
                               Table 3: Summary Statistics at the Bank Level

Reported are bank characteristics. The variables Assets, Trading Income, Gross Interest Income, Trading Income/Gross
Interest Income, Gross Interest Income/Assets and Net Loans/Assets are winsorized at the 1% level in each tail. The
variables Relative Trading Income, Gross Interest Income/Assets, and Net Loans/Assets are given as percentages.
Employment Non-Capital Markets Segments is the fraction of employees working in the non-capital market segments
corporate banking, private banking, and retail banking. Relative Trading Income is defined as Trading Income as
percentages of Gross Interest Income. Log Relative Trading Income is computed as (Relative Trading Income
+1824) where the constant 1824 is chosen to reduce the skewness of the variable to zero. The standard deviation of
Relative Trading Income is computed only if the variable has at least three observations. The constant 005 reduces
the skewness of Log of SD of Relative Trading Income, defined as (SD of Relative Trading Income +005), to zero.
Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income is computed as the ratio of Relative Trading Income and SD of Relative Trading
Income. EW Base Salary and HW Base Salary are standardized by 100,000.



                                                  Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7           Full Period 2003-11
                                                 Obs.    Mean        S.D.         Obs.    Mean        S.D.
      Bank Characteristics

      Assets                                       186    167 288     341 35     365    165 186     337 91
      Log Assets                                   186       1061        185     365       1052        190
      Trading Income                               186      27630   1 26653     365      25614   1 28028
      Gross Interest Income                        186   5 72975   9 30573     365   5 27360   8 82806
      Relative Trading Income (%)                  186        633       1200     365        859       2096
      Gross Interest Income/Assets (%)             186        416        172     365        373        177
      Net Loans/Assets (%)                         186       4109       2284     365       4025       2346
      Employment Non-Capital Markets Segm.          37        068        026      87        072        025

      Performance Characteristics

      Log Relative Trading Income                  186        311       040      365       313        054
      Log of SD of Relative Trading Income          40        014       170       80       049        176
      Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income                39        179       193       79       131        163

      Pay in Capital Market Segments

      EW Bonus Share                                41        027       014       96       023        013
      EW Base Salary                                41        086       018       96       092        023
      HW Bonus Share                                41        031       016       96       026        015
      HW Base Salary                                41        098       023       96       102        026

      Pay in Non-Capital Market Segm.

      EW Bonus Share                                37        016       007       87       014        008
      EW Base Salary                                37        072       017       87       077        020
      HW Bonus Share                                37        018       008       87       017        010
      HW Base Salary                                37        080       019       87       085        024




                                                         41
                         Table 4: Incentive Pay Structure at the Employee Level

The employee-level bonus share is regressed on a set of fixed eﬀects for bank segment, hierarchy, age, tenure, and
year, as well as on the Log Base Salary and Log Base Salary Squared. Standard errors are clustered by bank and are
reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




  Dep. Variable:                                All Bank Segments                     Capital Market Segments
  Bonus Share                   2004-2007    2008-2011     2004-2007      2008-2011   2004-2007    2008-2011
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)

  Constant                      14907∗∗∗    10075∗∗∗                                   −0840        −5701∗
                                  (2189)      (1394)                                   (4215)        (3162)
  Log Base Salary               −2923∗∗∗    −1962∗∗∗                                   −0146           0858
                                  (0404)      (0251)                                   (0771)        (0554)
  Log Base Salary Squared        0144∗∗∗     0096∗∗∗                                     0020        −0031
                                  (0019)      (0011)                                   (0035)        (0024)

  Retail Banking                                              −0079∗∗∗   −0097∗∗∗
                                                                (0001)     (0013)
  Corporate Banking                                           −0076∗∗∗   −0088∗∗∗
                                                                (0001)     (0013)
  Private Banking                                               −0032    −0058∗∗∗
                                                                (0024)     (0022)
  Investment Banking                                            −0003     −0043∗∗   −0020∗∗∗         −0004
                                                                (0015)     (0018)     (0008)         (0011)
  Treasury/Capital Market                                       0034∗∗   −0050∗∗∗
                                                                (0014)     (0018)

  Hierarchy Level 2                                               0006    −0007∗         0008        −0017
                                                                (0007)     (0004)      (0019)        (0025)
  Hierarchy Level 3                                            0030∗∗∗    0013∗∗∗        0017        −0018
                                                                (0007)     (0004)      (0023)        (0028)
  Hierarchy Level 4                                            0084∗∗∗    0050∗∗∗        0025        −0010
                                                                (0013)     (0008)      (0026)        (0028)
  Hierarchy Level 5                                            0176∗∗∗    0112∗∗∗      0067∗∗          0003
                                                                (0017)     (0015)      (0030)        (0033)
  Hierarchy Level 6                                            0286∗∗∗    0188∗∗∗      0097∗∗          0049
                                                                (0021)     (0016)      (0038)        (0042)
  Hierarchy Level 7 (Highest)                                  0457∗∗∗    0256∗∗∗     0142∗∗∗        0111∗∗
                                                                (0040)     (0040)      (0053)        (0050)
  Other Dummies
  Age Group                            No          No              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
  Tenure Group                         No          No              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
  Year                                 No          No              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes

                               305 918    210 568         305 918    210 568      26 046         21 274
  2                                0472       0370            0520       0415        0442           0257




                                                         42
                                                                             Table 5: Partial Correlations

The lower-left triangle of the matrix reports partial correlations between bank variables measured as four-year averages for the pre-crisis period (2003-7) and the crisis period
(2008-11). The partial correlations between two variables are calculated based on the sample mean of each subperiod. The upper-right triangle of the matrix reports the number
of observations used to calculate the correlations. The variables characterize the (i) bank incentive culture, (ii) bank governance, (iii) labor market characteristics of the employees
in the capital market segment, and (iv) bank risk management. We distinguish the equally weighted (EW) Bonus Share in the bank’s capital market segment (Capital Mkt.) from
that in the non-capital market segments (Non-Cap. Mkt.). STD Bonus Share refers to the standard deviation of the Bonus Share within either the capital market segments or the
non-capital market segments of the bank. The bank governance variables characterize the quality of the supervisory and executive board as described in Hau and Thum (2009).
The labor market characteristics comprise the average age and the average job tenure in the capital market segment of a bank. The role of risk management is captured by the
average compensation of risk managers (RMs) and their average hierarchy level. Correlations significant at the 5% level are printed in bold.


                                                      1        2         3         4           5        6       7        8        9       10          11        12        13     14
          Bank Incentive Culture

      1   EW Bonus Share Capital Mkt.                        183      209        178           79      37      37       37       37      183         172       208       181   181
      2   EW Bonus Share Non-Cap. Mkt.            059                177        242           80      34      36       36       36      183         149       175       200   200
      3   STD Bonus Share Capital Mkt.            053      033                 173           79      37      37       37       37      177         162       199       172   172
      4   STD Bonus Share Non-Cap. Mkt.           060      065     042                      80      34      36       36       36      178         146       170       195   195

          Bank Governance

     5    State Bank Dummy                       −034    −025    −022       −015                   46      48       47       48       71          69        77        85    85
     6    Financial Experience Sup. Board        −021     006     006        020     −015                 46       45       46       34          36        36        37    37
     7    Foreign Experience Sup. Board           019     020     025       −014     −035       023               47       48       34          36        36        39    39
     8    Capital Markets Exp. Exec. Board       −018     006    −005       −005      010      −006   −003                47       34          36        36        39    39
     9    Political Aﬃliations Exec. Board        020     010    −007        024      008      −055   −023   −018                 34          36        36        39    39
    10    Employment other Segments              −018    −027    −017       −007     −010      −021    012   −015    −004                   149       175       159   159

          Labor Market Characteristics

    11    Average Age in Capital Mkt.            −040    −009    −011      −007        020      020   −020   −029      008     012                   171       152   152
    12    Average Job Tenure in Cap. Mkt.        −028    −037    −020      −027        036     −013    004    000      005     039        048                 171   171

          Bank Risk Management

    13    Average Compensation of RMs             050      056     030       038     −025      −005    011     019    006    −031       −027     −033              250
    14    Av. Hierarchy Level of RMs              016      025     011       010     −007      −003    028     028   −015    −031       −010     −015       054




                                                                                          43
                                 Table 6: Trading Income and Incentive Pay

In Panel A, we regress the Log Relative Trading Income defined as the Log of the ratio of Trading Income to Gross
Interest Income on a bank’s Equally Weighted (EW) Bonus Share and Equally Weighted (EW) Base Salary calculated
for all employees in the segments Treasury/Capital Market and Investment Banking. In Panel B, we regress the same
dependent variable on the Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Bonus Share and the Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Base Salary
calculated for the same capital market segments. The controls are: Log Assets = natural logarithm of bank assets; Net
Loans/Assets = net loans over bank assets and year fixed eﬀects. Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions are used
in columns (1) and (4). In columns (2) and (5) we weight each bank by the square root of the number of employee-
observations used to compute the bank average bonus share (WOLS). Column (3) reports the results of random eﬀects
(RE) panel regressions. All specifications include a constant. Robust standard errors clustered at the bank level are
reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.


                         Panel A: Trading Income and the Equally Weighted Bonus Share

           Dep. Variable:                      Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7             Full Period 2003-11
           Log Relative Trading Income       OLS        WOLS          RE             OLS         WOLS
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)

           EW Bonus Share                  2028∗∗∗     1910∗∗∗       2011∗∗∗        0701     1249∗∗∗
                                            (0545)      (0659)        (0561)      (0421)      (0449)
           EW Base Salary                 −1501∗∗∗    −1366∗∗∗      −1522∗∗∗        0146      −0223
                                            (0463)      (0582)        (0477)      (0320)      (0325)
           Log Assets                     −0103∗∗∗     −0081∗∗      −0113∗∗∗    −0090∗∗∗    −0075∗∗∗
                                            (0025)      (0032)        (0028)      (0019)      (0024)
           Net Loans/Assets                 −0001       −0001         −0001      −0002∗∗     −0002∗∗
                                            (0002)      (0002)        (0002)      (0002)      (0002)

           Year FE                               Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
                                              186            186         186           365         365
           2                                  0330          0237       0329         0266       0264

                        Panel B: Trading Income and the Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share

           Dep. Variable:                      Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7             Full Period 2003-11
           Log Relative Trading Income       OLS        WOLS          RE             OLS         WOLS
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)

           HW Bonus Share                  1853∗∗∗     1811∗∗∗       1839∗∗∗      0800∗∗     1275∗∗∗
                                            (0469)      (0567)        (0479)      (0382)      (0412)
           HW Base Salary                 −1216∗∗∗     −1017∗∗      −1247∗∗∗      −0023       −0309
                                            (0344)      (0409)        (0353)      (0283)      (0259)
           Log Assets                     −0102∗∗∗     −0075∗∗      −0113∗∗∗    −0091∗∗∗    −0075∗∗∗
                                            (0027)      (0035)        (0030)      (0019)      (0024)
           Net Loans/Assets                 −0001       −0002         −0001       −0002       −0002
                                            (0002)      (0002)        (0002)      (0002)      (0002)

           Year FE                               Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
                                              186            186         186           365         365
           2                                  0342          0246       0340         0265       0273




                                                         44
                             Table 7: Trading Income Volatility and Incentive Pay

In Panel A, we regress the Log Standard Deviation (SD) of the Relative Trading Income defined as the Log of the
standard deviation of the ratio of Trading Income to Gross Interest Income on a bank’s Equally Weighted (EW) Bonus
Share and Equally Weighted (EW) Base Salary calculated for all employees in the segments Treasury/Capital Market
and Investment Banking. In Panel B, we regress the same dependent variable on the Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Bonus
Share and the Hierarchy-Weighted (HW) Base Salary calculated for the same capital market segments. The controls
are: Log Assets = natural logarithm of bank assets; Net Loans/Assets = net loans over bank assets; Crisis Dummy
= 1 for years 2008 to 2011. Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions are used in columns (1) and (3). In columns (2)
and (4) we weight each bank by the square root of the number of employee-observations used to compute the bank
average bonus share (WOLS). All specifications include a constant. Robust standard errors clustered at the bank level
are reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.


                     Panel A: Volatility of Trading Income and the Equally Weighted Bonus Share

        Dep. Variable:                           Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7           Full Period 2003-11
        Log SD of Relative Trading Income          OLS            WOLS              OLS           WOLS
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

        EW Bonus Share                            12235∗∗∗       10066∗∗∗          4837∗∗         5153∗∗∗
                                                    (2785)         (3041)          (2062)          (1786)
        EW Base Salary                            −8054∗∗∗        −5070∗           −0136             0509
                                                    (2461)         (2956)          (1712)          (1601)
        Log Assets                                  −0216          −0047             0119           0199∗
                                                    (0135)         (0140)          (0116)          (0111)
        Net Loans/Assets                            −0006         −0020∗          −0017∗∗        −0023∗∗∗
                                                    (0010)         (0011)          (0008)          (0008)
        Crisis Dummy                                                                1079∗∗∗         1276∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0372)          (0350)

                                                       40             40                80              80
        2                                             0337          0299             0210           0334

                     Panel B: Volatility of Trading Income and the Hierarchy-Weighted Bonus Share

        Dep. Variable:                           Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7           Full Period 2003-11
        Log SD of Relative Trading Income          OLS            WOLS              OLS           WOLS
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

        HW Bonus Share                            10303∗∗∗        9032∗∗∗         4913∗∗∗        5033∗∗∗
                                                    (2406)         (2522)          (1775)         (1497)
        HW Base Salary                            −5618∗∗∗         −3434           −0420            0183
                                                    (1988)         (2171)          (1419)         (1259)
        Log Assets                                  −0181          −0009             0130         0208∗∗
                                                    (0145)         (0140)          (0114)         (0102)
        Net Loans/Assets                            −0007         −0021∗          −0016∗∗        −0022∗∗
                                                    (0010)         (0011)          (0008)         (0008)
        Crisis Dummy                                                                1195∗∗∗        1406∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0365)         (0333)

                                                       40             40                80              80
        2                                             0317          0329             0226           0353




                                                         45
                         Table 8: Trading Income and Instrumented Incentive Pay

We estimate a two-stage regression with Log Relative Trading Income as the dependent variable and in which the
Equally Weighted (EW) Bonus Share is instrumented in a first stage regression (Panel A) by the equally weighted
bonus share in Retail Banking, Private Banking and Corporate Banking of the same bank (= EW Bonus Share other
Segm.), and the share of the total number of employees in these segments relative to total employment (= Employment
Other Segm.). Panel B reports the second-stage regression and Panel C replaces the instrument EW Bonus Share
Other Segm. with an alternative instrument, Filtered EW Bonus Share Other Segm. The latter is purged of any
intertemporal correlation between trading income as the dependent variable and the EW Bonus Share Other Segm.
We use the same control variables as before: Log Assets = natural logarithm of bank assets; Net Loans/Assets = net
loans over bank assets; and year fixed eﬀects. Two-stage least squares (2SLS) regressions are used in columns (1) and
(3). In columns (2) and (4) we weight each bank by the square root of the number of employee-observations used
to compute the bank average bonus share (W2SLS). All specifications include a constant. Robust standard errors
clustered at the bank level are reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** represent significance levels of
10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The last rows of Panel B and C report the p-values for the null hypothesis that all
instruments are valid.


                               Panel A: First Stage Regression for EW Bonus Share

       Dep. Variable:                              Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7         Full Period 2003-11
       EW Bonus Share                                 2SLS         W2SLS            2SLS          W2SLS
                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

       EW Bonus Share Other Segm.                      0760∗∗∗    0824∗∗∗          0776∗∗∗       0897∗∗∗
                                                        (0122)     (0167)           (0099)        (0105)
       Employment Other Segm.                          0128∗∗∗    0149∗∗∗          0126∗∗∗       0136∗∗∗
                                                        (0038)     (0047)           (0027)        (0033)
       EW Base Salary                                  0436∗∗∗    0389∗∗∗          0313∗∗∗       0286∗∗∗
                                                        (0068)     (0099)           (0043)        (0054)
       Log Assets                                       0017∗∗    0016∗∗∗          0011∗∗∗       0012∗∗∗
                                                        (0006)     (0005)           (0004)        (0004)
       Net Loans/Assets                                 −0001      −0000            −0000         −0000
                                                        (0001)     (0001)           (0000)        (0000)

       Year FE                                              Yes         Yes               Yes            Yes
                                                         169         169               332            332
       2                                                 0783       0699             0711          0697
        −   (0 : all coeﬀ. = 0)                     5256       1908             3071          3268
        −   (0 : IV coeﬀ. = 0),               1957       1225             3660          3713
            
       (10%15%20%  )                                                           19931159875




                                                         46
Table 8 continued

                 Panel B: Second Stage with Instruments for EW Bonus Share

Dep. Variable                       Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7       Full Period 2003-11
Log Relative Trading Income            2SLS         W2SLS          2SLS         W2SLS
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)

EW Bonus Share (instrumented)          3180∗∗∗    3865∗∗∗         2000∗∗        2781∗∗∗
                                        (1191)     (1357)         (0880)         (0816)
EW Base Salary                         −1921∗∗    −2227∗∗         −0245          −0736
                                        (0891)     (1094)         (0565)         (0508)
Log Assets                            −0118∗∗∗   −0116∗∗∗       −0098∗∗∗       −0093∗∗∗
                                        (0033)     (0041)         (0019)         (0025)
Net Loans/Assets                          0002       0001           0000           0000
                                        (0002)     (0003)         (0001)         (0002)

Year FE                                     Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
                                         169          169            332             332
2                                        0269        0135          0265           0255
Overident. Test (p-value)                 0233        0162          0538           0136

             Panel C: Second Stage with Filtered Instruments for EW Bonus Share

Dep. Variable                       Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7       Full Period 2003-11
Log Relative Trading Income            2SLS         W2SLS          2SLS         W2SLS
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)

EW Bonus Share (instrumented)           2807∗∗     3830∗∗           1639        2843∗∗∗
                                        (1235)     (0149)         (1143)         (1062)
EW Base Salary                         −1682∗     −2186∗          −0094          −0771
                                        (0927)     (1154)         (0631)         (0594)
Log Assets                            −0115∗∗∗   −0115∗∗∗       −0097∗∗∗       −0094∗∗∗
                                        (0033)     (0042)         (0020)         (0025)
Net Loans/Assets                          0002       0001         −0000            0000
                                        (0001)     (0003)         (0001)         (0002)

Year FE                                     Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
                                         164          164            324             324
2                                        0295        0149          0280           0257
Overident. Test (p-value)                 0139        0127          0360          00994




                                             47
                    Table 9: Trading Income Volatility and Instrumented Incentive Pay

We estimate a two-stage regression with the Log Standard Deviation (SD) of Relative Trading Income as the dependent
variable and in which the Equally Weighted (EW) Bonus Share is instrumented in a first-stage regression (Panel A) by
the equally weighted bonus share in Retail Banking, Private Banking and Corporate Banking of the same bank (= EW
Bonus Share Other Segm.), and the share of total number of employees in these segments relative to total employment
(= Employment Other Segm.). Panel B reports the second-stage regression and Panel C replaces the instrument EW
Bonus Share Other Segm. with an alternative instrument, Filtered EW Bonus Share other Segm. The latter is purged
of any intertemporal correlation between trading income as the dependent variable and the EW Bonus Share Other
Segm. We use the same control variables as before: Log Assets = natural logarithm of bank assets; Net Loans/Assets
= net loans over bank assets; Crisis Dummy = 1 for years 2008 to 2011. Two-stage least squares (2SLS) regressions
are used in columns (1) and (3). In columns (2) and (4) we weight each bank by the square root of the number of
employee-observations used to compute the bank average bonus share (W2SLS). All specifications include a constant.
Robust standard errors clustered at the bank level are reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** represent
significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The last rows of Panel B and C report the p-values for the null
hypothesis that all instruments are valid.


                               Panel A: First Stage Regression for EW Bonus Share

       Dep. Variable:                             Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7         Full Period 2003-11
       EW Bonus Share                                2SLS         W2SLS            2SLS          W2SLS
                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

       EW Bonus Share Other Segm.                      0735∗∗∗   0795∗∗∗         0706∗∗∗        0881∗∗∗
                                                        (0124)    (0165)          (0110)         (0120)
       Employment Other Segm.                          0133∗∗∗   0149∗∗∗         0125∗∗∗        0136∗∗∗
                                                        (0039)    (0046)          (0029)         (0035)
       EW Base Salary                                  0435∗∗∗   0388∗∗∗         0377∗∗∗        0307∗∗∗
                                                        (0071)    (0101)          (0058)         (0067)
       Log Assets                                       0017∗∗   0016∗∗∗           0008∗         0010∗∗
                                                        (0007)    (0005)          (0004)         (0004)
       Net Loans/Assets                                 −0001     −0000           −0000            0000
                                                        (0001)    (0001)          (0000)         (0001)
       Crisis Dummy                                                               −0063∗∗∗       −0080∗∗∗
                                                                                    (0014)         (0018)

                                                          37         37                74             74
       2                                                 0778      0698             0699          0684
        −   (0 : all coeﬀ. = 0)                     6741      3033             3897          4245
        −   (0 : IV coeﬀ. = 0),               1762      1168             2463          2809
            
       (10%15%20%  )                                                          19931159875




                                                        48
Table 9 continued

                    Panel B: Second Stage with Instruments for EW Bonus Share

Dep. Variable:                         Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7          Full Period 2003-11
Log SD of Relative Trading Income       2SLS            W2SLS            2SLS          W2SLS
                                         (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)

EW Bonus Share (instrumented)           16871∗∗∗       14705∗∗∗        10001∗∗     8302∗∗
                                          (4789)         (5351)         (4810)     (3728)
EW Base Salary                         −10591∗∗∗         −7360          −2931      −1552
                                          (3786)         (4520)         (3228)     (2415)
Log Assets                              −0283∗∗          −0126            0083       0129
                                          (0141)         (0156)         (0110)     (0101)
Net Loans/Assets                          −0001          −0016          −0014     −0020∗∗
                                          (0014)         (0015)         (0009)     (0009)
Crisis Dummy                                                             1726∗∗∗    1850∗∗∗
                                                                          (0541)     (0554)

                                             37             37              74           74
                                            0307          0263           0197        0344
Overident. Test (p-value)                    0417          0979           0444       04402

               Panel C: Second Stage with Filtered Instruments for EW Bonus Share

Dep. Variable:                         Pre-Crisis Period 2003-7          Full Period 2003-11
Log SD of Relative Trading Income       2SLS            W2SLS            2SLS          W2SLS
                                         (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)

EW Bonus Share (instrumented)            14127∗∗        12238∗∗         10050∗       7690
                                          (5609)         (5879)         (5991)     (4761)
EW Base Salary                           −8913∗∗         −6068          −2980      −1311
                                          (4051)         (4423)         (3721)     (2816)
Log Assets                                −0245          −0085            0086       0134
                                          (0151)         (0167)         (0112)    (01005)
Net Loans/Assets                          −0002          −0017          −0014     −0021∗∗
                                          (0014)         (0015)         (0009)     (0009)
Crisis Dummy                                                             1709∗∗∗     1745∗∗
                                                                          (0625)     (0705)

                                             36             36              73           73
2                                           0317          0265           0183        0332
Overident. Test (p-value)                    0295          0799           0426        0394




                                               49
                  Table 10: Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income and Optimal Pay Incentives

We estimate a two-stage regression with the Sharpe Ratio of Trading Income as the dependent variable and in which
the Equally Weighted (EW) Bonus Share (column (1)) as well as its interaction with the crisis dummy (column (2))
are instrumented in first-stage regressions by the equally weighted bonus share in Retail Banking, Private Banking and
Corporate Banking of the same bank (= EW Bonus Share Other Segm.) and its interaction with the crisis dummy.
Column (3) reports the second-stage regression and column (4) the OLS regression for comparison. We use the same
control variables as before: Log Assets = natural logarithm of bank assets; Net Loans/Assets = net loans over bank
assets; Crisis Dummy = 1 for years 2008 to 2011. All specifications include a constant. Robust standard errors
clustered at the bank level are reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** represent significance levels of 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                 1st Stage                           2nd Stage
 Dep. Variable:                       EW Bonus Share EW Bonus Share                Sharpe Ratio          Sharpe Ratio
                                                       × Crisis Dummy             Trading Income        Trading Income
                                          2SLS              2SLS                       2SLS                  OLS
                                           (1)                (2)                       (3)                   (4)

 EW Bonus Share Other Segm.                    0441∗∗∗                 0015
                                                (0153)               (0031)
 EW Bonus Share Other Segm.                       0149               0511∗∗
    × Crisis Dummy                              (0222)               (0203)

 EW Bonus Share                                                                          −21404∗                −2797
                                                                                          (12818)               (4129)
 EW Bonus Share                                                                          29472∗∗                  5253
    × Crisis Dummy                                                                        (14815)               (4111)

 EW Base Salary                               0532∗∗∗                 0023              13239∗                 0946
                                               (0070)               (0021)              (7641)               (2861)
 EW Base Salary                               −0221∗∗              0326∗∗∗             −17474∗               −2151
     × Crisis Dummy                            (0109)               (0085)              (8958)               (2880)
 Log Assets                                     0009∗                 0001              −0154              −0263∗∗∗
                                               (0005)               (0003)              (0120)               (0064)
 Net Loans/Assets                                0000                 0000              −0013                −0011
                                               (0000)               (0000)              (0012)               (0008)
 Crisis Dummy (= CD)                             0100             −0170∗∗∗               7065∗               −0258
                                               (0081)               (0055)              (4234)               (1915)

                                                  73                   73                   73                     79
 2                                               0646                0822               −0097                 02151
  −   (0 : all coeﬀ. = 0)                   4448                3738                 464                   506
  −   (0 : IV coeﬀ. = 0)                     565                 320
  −       −                                   448
      
 (10%15%20%  )                                    703458395




                                                          50
