NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF FUEL CONSERVATION POLICIES IN A DUAL-FUEL CAR MARKET:
EVIDENCE FROM INDIA
Randy Chugh
Maureen L. Cropper
Working Paper 20460
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20460

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

Previously circulated as "The Welfare Effects of Fuel Conservation Policies in the Indian Car
Market." We thank Resource for the Future and the World Bank for funding. We would like to
thank seminar participants at the University of Virginia, Cornell University, NBER and Stanford
University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are entirely those of the authors and
should not be purported to reflect those of the U.S. Department of Justice or of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Randy Chugh and Maureen L. Cropper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Welfare Effects of Fuel Conservation Policies in a Dual-Fuel Car Market: Evidence from
India
Randy Chugh and Maureen L. Cropper
NBER Working Paper No. 20460
September 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. L9,Q48,R48
ABSTRACT
We estimate a model of vehicle choice and kilometers driven to analyze the long-run impacts of
fuel conservation policies in the Indian car market. We simulate the effects of petrol and diesel
fuel taxes and a diesel car tax, taking into account their interactions with the pre-existing petrol
fuel tax and car sales taxes. At levels sufficient to reduce total fuel consumption by 7%, the
increased diesel and petrol fuel taxes both yield deadweight losses (net of externalities) of about 4
(2010) Rs./L. However, at levels sufficient to reduce total fuel consumption by 2%, the increased
petrol fuel tax results in a deadweight loss per liter of fuel conserved that is greater than that
caused by the diesel fuel tax. This reflects both the high pre-existing tax on petrol fuel and the
high own-price elasticities of fuel demand in India. A tax on diesel cars that results in the same
diesel market share as the large diesel fuel tax actually has a negative deadweight loss per liter of
fuel conserved. The welfare effects of all three policy instruments are positive, once the external
benefits of reducing fuel consumption are added to the excess burden of taxation.

Randy Chugh
Department of Justice
450 5th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
chugh.randy@gmail.com.
Maureen L. Cropper
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
cropper@econ.umd.edu

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of fuel conservation policy—whether motivated by environmental or
energy security concerns—depends on the price elasticity of fuel consumption. The higher the
price elasticity, the greater the impact of a fuel tax and the greater the rebound effect associated
with a fuel economy standard. In the transport sector, the long-run price elasticity of fuel
consumption depends on consumers’ willingness to substitute to more fuel efficient cars in
addition to their willingness to drive less. Thus, measuring long-run price elasticity requires data
on vehicle choice and vehicle use. Although several studies combine these data to measure longrun price elasticity in the United States (Bento et al., 2009; Feng et al., 2013; Goldberg, 1998;
Jacobsen, 2013; West, 2004), there are few such studies outside of the United States (Fullerton et
al., 2014) and none of which we are aware for developing countries. This paper takes a first step
in filling this gap in the literature.
Studies of fuel consumption elasticity for developing countries are generally based on
aggregate, time-series data. Income elasticities are generally based on GDP and household
demand is usually not separated from the demand for fuel for commercial purposes (Dahl, 2012).
In contrast, we use a rich household-level dataset on new vehicle purchases, kilometers driven,
and household characteristics of new car buyers in India. This level of detail allows us to
estimate a theoretically consistent model of consumer behavior. One of the key contributions of
this paper, therefore, is to present the first theoretically consistent fuel consumption elasticity
estimates in a developing country setting. We use our model to simulate the likely effects of fuel
conservation policies currently being considered by the Indian government. Our results also have
implications for the European car market which, like India, is characterized by diesel cars’
substantial market share (Frondel et al., 2012; Vance and Mehlin, 2009; Verboven, 2002).
India is one of the world’s fastest growing car markets. New car sales quadrupled from
about 600,000 in 2002 to about 2.3 million in 2010 (Society of Indian Automobile
Manufacturers). The Indian passenger vehicle fleet, which stood at 22 million in 2010, is
projected to increase to 112 million by 2030 (Arora et al., 2011).1 Thus, the Indian car market is
important in its own right. Because of India’s increasing importance as a contributor to world
greenhouse gas emissions, Indian fuel conservation policy is also important from a global point
1

For context, 2010 motor vehicle sales were 10.4 million in the U.S. and 13.6 million in China (Bloomberg, 2010).

2

of view. Early adoption of fuel conservation policy in India will have a direct effect on world oil
consumption and an indirect effect by providing an example for other developing countries.
As in many European countries, diesel cars constitute a significant fraction of the Indian
passenger vehicle fleet. India has historically taxed diesel fuel at a lower rate than petrol,
resulting in diesel fuel’s lower price at the pump. This fuel cost advantage compounds diesel
cars’ fuel economy advantage, resulting in substantially lower per-kilometer operating costs for
diesel cars. Not surprisingly, diesel cars’ share of the new car market has risen steadily, from
22% in 2002 to 34% in 2010. Because of the dual-fuel nature of the Indian car market, elasticity
results cannot easily be transferred from the United States. Our model of the Indian car market
allows cross-price elasticities and tax interactions to play central roles in determining the impact
of differential fuel or car taxation. Our study thus contributes to the empirical tax interaction
literature (West and Williams, 2004, 2005) in a unique developing country setting.
Specifically, we estimate the welfare effects (and fuel conservation impacts) of raising
the tax on diesel fuel to equal the tax on petrol. As indicated by the familiar Harberger formula
(Harberger, 1964),2 the excess burden of a tax on diesel fuel depends not only on the impact of
the tax on the demand for diesel fuel, but on the impact of the tax on the markets for petrol fuel,
petrol cars, and diesel cars, and on the rate at which these commodities are taxed. Formally the
excess burden of a tax on diesel fuel is given by:

(1)
where

is the tax on diesel fuel,

petrol fuel,
for petrol cars,

is demand for diesel fuel,

is demand for petrol fuel,

is the pre-existing tax on

is the pre-existing tax on petrol cars,

is the pre-existing tax on diesel cars, and

is demand

is demand for diesel cars.

The second and third terms in the equation reflect the gain in tax revenues as consumers
switch from diesel to petrol vehicles and depend on the long-run elasticities of demand for petrol
fuel and petrol cars. This gain in tax revenue is, however, offset by the loss in sales taxes on

2

For a more recent application see Goulder and Williams (2003).

3

diesel cars. The excess burden of taxing diesel fuel depends empirically on all four tax rates, and
on own and cross-price elasticities of demand.
The full welfare effect of the diesel tax equals the excess burden in equation (1) plus the
external effects of burning diesel and petrol fuels which, following Parry et al. (2014), we
assume are proportional to the amount of fuel consumed. The full welfare effect of a tax on
diesel fuel is given by:

(2)
where

is excess burden as defined in equation (1),

with consumption of diesel fuel, and

is the external damage associated

is the external damage associated with consumption of

petrol fuel. The excess burden of taxing diesel fuel may, therefore, be offset by the external
benefits of reducing diesel fuel consumption, net of any increase in damages due to petrol
consumption.3
An alternative method of conserving fuel is to tax diesel cars more heavily than petrol
cars, as suggested by an expert panel convened by the Indian government (Parikh, 2010). This
policy will curtail fuel consumption by inducing buyers to switch from diesel to petrol cars,
which run on more expensive fuel. Calculating the welfare impact of this policy likewise
requires a model of vehicle purchases as well as fuel consumption.
Our Approach
To analyze the impact of fuel conservation policies in the Indian car market we present a
structural econometric analysis of the demand for new cars and simulate market responses to
alternative policies. Using data from the JD Power APEAL survey (JD Power, 2010), we model
the joint decision of which car to buy and how much to drive it in a mixed logit discretecontinuous choice framework. The method, pioneered by Dubin and McFadden (1984), provides
a tractable, theoretically motivated approach to dealing with selection bias and has become a

3

The equations for the welfare effects of taxing petrol fuel or diesel cars are analogous to those for diesel fuel and
are therefore not presented here.

4

workhorse model in energy demand estimation. Their two-stage approach has been applied to the
United States car market in several studies (Bento et al., 2009; Goldberg, 1998; West, 2004).
One drawback of the two-stage approach is that separate estimation of car choice and
driving distance leads to two sets of model parameters, often differing in magnitude and sign.
Recent contributions by Bento et al. (2009) and Feng et al. (2013) have sought to overcome this
limitation by estimating vehicle choice and distance driven simultaneously. We adopt this
approach using model fixed effects to account for unobserved vehicle characteristics and
randomly distributed parameters to account for unobserved household heterogeneity. The model
leads to a single set of parameter estimates which we use to compute theoretically consistent
welfare effects.
We estimate the model for the year 2010 and simulate consumers’ responses to five fuel
conservation policies: (1) a large diesel fuel tax that equalizes the prices of petrol and diesel fuel;
(2) a diesel car tax that reduces market share of diesel cars by the same amount as policy 1; (3) a
small diesel fuel tax that results in the same decrease in fuel consumption as policy 2; (4) a large
increase in the petrol fuel tax that results in the same decrease in fuel consumption as policy 1;
and (5) a small increase in the petrol fuel tax that results in the same decrease in fuel
consumption as policies 2 and 3. For each policy, we simulate changes in market shares, driving
distances, and total fuel use. We compare the efficiency of policies by calculating compensating
variation, government revenue, and deadweight loss per liter of fuel conserved. We also quantify
the externality abatement benefits associated with each policy based on recent work by Parry et
al. (2014).
The relative efficiency of the diesel fuel tax and the petrol fuel tax depends on the level
of fuel conservation they achieve. At levels sufficient to reduce total fuel consumption by 7%,
the increased diesel and petrol fuel taxes both yield deadweight losses (net of externalities) of
about 4 (2010) Rs. per liter.4 However, at levels sufficient to reduce total fuel consumption by
2%, the increased petrol fuel tax results in a deadweight loss per liter of fuel conserved that is
greater than that caused by the diesel fuel tax. This reflects both the high pre-existing tax on
petrol fuel and the high own-price elasticities of fuel demand in India. A tax on diesel cars that
4

Unless otherwise indicated, all prices and welfare estimates are presented in units of 2010 rupees; we drop the
“(2010)” notation for the remainder of the paper.

5

results in the same diesel market share as the large diesel fuel tax actually has a negative
deadweight loss per liter of fuel conserved.5 The welfare effects of all three policy instruments
(i.e., equation (2)) are positive, once the environmental benefits of reducing fuel consumption are
added to the excess burden of taxation.
Our elasticity estimates also have implications for the corporate average fuel economy
(CAFE) standards recently enacted by the Indian government. The Bureau of Economic
Efficiency issued weight-based CAFE standards that went into effect in 2015-16, with more
stringent standards to go into effect in 2020-21.6 Our estimates of the long-run elasticity of diesel
and petrol fuel consumption with respect to price suggest that improving vehicle fuel economy is
likely to have a significant rebound effect. As we demonstrate, the 2015-16 fuel economy
standards would reduce fuel consumption by approximately 22% if consumers continued to
purchase the same vehicles they bought in 2010 and drive them the same number of kilometers.
Our model suggests that allowing for both types of adjustment, however, implies a reduction in
fuel consumption of only 5.1%.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the new car market, fuel pricing,
and fuel consumption in India. Section 3 presents our model of vehicle choice and kilometers
driven and our estimation strategy. Section 4 discusses the data used to estimate the model,
including the stylized facts about Indian cars and the people who buy them. Section 5 presents
our estimation results. Section 6 discusses the results of policy simulations and section 7
concludes.

2. Overview of the Indian Car Market
Sales of passenger vehicles in India have been growing rapidly, from 600,000 cars in
2002 to 1.2 million in 2006 and 2.6 million in 2011 (Society of Indian Automobile
Manufacturers). Hatchbacks constitute approximately 66% of new car sales, sedans
approximately 17%, with the remainder accounted for by SUVs. Trends in sales of diesel
passenger vehicles in the Indian car market are shown in Figure 1. Diesel vehicles accounted for
5

According to Hines (1999), the possibility of negative deadweight loss in a market characterized by multiple
distortions was first discussed in Lipsey and Lancaster (1956) and Corlett and Hague (1953).
6
http://www.egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2014/158019.pdf

6

34% of new car sales in 2010, although there was significant variation across vehicle type. As
relatively few diesel hatchbacks are available due to technological constraints, diesel models’
share of the hatchback market has remained between 10% and 20%. 7 Among SUVs, diesel
models’ share has also been relatively constant between 60% and 70%. In the sedan market,
however, diesel cars’ share has increased from 25% in 2003 to nearly 50% in 2010.
The increasing trend in purchase of diesel vehicles can be explained, in part, by the lower
price of diesel fuel. Figure 2 shows the nominal retail prices of diesel and petrol per liter in Delhi
from 2002 to 2013. Prior to 2010, the year of our study, both diesel and petrol prices were
government-determined and, as the figure suggests, shielded from variation in world oil prices.
The base price received by oil companies was set by the federal government.8 Customs duties,
excise duties, and sales taxes were added to this to yield the retail prices shown in Figure 2.
Beginning in 2010, the base price of petrol was allowed to vary with international oil prices. The
lower price of diesel in Figure 2 reflects lower taxes on diesel and, in some years, a discount in
the price retail dealers were charged for diesel. For modeling purposes, we treat the difference
between petrol and diesel prices as a difference in tax rates.
An important question is why diesel is taxed at a lower rate than petrol. Approximately
60% of diesel fuel is used for road transport (primarily for trucks and buses), 20% for power
generation (both captive power generation and transmission to the grid), 12% for agriculture, 4%
by railways, and 4% for miscellaneous uses (Anand, 2012). In spite of these statistics, diesel is
widely perceived to be a “poor man’s fuel.” There is also concern about the macroeconomic
consequences of equalizing the price of diesel and petrol (Anand, 2012; Parikh, 2010). For both
reasons, there are political pressures not to raise the tax on diesel fuel, but to tax diesel cars
instead.
As discussed below, we find operating cost to be a key determinant of vehicle choice.
Although diesel cars are generally more expensive than their petrol twins, their lower operating
cost more than offsets the purchase price difference (Chugh et al., 2011). The fuel economy of a
diesel sedan (about 15 km/L in 2010) is about 23% higher than that of a petrol sedan (12.2 km/L)
(see Table 1). When coupled with the 30% cheaper price of diesel fuel, the diesel sedan’s fuel
7
8

There are no diesel engines below 1250cc. Many hatchbacks have smaller engines.
The base price was set equal to 80% of the import price of oil plus 20% of the export price (Anand, 2012).

7

economy advantage results in an operating cost that is approximately 60% that of a petrol sedan.
In view of the lower operating cost of diesel vehicles, it is not surprising that they are driven
more. In 2010, diesel sedans were driven 36% farther than petrol sedans, diesel SUVs were
driven 58% farther than petrol SUVs, and diesel hatchbacks were driven 66% farther than petrol
hatchbacks (see Table 2).

3. A Discrete-Continuous Choice Model of New Car Purchases
We model the purchase and use of new cars in a discrete-continuous choice framework.
The method, pioneered by Dubin and McFadden (1984), provides a tractable, theoretically
motivated approach to dealing with selection bias and has become a workhorse model in energy
demand estimation. The key insight of their study is that if consumers with high expected
electricity usage buy low operating cost appliances, then a simple regression of usage on
operating cost will result in a biased estimate of the price responsiveness of electricity demand.
By directly modeling the discrete choice of which appliance to purchase, the authors develop a
selection correction method and recover unbiased elasticity estimates in a second stage.
This two-stage approach has been applied to the United States car market in several
studies. Goldberg (1998) uses a model of vehicle choice and utilization, coupled with an
oligpolistic model of supply, to study the effect of CAFE standards on car sales, prices, and fuel
consumption. West (2004) follows a similar approach and considers a broader range of policies
and studies their distributional effects.
One drawback of the two-stage approach is that separate estimation of car choice and
distance driven leads to two sets of model parameters, often differing in magnitude and sign. As
the number of kilometers driven is derived using Roy's Identity in a static utility maximization
framework, theoretical consistency requires a single set of parameters to determine both choices.
This is especially important in calculating the welfare impact of policy interventions. Recent

8

contributions from Feng et al. (2013) and Bento et al. (2009) have sought to overcome this
limitation by introducing simultaneous estimation techniques.9
Our approach incorporates these recent modeling and estimation advances in a mixed
logit, discrete-continuous choice model of which car to buy and how much to drive it. We
incorporate body type and model fixed effects to account for unobserved vehicle characteristics
and we allow for randomly distributed parameters to account for unobserved household
heterogeneity. The model is estimated by full information maximum likelihood which leads to a
single set of parameter estimates, allowing for theoretically consistent welfare calculations.
3.1 The Model
The household's decision takes the form of a standard static utility maximization problem
where utility is a function of car characteristics, kilometers driven, and consumption of all other
goods. The household chooses the car that yields the highest indirect utility; optimal driving
distance can then be inferred by Roy's Identity.
Although the JD Power survey is conducted in several locations across the country, we
model the new car market as a single, national market with the choice set being the same for all
households. As data are limited to households that have purchased a new car in the survey year,
the choice set does not include an outside good. Thus, households in the model are faced with the
decision of which car to buy conditional on having already decided to buy a new car. This
modeling approach is necessary given data limitations, but also allows for a more precise
estimation of means and distributions of preferences for the subpopulation of new car buyers (see
Train and Winston (2007) for further discussion).
3.2 Vehicle Choice
Each household

chooses the car from choice set

that yields the highest utility.

Following Bento et al. (2009), household ’s utility conditional on buying car is

9

We note two recent studies of vehicle demand in China (Li, 2014; Xiao and Ju, 2014) which use aggregate
household data to analyze the impact of policies to limit vehicle emissions. Fullerton et al. (2014) estimate a model
of vehicle demand and distance driven for Japan using aggregate data.

9

,

where

(3)

is annual income of household minus the annualized rental cost of car ;

vector of characteristics of car , characteristics of household , and interactions of the two;
the per-kilometer operating cost of car ;

is an idiosyncratic taste for driving; and

i.i.d. stochastic preference shock.10 The coefficients

and

is a
is
is an

are assumed to follow uncorrelated

random distributions, the parameters of which are estimated along with other parameters of the
model. For example,

where

deviation drawn from some distribution

is the mean of

and

is an idiosyncratic

.11 The idiosyncratic taste for driving,

, is

assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero; its standard deviation, , is estimated along
with the other parameters of the model.
Let

represent the common set of coefficients such that

.

Individual parameters are then distributed according to the joint probability density function
. Assuming that

have a Type I Extreme Value distribution, the probability that

household chooses car takes the mixed logit form,

(4)

where

is the scale parameter of the i.i.d. Type I Extreme Value error term.
3.3 Driving Distance
Using Roy’s Identity, annual driving distance can be derived from equation (3) as

follows:

10

This functional form leads to a log-linear specification of the demand for kilometers driven. Previous discretecontinuous models, including Dubin and McFadden (1984), Goldberg (1998), and West (2004), used an indirect
utility function that leads to a linear demand function for kilometers driven. The log-linear demand function
provides a better fit for our data.
11
Including random coefficients on all car characteristics would result in a more general model, but comes at the
cost of a higher dimensional integral requiring many more random draws to simulate. Experiments with more
general specifications did not improve model fit or substantially change counterfactual predictions.

10

.

As mentioned above, household ’s idiosyncratic taste for driving,
normal distribution with standard deviation

(5)

, is drawn from a mean-zero

which is estimated along with the other parameters

in the model. This modeling of the driving distance decision, which follows Feng et al. (2013),
improves the fit of the model to the data but still allows for a more general correlation of errors
as in Bento et al. (2009).
Taking account of the fact that the same randomly distributed coefficients that determine
vehicle choice probabilities also determine driving distance predictions, the expected log of
demand for kilometers driven equation becomes
(6)

Just as equation (4) takes advantage of the closed-form solution of the integral over the type I
extreme value preference shock, equation (7) below takes advantage of the closed-form solution
of the integral over the normally distributed idiosyncratic taste for driving. The likelihood of
observing

kilometers driven conditional on household buying car is

(7)

where

is an indicator function equal to 1 if household bought car and 0 otherwise and
is the right hand side of equation (6) without the idiosyncratic taste for driving

shock.
3.4 Estimation Strategy
Household ’s likelihood of buying the car it is observed to have bought and driving the
distance it is observed to have driven is the product of the probability of buying car (equation

11

(4)) and its likelihood of driving

conditional on buying car

(equation (7)). 12 The full

information likelihood function is the product over all households:

(8)
The log-likelihood function is

(9)

Evaluating the log-likelihood function directly would require solving the integral over the
observed joint choice which is implicit in equation (9). In the absence of a closed-form solution,
integration can be performed by simulation (Train, 2009). For any draw

from the distribution

, the log-likelihood for household is calculated, the sum of the log-likelihoods from
separate draws is found, and the average is taken. In the limit as

approaches infinity,

simulation error approaches zero. The second departure from equation (9) is to weight each
observation to ensure that the prominence of each vehicle model in the sample is proportional to
its market share.13 Thus, the log-likelihood to be maximized is given by

(10)

where

is the weight applied to observation ,

conditional on the
drives

is the probability that person buys car

draw from the distribution,

conditional on buying car and conditional on the

is the likelihood that person
draw from the distribution,

12

We note, however, that equation (4) explicitly integrates over the distribution of parameters only to demonstrate
the link between the indirect utility function (equation (3)) and car choice probability and the conceptual role of the
randomly distributed parameters. Equation (7) implicitly integrates over the distribution of parameters, by virtue of
the fact that it is a function of the right hand side of equation (6), for similar pedagogical purposes. In application,
our model focuses on maximizing the likelihood of the observed joint choice and therefore the integral that matters
is over the product of car choice probability and driving distance likelihood.
13
Weights for each observation equal the ratio of the market share to the sample share of the chosen model.

12

and the parenthetical term, therefore, is the simulated integral of the likelihood of the observed
joint choice.14

4. Data and Empirical Specification
4.1 New Car Buyers and Vehicles Purchased
We estimate the model using data on household car choice and monthly driving distances
from the 2010 JD Power APEAL survey, a survey of 7,000 new car buyers in India. The survey
provides the make, model, and fuel type of the car purchased and the purchase price, monthly
kilometers driven, and the buyer’s estimate of fuel economy. It also collects data on household
income, demographic characteristics, and vehicle ownership.15
Car characteristics data come from the magazine AutoCar India and the website
DriveInside.com. Most car models are available in multiple versions (e.g., a Honda Civic LX or
a Honda Civic EX). This level of detail is available in AutoCar India and DriveInside, but survey
respondents report a model/fuel type only. Car characteristics for each model/fuel type are
constructed as the unweighted average across all versions of each model/fuel type. Table 1
presents the sales-weighted summary statistics for all vehicle models sold in 2010. Price and fuel
economy variables are taken as the average across all respondents for each model/fuel type, but
are found to be similar to price and fuel economy reported in AutoCar India.16
It is important to note that the figures presented in Table 1 reflect differences in model
availability across fuel types in addition to general differences between petrol and diesel cars. Of
14

Results presented below are based on integrals simulated using 200 shifted and shuffled Halton draws, a quasirandom scheme that provides better coverage than pseudo-random draws. While some studies use up to 5000
pseudo-random draws, Train and Winston (2007) find 200 Halton draws to be sufficient. We follow their approach
to testing for sufficient draws by calculating the value of the test statistic
using 400 draws at the parameter
estimates obtained using 200 draws. Under the null hypothesis that the gradient is zero, this test statistic is
distributed chi-squared with degrees of freedom equal to the number of parameters. Using this approach, we fail to
reject the hypothesis that the parameters found using 200 draws are likelihood maximizing. As in Train and Winston
(2007), we present standard errors that are robust to simulation noise.
15
The JD Power Automotive Performance, Execution and Layout Study (JD Power, 2010) is a home interview
survey of new car buyers conducted in 20 cities in India within 2 to 6 months after the purchase of a new car. At
least 100 households are sampled for each model covered by the survey.
16
A regression through the origin of buyers' estimates of fuel economy on published estimates of city fuel economy
yields a coefficient of 1.14 (s.e.=0.010). When highway fuel economy is added to the equation, the coefficient on
city fuel economy equals 1.09 (s.e.=0.099) and the coefficient on highway fuel economy is 0.034 (s.e.=0.071).

13

the 54 models in the dataset, 31 are available in both petrol and diesel form. Among these
models, 20 were bought in substantial numbers in both petrol and diesel form, while 11 were
purchased as diesels only. Counting only those vehicles that sold in substantial numbers yields a
choice set of 74 cars for each buyer.17 For hatchbacks and sedans, every diesel model is available
as a petrol vehicle, but a wide variety of petrol models are available for which there is no diesel
counterpart. Nevertheless, some stylized facts are worth noting. Diesel cars are heavier than
petrol cars, have a lower horsepower-to-weight ratio, and, with the exception of SUVs, have
higher fuel economy.
Because of their higher fuel economy and cheaper fuel, diesel cars have lower costs per
kilometer driven than petrol cars. 18 In 2010, diesel operating costs were 34% lower for
hatchbacks, 39% lower for sedans, and 20% lower for SUVs. Predictably, the owners of diesel
cars drove more. As shown in Table 2, owners of diesel hatchbacks drove 66% more than owners
of petrol hatchbacks, owners of diesel sedans drove 36% more than owners of petrol sedans, and
owners of diesel SUVs drove 58% more than owners of petrol SUVs.
The APEAL survey provides information on the income, age, gender, family size, and car
ownership of respondents. Sedan owners, on average, have higher incomes than hatchback
owners. Diesel sedan owners, on average, have lower incomes than petrol sedan owners. Family
size is slightly higher among diesel households and the average age of diesel car owners is
slightly lower. Family size is correlated with vehicle size: for both diesel and petrol vehicles
family size is smaller on average for hatchback buyers than for sedan buyers and smaller for
sedan buyers than for buyers of SUVs.
4.2 Model Specification
To operationalize the model, we convert the purchase price of a vehicle to an annualized
rental price and construct a per-kilometer operating cost. We focus entirely on the purchase price
(inclusive of sales taxes) and calculate the rental price as the annual payment on a car loan such
that the loan would be paid back over the expected life of the vehicle. Vehicle survival
probabilities are based on a survival curve for Indian cars estimated by Arora et al. (2011). Their
17
18

Any car with at least 0.01% market share is included in the survey and in our model.
Operating costs are calculated using Delhi fuel prices, as described more thoroughly below.

14

survival curve assumes a maximum vehicle life of 20 years and implies an expected vehicle life
of 18 years. We use a nominal interest rate of 15%, based on interest rates charged on new car
loans in India, and note that about 80% of new car purchases are financed with such loans
(Carazoo.com, 2011; Seth, 2009; Shankar, 2007). After adjusting for inflation, we use a real
interest rate of 8.5%.
Operating cost is the fuel price divided by fuel economy. As with vehicle price, fuel
economy is taken as the average self-reported fuel economy for each vehicle type, but results are
robust to the use of AutoCar India fuel economy data instead. Identifying the coefficient on
operating cost requires that we have variation in operating cost that is independent of vehicle
characteristics. Unfortunately, there is little variation in fuel prices across Indian cities which
could be used to identify the coefficient on operating cost.19 We therefore use the Delhi prices of
petrol and diesel fuel, which in 2010 were 49.4 Rs. per liter and 36.7 Rs. per liter, respectively.
This implies that variation in operating cost comes from variation in fuel economy across
vehicles and the difference between the prices of petrol and diesel fuels. Our identification
strategy relies on including model fixed effects in the X vector, implying that variation in
operating cost comes from within-model variation across fuel types for models available in both
fuel types (i.e., “twins”).
The inclusion of model fixed effects limits the number of vehicle characteristics that we
can include in our empirical model. As a sensitivity analysis, we include in Appendix B a model
with manufacturer and body type fixed effects, which allows us to include a richer set of vehicle
characteristics.20 Both models include the age and gender of the household head and family size.
To improve model fit and better characterize substitution possibilities, we interact vehicle
and household characteristics and allow two of the coefficients in the indirect utility function and
the idiosyncratic taste for driving to be randomly distributed. We interact family size with sedan
and hatchback dummies and with the ratio of horsepower to weight and we interact buyer age
with a safety index. The distribution of , the income minus rental cost coefficient, is assumed to
19

The variation across cities in diesel and petrol fuel prices is small. In 2010 the average price of petrol in 31 Indian
cities was 52.86 Rs. with a standard deviation of 2.40 Rs. The average price of diesel was 38.94 Rs. with a standard
deviation of 1.74 Rs.
20
Appendix tables B.1 through B.3, which correspond to Tables 3 through 5 in the text, present results for this
alternate specification.

15

be log-normal to reflect the positive marginal utility of consumption of all other goods and the
positive wealth effect on driving distance such that

with

. Following the

same reasoning, the distribution of , the operating cost coefficient, is assumed to be negative
log-normal such that

with

. The idiosyncratic taste for driving,

assumed to be distributed normally with mean zero and standard deviation

, is

such that

.

5. Econometric Results
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the within-sample fit of the estimated model in terms of market
shares and annual kilometers driven. Aggregated to body type/fuel type categories, predicted
market shares match actual market shares closely. In fact, the model mirrors the market shares of
petrol and diesel vehicles (66% and 34%, respectively) to two significant digits. Annual
kilometers driven are predicted accurately for four of the six vehicle categories but are overpredicted for drivers of petrol hatchbacks and under-predicted for owners of diesel SUVs. On
average, the model over-predicts fuel usage by 4.8% and kilometers driven by 6.0%.
Table 3 presents estimation results for all parameters; model fixed effects are not shown.
Many coefficients are estimated at the 0.05 significance level or better, with signs that align with
prior expectations. People prefer cars with more torque; older drivers prefer safer cars. Larger
households prefer SUVs over sedans and hatchbacks. All else equal, driving distance increases
with family size and decreases with age and women drive less than men.
Estimates of the short run elasticity of VKT with respect to operating cost implied by our
model are similar to those found in other studies using household data.21 Evaluated at the mean
operating cost for diesel and petrol vehicles, these elasticities are -0.68 for diesel car owners and
-0.93 for petrol car owners. Bento et al. (2009) report elasticities of VKT with respect to
operating cost of -0.74 for car owners in the US based on the 2001 Nationwide Household
Transportation Survey. West (2004), using data from the 1997 US Consumer Expenditure
21

Equation (5) implies that the elasticity of VKT with respect to operating cost is

.

16

Survey, estimates an elasticity of VKT with respect to operating cost of -0.87. Frondel et al.
(2012) report a corresponding elasticity of -0.62 for one-car households in Germany based on
data from 1997-2009.22
The income elasticity of VKT implied by our model, which is conditional on vehicle
ownership, is about 0.28.23 Other studies have also found low estimates of the impact of income
on VKTs. Using the 1990 Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey, Bento et al. (2005) find
an elasticity of distance driven with respect to income of 0.12 for two-vehicle households and
0.23 for one-vehicle households. Studies by Mannering and Winston (1985) and Train (1986)
also suggest that income has a small effect on distance driven, holding number of vehicles
constant.
Table 4 displays the elasticities of fuel consumption implied by our model. 24 We
calculate long-run elasticities by varying (e.g.) diesel fuel price, holding everything else constant,
and allowing buyers to switch vehicles as well as distance driven. Raising the price of diesel fuel
by 5% lowers diesel fuel consumption by 7.9%, implying a long-run, own-price elasticity of
consumption of -1.58. Most of the reduction in diesel fuel consumption reflects the shift from
diesel to petrol cars; conditional on buying a diesel, diesel fuel consumption falls by only 3%.
Taking into account the increase in petrol consumed as buyers shift from diesel to petrol cars, the
long-run elasticity of total fuel consumed with respect to the price of diesel is only –0.29. The
long-run own-price elasticity of petrol consumption is –1.35; again, the reduction in petrol
consumption is partly achieved by buyers switching to diesel cars. The associated increase in
diesel fuel consumption implies a long-run elasticity of total fuel consumption with respect to
petrol for price of –0.39.25 It is the long-run elasticities of total fuel consumption that are relevant
to our evaluation of fuel conservation policies in the new car market.
22

The median number of cars owned by households in our sample is one.
It is, on average, about 0.27 conditional on owning a petrol vehicle and 0.30 conditional on owning on a diesel
vehicle.
24
Bootstrapped standard errors are shown in parentheses. These standard errors are calculated by taking 500 random
draws from a joint normal distribution based on the point estimates and simulation-robust covariance matrix of the
parameter estimates. For each random draw, the elasticities are calculated and the standard errors are calculated
from the resulting distribution of elasticities.
25
Formally, the impact of a marginal change in the diesel fuel tax on total fuel consumption can be expressed as
23

where

is the number of cars sold of fuel type and

s average fuel consumption by a

car of fuel type .

17

Table 4 also reports the long-run elasticity of total fuel consumption in response to a
change in the price of diesel cars. This elasticity is -0.150—approximately half as large as the
elasticity of total fuel consumption with respect to diesel fuel price. This result agrees
qualitatively with Verboven (2002) who finds that the elasticity of diesel market share in Europe
is more sensitive to fuel taxes than to car taxes. Our result is also consistent with Vance and
Mehlin (2009) who study of the impact of fuel taxes and car taxes in Germany.
Our long-run fuel demand elasticity estimates reflect an elasticity of the market share of
diesel cars with respect to diesel fuel price of -1.01. This elasticity plays a key role in our policy
analysis: it is the shift of diesel car buyers to petrol cars that generates the tax revenues that
offset the welfare effects of the diesel fuel tax. It is difficult to find comparable elasticities
reported in the literature. Verboven (2002) estimates the elasticity of petrol market share with
respect to the petrol/diesel fuel tax differential, but not with respect to diesel fuel price. Givord et
al. (2014) examine the impact of raising the tax on diesel fuel in France to equal the tax on petrol
fuel. They estimate that this would result in a decline in the diesel share of new cars purchased
by 7.55% to 9.26%.26
Table 4 also displays elasticities of fuel consumption conditional on buying a diesel or a
petrol vehicle.27 When the price of diesel rises by 5%, diesel car owners reduce fuel consumption
by 3%; when petrol price rises by 5% petrol car owners reduce fuel consumption by 4%.
Although we focus on the long-run impact of fuel taxes on the new car market, these taxes will
have impacts on the used car market. Conditional elasticities may be used to give a rough
estimate of these effects.

6. Policy Simulations
We use our behavioral model to explore the welfare implications of taxing diesel fuel and
diesel cars and contrast this with the welfare implications of raising the tax on petrol fuel. We
measure the welfare effects of a policy as the sum of the deadweight loss of the policy and its
26

Equalizing the taxes on diesel and petrol raises the price of diesel by about 17% in 2011, implying an elasticity of
about -0.5.
27
The conditional elasticity of diesel fuel consumption is the elasticity of average fuel consumption by diesel car
drivers when diesel price rises.

18

impact on the externalities associated with fuel consumption (equation (2)). As noted in equation
(1) the deadweight loss of a diesel fuel tax depends on the level of the tax on petrol fuel and on
diesel and petrol cars. In 2010, petrol was taxed at a rate of 12.7 Rs./L and diesel and petrol cars
were subject to sales taxes of 22.5%. To measure the externalities associated with fuel use, we
rely on the work of Parry et al. (2014) who compute the value of externalities per liter of diesel
and petrol associated with greenhouse gases, congestion, local air pollution, and accidents for
countries throughout the world, including India. If the value of a statistical life is transferred
from the United States to India at market exchange rates, assuming an income elasticity of 1, the
damages in 2010 are 12.4 Rs./L for petrol and 13.1 Rs./L for diesel used in passenger vehicles
(see Appendix A for details.)
We begin with a tax on diesel fuel that equates the prices of diesel and petrol fuel, a
policy considered by the Government of India’s Expert Group on Pricing Petroleum Products
(Parikh, 2010). In 2010, diesel was not taxed, but petrol was taxed at a rate of 12.7 Rs./L. Policy
1 imposes a tax of 12.7 Rs./L on diesel, raising its price by 34.5%.28 Policy 2 imposes a tax on
new diesel vehicles. To make this policy comparable to policy 1, we set the diesel car tax at
25.1%, the rate that results in the same after-tax market share for diesel vehicles as policy 1. For
the diesel car tax to result in the same reduction in total fuel consumption as policy 1 would
require a tax of over 80%, which we view as politically infeasible. Policy 3 examines a smaller
diesel fuel tax of 3.06 Rs./L (8.34%) that results in the same total fuel conservation as policy 2.
We then contrast these results with the welfare costs of further increases in the petrol fuel
tax. Policy 4 is a tax on petrol fuel that achieves the same reduction in total fuel consumption as
the large diesel fuel tax (policy 1) while policy 5 is a smaller petrol fuel tax that results in the
same total fuel conservation as the diesel car tax (policy 2) and the smaller diesel fuel tax (policy
3).
6.1 Policy Simulation Results
For each policy, we use the model of section 3 to compute the impact of the policy on
market shares, driving distances, fuel consumption, government revenue, and the external costs
28

We note that Policy 1 is very close to levying a Pigovian tax of 13.14 Rs./L on diesel fuel and 12.42 Rs./L on
petrol fuel. When we model the Pigovian taxes, they reduce fuel use by 7.09% at a deadweight loss of 8.04 Rs./L
and a welfare gain of 4.58 Rs./L.

19

of fuel use. We also compute the compensating variation associated with each policy, i.e., the
amount of money that new car buyers would have to receive to restore them to their pre-tax level
of utility. To calculate the welfare effects of each policy we subtract the increase in government
revenues resulting from the policy from compensating variation and add to this the change in
external costs associated with the policy. All results, including reductions in the external costs of
fuel use, are extrapolated from our sample to all 2010 new car buyers.29 Comparisons of market
outcomes and welfare results under the policy simulations are presented in Table 5.30 For ease of
comparison we present model simulation results in the absence of any of the above policies (PrePolicy Baseline).
Policy 1: Large Diesel Fuel Tax
The price-equalizing diesel fuel tax (policy 1) has a greater impact on fuel consumption
than the diesel car tax (policy 2), reducing total fuel consumption by 7.18%. Sixty-nine percent
of the reduction in diesel fuel use occurs because people switch to petrol vehicles: the policy
results in a decrease in diesel market share from 33.7% to 23.7%. The reduction in diesel fuel
consumption is, however, offset by a 15.8% increase in petrol fuel consumption. The buyers who
continue to purchase a diesel car decrease their fuel consumption by 18.6%. This effect accounts
for 68.5% of the reduction in total fuel consumption.
We estimate the welfare effects of this diesel fuel tax by calculating compensating
variation for new car owners in our dataset and extrapolating the results to the population of new
car owners.31 The compensating variation associated with the diesel tax is, on average, 6,790 Rs.
per new car buyer, or about 15.7 billion Rs. in the aggregate. The burden of the tax, however,
falls entirely on would-be diesel car buyers. Petrol car buyers bear none of the tax, as the price of
petrol is not changed by the policy. Total compensating variation divided by the number of diesel

29

2,309,000 new passenger vehicles were purchased in India in 2010 (Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers).
Standard errors are not provided for these results due to the computational burden of calculating them.
31
For each random draw from the distribution of taste parameters, compensating variation is calculated by solving
the equation
. The left hand side of this
equation is the indirect utility function in equation (3) without the
term. The right hand side is the counterfactual
version of the left hand side, with observed values of rental price, operating cost, etc. replaced by their post-policy
values, and with the income term augmented by compensating variation. Since indirect utility is not linear in
income, the equation must be solved numerically. Expected compensating variation is then calculated by averaging
over the results from each draw, and results are aggregated across individuals within a category (e.g. petrol car
buyers). See, for example, Herriges and Kling (1999) for further discussion.
30

20

car buyers in 2010 is 20,000 Rs., or about 3% of the average income of diesel car buyers. Given
the low elasticity of fuel consumption with respect to income, the burden of policy 1 on diesel
car buyers, in terms of welfare cost as a fraction of income, increases as income falls. The
ultimate regressivity of this diesel fuel tax depends, however, on what is done with the increased
revenue.
To determine the welfare cost of the tax we subtract the change in government revenues
from compensating variation and adjust the result for the change in externality costs. The diesel
fuel tax generates over 9 billion Rs. in the diesel fuel market. Because the initial diesel/petrol
price difference (12.7 Rs.) is due to the higher tax on petrol, the increase in petrol consumption
generates additional tax revenues in the petrol fuel market, although car sales tax revenues
decline. 32 Subtracting total revenue (11.6 billion Rs.) from compensating variation implies a
deadweight loss of 18.0 Rs. per liter of fuel conserved. The reduction in fuel consumption,
however, reduces externality costs by 3.26 billion Rs., implying that policy 1 has a net welfare
cost of 3.92 Rs./L.
Policy 2: Diesel Car Tax
By construction, the diesel car tax results in the same shift in car ownership from diesel
to petrol vehicles as the diesel fuel tax of policy 1. By shifting consumers out of diesel cars,
policy 2 reduces diesel fuel consumption, but this is largely offset by increased consumption of
petrol. On net, the 25.1% diesel car tax results in a 2.35% reduction in total fuel consumption by
new car buyers. The compensating variation of the car tax is lower, on average, than the diesel
fuel tax of policy 1: compensating variation is about 4,090 Rs. per household per year. The
compensating variation per liter of fuel conserved (117 Rs./L) is, however, almost twice that of
policy 1 (68.1 Rs./L) due to the smaller impact of policy 2 on fuel consumption.
The deadweight loss from the diesel car tax is actually negative. Revenue from increased
sales of petrol fuel, when added to revenues from the diesel car tax, are greater than the amount

32

There is also a change in tax revenue from pre-existing car taxes as buyers switch from diesel to petrol vehicles.
All states levy taxes on the purchase price of a new car. Because diesel cars are, in general, more expensive than
petrol cars, state tax revenues fall by approximately 1.4 billion Rs. We subtract this from the increase in fuel tax
revenues in calculating deadweight loss.

21

that new car buyers must be compensated to restore them to their pre-tax level of utility.33 The
deadweight loss per liter of fuel saved is -1.39 Rs./L. Goulder and Williams (2003) note that
ignoring the impact of a tax in one market on consumption in other markets with pre-existing
taxes can lead to biased estimates of the deadweight loss of a tax. This is clearly the case here. In
the case of policies 1 and 2, the shift of new car buyers to petrol vehicles increases petrol
consumption by over 15% (approximately 300 million liters), resulting in additional tax revenue
of over 3.8 billion Rs. When we take into account the reduction in externalities associated with
the diesel car tax, the net welfare cost of the tax is negative—i.e., the tax yields a benefit of 17.5
Rs./L of fuel reduced.

Policy 3: Small Diesel Fuel Tax
Whether the diesel car tax is superior to the diesel fuel tax depends on the policymaker’s
objectives. If they are to reduce fuel consumption, the car tax is not very effective. A fairer
comparison from the perspective of fuel conservation is between the diesel car tax and a tax on
diesel fuel that would achieve the same reduction in total fuel consumption. A 8.34% (3.06 Rs.)
tax on diesel fuel would reduce total fuel consumption by 2.35% among new car buyers. The tax
would reduce the market share of diesel vehicles from 34.0% to 31.0%. Two-thirds of the
reduction in diesel consumption that results from this tax (161 million liters per year) is due to
the shift to petrol vehicles. Again, this reduction is partially offset by an increase of about 85
million liters in petrol consumption. The remainder of the reduction in diesel consumption is due
to a 4.96% reduction in diesel consumption by buyers who continue to purchase diesel cars.34
While compensating variation per liter of fuel conserved is only slightly lower (60.8 Rs./L) than
in the case of the larger diesel fuel tax (68.1 Rs./L), deadweight loss per liter of fuel conserved is
much smaller (7.53 Rs./L compared with 18.0 Rs./L for policy 1). Once we account for the
reduction in externalities associated with reduced fuel consumption the welfare cost of policy 3
is negative, i.e., the policy delivers a benefit of 6.48 Rs./L of fuel conserved.
Policies 4 and 5: Additional Petrol Fuel Tax
33

In evaluating the deadweight loss of the diesel car tax, we include the increased petrol car tax revenue in addition
to the increased diesel car tax revenue and increased petrol fuel tax revenue in our total increase in government
revenue (see footnote 28).
34
The reduction in diesel consumption by diesel car buyers accounts for approximately 71% of the total reduction in
fuel consumed.

22

Because diesel fuel is not taxed in the baseline scenario, reducing fuel consumption by
increasing the tax on petrol will shift buyers into the market for diesel, but this will generate no
diesel fuel tax revenue to offset the welfare cost of the higher petrol tax. Car sales tax revenues
will, however, increase because diesel cars are, on average, more expensive than petrol cars. The
analysis of policies 4 and 5 demonstrates the importance of empirical analysis when theory is
ambiguous. Policy 4, which saves as much fuel as the larger diesel fuel tax (policy 1), creates a
slightly smaller deadweight loss per liter of fuel saved than policy 1 (16.1 Rs./L for policy 5 v.
18.0 Rs./L for policy 1). Policy 5, which reduces total fuel consumption by the same amount as
the smaller diesel fuel tax (policy 3), creates a slightly larger deadweight loss per liter of fuel
saved than policy 3 (8.85 Rs./L for policy 5 v. 7.53 Rs./L for policy 3). However, when the
impact of the taxes on externality costs are taken into account, the diesel fuel taxes perform
better than the taxes on petrol fuels: the welfare cost of the large diesel fuel tax (3.92 Rs./L
saved) is slightly lower than the petrol fuel tax (4.55 Rs./L saved). The small diesel fuel tax
generates benefits of 6.48 Rs./L while the small petrol tax generates benefits of 2.98 Rs./L of fuel
conserved.
6.2 Discussion
The results above are subject to three caveats. The first is that, because we have data only
on new-car buyers, the model we estimate includes no outside good. We cannot, therefore,
estimate the impact of the policies on the total number of cars sold. To the extent that all five
policies raise the cost of car ownership they are likely to reduce new car sales. Our analysis
above, because it ignores this impact, is likely to understate the reduction in fuel savings from all
policies.
The second caveat is that we do not estimate supply-side responses to our policies.35 It is
likely that automakers might react to policies 1-3 by lowering the price of diesel cars. This would
attenuate the impact of these policies in shifting buyers to petrol vehicles and would reduce fuel
savings. Similar adjustments would be expected in the case of policies 4 and 5.36

35

Estimating supply-responses is difficult in the absence of an outside good since own-price elasticities are likely to
be under-estimated.
36
It is difficult to say much about how the omitted outside option and supply side response would differentially
affect our results across the various policies considered here. Our intuition, however, is that ignoring these factors

23

The third caveat is that all taxes would have impacts in the used car market. In 2010, fuel
taxes would achieve much greater reductions in fuel use in the used car market than in the new
car market, given that the stock of registered cars as of 2009 was 6.6 times the number of new
cars sold in 2010 (Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 2012).37 The diesel fuel tax would
likely hasten the retirement of diesel cars and would reduce fuel consumption by existing diesel
vehicles. In contrast, the tax on new diesel cars would likely increase the lifetimes of used diesel
vehicles but would have no impact on the kilometers they are driven. We cannot analyze the
welfare impacts of either policy on the used car market due to lack of data; however, ignoring the
used car market clearly understates the fuel conservation benefits of the diesel fuel tax relative to
a tax on new diesel cars.38

6.3 Implications of Our Results for CAFE Standards
Our model results also have important implications for the size of the rebound effect
associated with fuel economy standards in India. In 2014 the Bureau of Economic Efficiency
issued weight-based CAFE standards that went into effect in 2015-16, with more stringent
standards for 2020-21. These are weight-based standards, with lighter cars being subject to
stricter standards than heavier ones. Ignoring the impact of CAFE standards on vehicle choice
and kilometers driven, the 2015-16 standards would decrease fuel consumption by 28% for
petrol cars and 12% for diesel cars.39 Weighting these percentages by market shares, total fuel
consumption would decline by about 22%.
We use our model to simulate the market outcome following a hypothetical fuel economy
improvement sufficient to satisfy the proposed fuel economy standard. Because diesel cars have
higher fuel economy than petrol cars, they will be less affected by the standard. The standard,
has a larger impact for the more extreme policies. For example, more consumers would prefer to choose the outside
option under a 34.5% diesel fuel tax than under an 8.34% diesel fuel tax. By not including that preferred option, it is
likely the case that our welfare and deadweight loss calculations are more biased toward larger (in absolute value)
values for the large tax policies than for the small tax policies.
37
Our current dataset does not permit analysis of the impact of any of our policies on the stock of used cars, as we
have data only on new car buyers.
38
There is no survey of vehicle owners in India that is similar to the National Household Travel Survey in the US.
39
These are average figures based on 2010 JD Power data. The standard for 2015-16 is a weight-based standard
specifying that liters per 100 kilometers cannot exceed 0.0024*kerbweight (in kilograms) + 3.0014. These figures
correspond to a 38% increase in fuel economy for petrol cars and a 14% increase for diesel cars.

24

therefore, will lead to a greater improvement in the fuel economy for petrol cars and lead to a
shift from diesel to petrol vehicles. Indeed, we predict petrol market share to increase from 66%
to 74%.40 One might expect this to increase fuel savings, but the rebound effect in both petrol
and diesel markets is sizeable. The 28% average reduction in per-kilometer operating cost for
petrol vehicles leads to a 26% increase in kilometers driven. The 12% reduction in per-kilometer
operating cost for diesel vehicles results in a 8% increase in kilometers driven. The net effect of
these adjustments implies that the 2015-16 CAFE standard would, once consumers adjust, reduce
fuel consumption by 9% rather than 22%.41

7. Conclusions
India, like many developing countries, has historically taxed diesel fuel at a lower rate
than petrol. The Netherlands, Germany, France, and Belgium have also taxed diesel at a lower
rate than petrol. From an efficiency perspective, increasing the tax on diesel fuel may entail a
lower deadweight loss than further raising the tax on petrol. This, of course, depends on fuel
demand elasticities and on the existing level of diesel and petrol taxes. It may also lead to greater
welfare gains than taxing petrol, depending on the external costs per mile of burning diesel v.
petrol.
In this paper, we have estimated a structural econometric model of new car purchasing
decisions and driving behavior for the Indian car market, using data for 2010. We have used this
model to calculate the welfare effects of raising the taxes on diesel and petrol fuels and on diesel
cars, allowing consumers to adjust the vehicle they buy as well as kilometers driven in response
to taxes. Several results stand out.
If the goal of fuel and car taxation policy is to reduce fuel consumption, this is most
effectively done by taxing fuel rather than cars. Levying a tax of 34% on diesel fuel or an
additional tax of 31% on petrol fuel reduces fuel consumption by 7.2%.42 A tax on diesel cars of
25% reduces fuel consumption by only 2.4%. It is clear that a car tax provides no incentive to
40

These calculations ignore any pricing response by vehicle manufacturers.
This rebound effect is similar in magnitude to that reported by Frondel et al. (2012) for Germany.
42
Both taxes are calculated as a percent of the net of tax fuel price in 2010 (36.72 Rs./L), although the petrol fuel tax
is added to an existing tax of (12.65 Rs./L). The same is true of the diesel car tax—it is calculated as a percent of the
base price of the vehicle, but imposed on top of a 22.5% sales tax applied to all vehicles.
41

25

drive fewer miles—it works only by shifting diesel car buyers to petrol cars, which run on more
expensive fuel—but we have quantified the magnitude of this effect. To achieve the same fuel
reduction as the car tax requires a tax of 8.3% on diesel fuel or 8.2% on petrol.
The deadweight loss of taxation reflects the loss in consumer surplus in the market in
which the tax is imposed, net of any additional government revenues received as a result of the
tax. If there were no car sales taxes in India, raising the tax on diesel fuel from its 2010 base of
zero would yield a smaller deadweight loss per liter of fuel saved than increasing the tax on
petrol: raising the tax on diesel shifts car buyers into petrol cars, and petrol fuel is taxed at a
higher rate than diesel. There are, however, car sales taxes of 23% in the year of our study.
Because diesel cars are, on average, more expensive than petrol cars, this shift to petrol cars
lowers car sales tax revenue. The net effect of these impacts is to cause the deadweight loss per
liter of fuel saved by the large diesel tax to equal 18 Rs. while the excess burden of the larger
petrol fuel tax is 16 Rs. The results are reversed for the smaller fuel taxes: the deadweight loss of
the diesel tax is 7.5 Rs./L while it is 8.9 Rs./L for the petrol tax.
There are however, changes in external costs associated with fuel taxes: taxing diesel
reduces the average externality per liter of fuel saved by about 14 Rs., while taxing petrol
reduces it by about 12 Rs. Diesel fuel has slightly higher external costs per liter of fuel burned
(13 Rs./L v. 12 Rs./L for petrol) and taxing diesel shifts consumers into the fuel with the lower
external costs. Taking external costs into account implies that the welfare costs of the large taxes
on diesel and petrol are about 3.9 Rs./L and 4.6 Rs./L, respectively, while there is actually a net
welfare benefit from the smaller fuel taxes.
Finally, the tax on diesel cars, while not very effective in reducing fuel consumption, has
a negative deadweight loss of -1.4 Rs./L—the increase in tax revenues is actually greater than the
loss in consumer surplus—and a positive welfare benefit of 18 Rs./L.

26

Table 1. Sales-Weighted Vehicle Summary Statistics

Price (10 5 Rs. 2010)
Fuel Economy (km/L)
Operating Cost (Rs. 2010/km)
Engine Size (cc)
Power Ratio (hp/kg)
Torque (kg-m)
Gears
Automatic
Length (m)
Width (m)
Height (m)
Ground Clearance (m)
3

Weight (10 kg)
Safety Index
Luxury Index
# Models

Petrol
Diesel
Petrol
Hatchback Hatchback Sedan

Diesel
Sedan

Petrol
SUV

Diesel
SUV

3.94

5.22

8.33

7.47

3.07

9.23

(1.01)

(0.755)

(3.27)

(2.59)

(7.74)

(3.76)

14.2

15.9

12.2

15.0

12.7

11.9

(1.06)

(0.576)

(0.828)

(0.983)

(0.280)

(0.753)

3.51

2.31

4.05

2.46

3.88

3.10

(0.265)

(0.0850)

(0.276)

(0.185)

(0.0998)

(0.193)

1.06

1.31

1.51

1.40

1.21

2.45

(0.160)

(0.0664)

(0.257)

(0.210)

(0.155)

(0.186)

0.0745

0.0653

0.0938

0.0698

0.0796

0.0529

(0.00680)

(0.00498)

(0.0124)

(0.0107)

(0.00308)

(0.0185)

0.0949

0.172

0.141

0.190

0.103

0.232

(0.0180)

(0.0295)

(0.0326)

(0.0457)

(0.0165)

(0.0514)

4.93

5

5.01

5.02

5.01

5

(0.268)

(0)

(0.117)

(0.138)

(0.149)

(0)

0

0

0.0156

0.0100

0

0.0172

(0)

(0)

(0.127)

(0.104)

(0)

(0.137)

3.56

3.76

4.35

4.25

3.49

4.46

(0.173)

(0.0844)

(0.168)

(0.144)

(0.200)

(0.152)

1.57

1.69

1.70

1.68

1.48

1.78

(0.0775)

(0.00939)

(0.0376)

(0.0418)

(0.0515)

(0.0588)

1.55

1.52

1.50

1.52

1.80

1.89

(0.0748)

(0.0479)

(0.0515)

(0.0331)

(0.0179)

(0.0862)

1.68

1.67

1.68

1.66

1.60

1.85

(0.0531)

(0.0556)

(0.0876)

(0.0706)

(0.0373)

(0.124)

0.900

1.09

1.12

1.16

0.927

1.75

(0.118)

(0.0415)

(0.115)

(0.112)

(0.0941)

(0.163)

1.35

1.12

2.20

1.68

1.02

1.50

(0.597)

(0.401)

(0.779)

(0.719)

(0.298)

(0.641)

3.63

3.37

5.73

4.64

0.0901

3.93

(1.32)

(0.865)

(1.60)

(1.25)

(1.19)

(1.90)

21

8

20

13

2

10

Notes: This table presents sales-weighted means with standard deviations in parentheses. Version level
vehicle characteristics data come from AutoCar India and DriveInside.com. Model/fuel-type level vehicle
characteristics are constructed as the unweighted average across all available versions of each model/fueltype. The sales-weighted average of these is calculated for each vehicle category. Price and fuel economy data
are averaged over all JD Power APEAL survey respondents that purchased each vehicle type. Luxury index is
defined as the sum of the dummy variables for air conditioning, power steering, central locking, power
windows, alloy wheels, leather seats, power mirrors, and CD player. Safety index is defined as the sum of the
dummy variables for airbags, rear seatbelts, antilock braking system, and traction control.

27

Table 2. Demographic Summary Statistics

Income (10 5 Rs. 2010)
Family Size

Age (years)
% Female
Driving Distance (km/month)

Petrol
Diesel
Petrol
Hatchback Hatchback Sedan

Diesel
Sedan

Petrol
SUV

Diesel
SUV

5.05

5.12

6.95

5.96

5.88

6.67

(2.63)

(2.56)

(3.03)

(2.86)

(3.14)

(2.95)

4.72

4.93

5.02

5.18

5.54

5.43

(1.55)

(1.51)

(1.63)

(1.63)

(1.56)

(1.61)

38.0

36.1

37.2

36.5

37.9

36.9

(11.4)

(10.7)

(10.4)

(9.18)

(10.2)

(9.84)

0.0867

0.0330

0.0469

0.0332

0.0153

0.0281

(0.281)

(0.179)

(0.211)

(0.1793)

(0.123)

(0.165)

14500

24000

16600

22500

16600

26300

(16000)

(25200)

(18000)

(22200)

(16800)

(25100)

# Observations
2354
575
1173
903
131
996
Notes: This table presents unweighted means with standard deviations in parentheses. Owner demographics
come from the 2010 JD Power APEAL survey.

Table 3. Demand Model Parameter Estimates
Standard
Error
(0.00129)
(0.0588)
(0.00982)
(0.122)
(0.0981)
(0.0824)
(0.000606)
(0.00467)
(2.17E-05)
(0.00699)
(0.117)
(0.0247)
Standard
Standard
Standard
RANDOM
Coefficient
Error
Deviation
Error
Income - Rent (β)
-2.93***
(0.103)
0.0589
(0.0506)
Operating Cost (α)
-1.43***
(0.109)
0.429***
(0.0639)
*p<10%, **p<5%, ***p<1% (based on simulation-robust standared errors)
Notes: This table presents full information maximum likelihood coefficient estimates with 54
model fixed effects (not shown). Integrals are simulated using 200 shifted and shuffled
Halton draws. Number of observation=6132, LL=-29946 at convergence.
FIXED
Age
Female
Family Size
Power Ratio
Torque
Weight
Family Size x Hatcback
Family Size x Sedan
Age x Safey Index
Family Size x Power Ratio
Scale Factor (μ)
Taste For Driving (σ)

Coefficient
-0.00879***
-0.282***
0.0470***
0.0238
0.301***
-0.343***
-0.00233***
-0.00109***
3.06E-05*
-0.00519
0.782***
0.863***

28

Table 4. Fuel Consumption Elasticities
Petrol
Petrol
Diesel
Diesel
Total Fuel
(Long Run) (Conditional) (Long Run) (Conditional) (Long Run)
Petrol Fuel Price
-1.35***
-0.803***
1.12***
0
-0.389***
(0.0923)
(0.0666)
(0.143)
(0.0361)
Diesel Fuel Price
0.530***
0
-1.58***
-0.600***
-0.294***
(0.0728)
(0.126)
(0.0494)
(0.0302)
Petrol Car Price
-0.676***
-0.0431***
1.22***
0
0.0648***
(0.110)
(0.0181)
(0.201)
(0.0180)
Diesel Car Price
0.948***
0
-1.86***
-0.0374***
-0.15***
(0.128)
(0.210)
(0.00990)
(0.0210)
Income
0.26***
0.329***
0.490***
0.355***
0.350***
(0.0234)
(0.0274)
(0.0426)
(0.0317)
(0.0300)
*p<10%, **p<5%, ***p<1% (based on simulation-robust standared errors)
Notes: This table presents long-run and conditional elasticities of fuel consumption (petrol, diesel,
and total) with respect to price or income using paramter estimates presented in Table 3. All longrun elasticities and conditional, own-price elasticities are calculated by increasing price or income
5% from baseline values. Long-run elasticities are based on changes in total fuel consumption by
all households and reflect changes in vehicle choice and driving distance. Conditional, own-price
elasticities are based on changes in average fuel consumption conditional on owning a vehicle of a
given fuel type. Conditional, cross-price elasticities are, by definition, equal to zero. Bootstrapped
standard errors, in parentheses, are calculated by taking 500 random draws from a joint normal
distribution based on the point estimates and simulation-robust covariance matrix of the parameter
estimates. For each random draw, the elasticities are calculated and standard errors are obtained
from the resulting distribution of elasticities.

29

Table 5. Policy Simulation Results

Pre-Policy
Baseline

(POLICY 1)
34.46%
Diesel
Fuel Tax

(POLICY 2)
25.13%
Diesel
Car Tax

(POLICY 3)
8.34%
Diesel
Fuel Tax

(POLICY 4)
30.88%
Petrol
Fuel Tax

(POLICY 5)
8.23%
Petrol
Fuel Tax

Market Share
(%)

petrol
diesel

66.3%
33.7%

76.3%
23.7%

76.3%
23.7%

69.0%
31.0%

58.0%
42.0%

63.9%
36.1%

Total Fuel Consumptions
(10 6 L)

petrol
diesel

1960
1260

2270
720

2260
879

2040
1100

1420
1560

1800
1340

Total Fuel Conserved
(%)

7.18%

2.35%

2.35%

7.18%

2.35%

Total CV
(10 6 Rs. 2010)

15700

9460

4600

14200

4380

3890
9100
2370
-3790

3830
0
2250
3480

1080
3360
656
-1060

9370
0
-1940
3060

3400
0
-550
860

18.0

-1.39

7.53

16.1

8.85

3260

1220

1060

2660

895

3.92

-17.5

-6.48

4.55

-2.98

Government Revenue
(10 6 Rs. 2010)
Deadweight Loss/
Liter Conserved
(Without Externality
Abatement Benefit)
(Rs. 2010/L)
Externality Abatement Benefit
(10 6 Rs. 2010)
Deadweight Loss/
Liter Conserved
(With Externality
Abatement Benefit)
(Rs. 2010/L)

petrol fuel
diesel fuel
petrol car
diesel car

Notes: This table presents policy simulation results for year 2010 using paramter estimates presented in Table 3. 2010 petrol
and diesel fuel prices (in Rs. 2010/liter) were 49.37 and 36.72, respectively. Thus, a 34.46% diesel fuel tax amounts to 12.65
Rs./L and an 8.34% diesel fuel tax amounts to 3.06 Rs./L. In both cases, the existing tax on petrol fuel is assumed equal to
12.65 Rs./L. An 8.23% petrol fuel tax amounts to 3.02 Rs./L and a 30.88% petrol fuel tax amounts to 11.34 Rs./L. In both
cases, the new petrol fuel tax is added to the prevailing petrol fuel prices inclusive of the pre-existing petrol fuel tax. The
externality abatement benefit is calculated as 12.42 Rs. per liter of petrol fuel conserved and 13.14 Rs. per liter of diesel fuel
conserved. Deadweight loss per liter without the externality abatement benefit is calculated as compensating variation per liter
minus government revenue per liter. Deadweight loss per liter with the externality abatement benefit is calculated as
compensating variation per liter minus government revenue per liter minus externality abatement benefit per liter.

30

Figure 1: Diesel Share by Passenger Vehicle Segment

Segment Share (%)

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
hatchback

0

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

sedan

2008

2009

suv

2010

Year
Source: Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM) (various years)

31

Figure 2: Nominal Fuel Price (Rs./Liter) for Petrol and Diesel—2001-2013

70
60
50
40
30
20

2014

Petrol
2012

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2011

Diesel

0

2013

10

2010

Nominal Price (Rs./Liter)

80

Date
Source: Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Govt. of India

32

Figure 3: Model Fit (Market Shares)
60

Market Share (%)

50

40

30
Actual
Predicted

20

10

0
Petrol
Hatchback

Diesel
Hatchback

Petrol
Sedan

Diesel
Sedan

Petrol
SUV

Diesel
SUV

Body Type
Source: Authors’ calculations

33

Figure 4: Model Fit (Driving Distance)
30000

Driving Distance (KM/Year)

25000

20000

15000
Actual
Predicted

10000

5000

0
Petrol
Diesel
Hatchback Hatchback

Petrol
Sedan

Diesel
Sedan

Petrol
SUV

Diesel
SUV

Body Type
Source: Authors’ calculations

34

References
Anand, M. (2012). Diesel Pricing in India: Entangled in Policy Maze. National Institute of Public Financing
and Policy.
Arora, S., Vyas, A., & Johnson, L. R. (2011, Februrary). Projections of Highway Vehicle Population, Energy
Demand, and CO2 Emissions in India to 2040. Natural Resources Forum, 35(1), 49-62.
Bento, A. L., Goulder, L., Jacobsen, M., & Haefen, R. v. (2009). Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of
Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes. American Economic Review, 99(3), 1-37.
Bento, A. M., Cropper, M. L., Mobarak, A. M., & Vinha, K. (2005, August). The Effects of Urban Spatial
Structure on Travel Demand in the United States. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3),
466-478.
Carazoo.com. (2011, March 7). Car Loans - More Than Meets the Eye. Retrieved May 25, 2013, from
carazoo.com: www.carazoo.com/article/1606200801/Car-Loans---More-Than-Meets-the-Eye
Chaturyedi, B. K. (2008). Report of the High Powered Committee on Financial Position of Petroleum
Companies. Government of India, Petroleum Ministry.
Chugh, R., Cropper, M., & Narain, U. (2011, November). The Cost of Fuel Economy in the Indian
Passenger Vehicle Market. Energy Policy, 39, 7174-7183.
Datta, A. (2010). The Incidence of Fuel Taxation in India. Energy Economics, 32, S26-S33.
Dubin, J., & McFadden, D. (1984, March). An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance
Holdings and Consumption. Econometrica, 52(2), 345-362.
Feng, Y., Fullerton, D., & Gan, L. (2005, August). Vehicle Choices, Miles Driven and Pollution Policies.
NBER Working Paper Series, 1153.
Gillingham, K. (2010). How Do Consumers Respond to Gasoline Price Shocks? Working Paper.
Goldberg, P. K. (1998, March). The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standard in the U.S.
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(1), 1-33.
Herriges, J., & Kling, C. (1999, February). Nonlinear Income Effects in Random Utility Models. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 81(1), 62-72.
McFadden, D. (1995). Computing Willingness-to-Pay in Random Utility Models. Working Paper.
Parikh, K. S. (2010). Report of the Expert Group on a Viable and Sustainable System of Pricing of
Petroleum Products. Government of India.

35

Seth, Y. (2009, January 7). Auto Lenders Set to Revise Interest Rates. Retrieved May 25, 2013, from
financialexpress.com: www.financialexpress.com/news/auto-lenders-set-to-revise-interestrates/407419/
Shankar, N. (2007, October 17). Auto Loan Interest Rates Slashed by Bank of India. Retrieved May 25,
2013, from rupeetimes.com:
www.rupeetimes.com/news/car_loans/auto_loan_interest_rates_slashed_by_bank_of_india_1
079.html
Train, K. (2000). Halton Sequences for Mixed Logit. Working Paper.
Train, K. (2009). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.
Train, K., & Winston, C. (2007, November). Vehicle Choice Behavior and the Declining Market Share of
U.S. Automakers. International Economic Review, 48(4), 1469-1496.
West, S. (2004). Distributional effects of alternative vehicle pollution control policies. Journal of Public
Economics, 88, 735-757.

West, S. and Williams, R. (2004). Estimates from a Consumer Demand System: Implications for
the Incidence of Environmental Taxes. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 47(3): 535-558.
West, S. and Williams, R. (2005). The Cost of Reducing Gasoline Consumption. American
Economic Review, 95(2): 294-299.
Xiao, J. and Ju, H. (2014). Market Equilibrium and the Environmental Effects of Tax
Adjustments in China’s Automobile Industry. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2):
306-317.

36

Appendix A. Externality Costs of Petrol and Diesel Fuels
We base our estimates of the externality costs of petrol and diesel fuels on a recent
study by Parry et al. (2014). The authors quantify the social cost of local and global air
pollution, traffic congestion, and road traffic accidents for various countries, including India.
For health damages (damages associated with local air pollution and accidents), we combine
Parry et al.’s estimates of physical damages per liter of fuel with a value of a statistical life
(VSL) for India of $150,000 (in 2010 US dollars). This corresponds to a base VSL of $3.9
million (the base value used by Parry et al.) and an income elasticity of the VSL of one. The
corresponding VSL in 2010 rupees (6,750,000 Rs.) is in line with studies of the VSL in India
(Bhattacharya et al. 2007; Madheswaran 2007). The value of global pollution is based on the
US social cost of carbon of $35/ton CO2 in 2010 (Interagency Working Group on Social
Cost of Carbon 2013). The resulting components of externality costs (abatement benefits) per
liter of diesel and petrol are as follows:
Table A.1. Externality Abatement Benefits by Category and Fuel Type
Global Pollution ($/L)
Local Pollution ($/L)
Accident Costs ($/L)
Congestion Costs ($/L)
Total Externality Cost ($/L)
Total Externality Cost (Rs./L)

Petrol
0.800
0.009
0.158
0.029
0.276
12.42

Diesel
0.090
0.020
0.158
0.024
0.292
13.14

Note: Our accident damages per liter of diesel fuel reflect
Parry et al.'s (2014) assumption that accident risks are the
same for all vehicle classes.

37

Appendix B. Robustness to Alternative Specification
Table B.1 presents demand parameter estimates using a specification that includes make
fixed effects and a large number of car characteristics. Compared to the main specification,
which includes model fixed effects, this specification does not control as precisely for
unobservable car characteristics. However, it does allow for greater variation in operating cost
since not all car models are available in both petrol and diesel variants.
Tables B.2 and B.3 use this alternative specification to calculate elasticities and policy
simulation results. The tax values used in Table B.3 are not identical to those used in Table 5.
Instead, they are the tax values necessary to make the various policies comparable along certain
dimensions (e.g. the diesel car tax of policy 2 is that necessary to result in the same diesel
market share as in policy 1, policy 3 is the diesel fuel tax necessary to result in the same fuel
conservation as in policy 2, etc.). A comparison of Tables B.2 and B.3 to tables 4 and 5,
respectively, show little difference in terms of calculated elasticities and policy results.

38

Table B.1. Demand Model Parameter Estimates with Make Fixed Effects
Standard
Error
(0.00305)
(0.00500)
(0.00131)
(0.0585)
(0.0101)
(0.00338)
(0.0627)
(0.0112)
(0.00792)
(0.00802)
(0.00406)
(0.00560)
(0.00903)
(0.00290)
(0.00489)
(0.00149)
(0.000518)
(0.000540)
(0.000589)
-3.03E-05
(0.00751)
(0.0776)
(0.0225)
Standard
Standard
Standard
RANDOM
Coefficient
Error
Deviation
Error
Income - Rent (β)
-2.87***
(0.0977)
0.0274
(0.0322)
Operating Cost (α)
-1.44***
(0.107)
0.441***
(0.0551)
*p<10%, **p<5%, ***p<1% (based on simulation-robust standared errors)
Notes: This table presents full information maximum likelihood coefficient estimates with 12
make fixed effects (not shown). Integrals are simulated using 200 shifted and shuffled
Halton draws. Number of observation=6132, LL=-30496 at convergence.
FIXED
Hatchback
Sedan
Age
Female
Family Size
Engine Size
Power Ratio
Torque
Length
Width
Height
Ground Clearance
Weight
Gears
Automatic
Safety Index
Luxury Index
Family Size x Hatcback
Family Size x Sedan
Age x Safey Index
Family Size x Power Ratio
Scale Factor (μ)
Taste For Driving (σ)

Coefficient
0.00465*
0.0140***
-0.00872***
-0.293***
0.0499***
0.0270***
0.0478
0.00474
-0.0463***
-0.0610***
-0.0155***
0.0423***
0.0181**
0.0234***
-0.0146***
0.00494***
0.00295***
-0.00272***
-0.00150***
2.29E-05
-0.00474
0.910***
0.859***

39

Table B.2. Fuel Consumption Elasticities
Petrol
Petrol
Diesel
Diesel
Total Fuel
(Long Run) (Conditional) (Long Run) (Conditional) (Long Run)
Petrol Fuel Price
-1.27***
-0.793***
0.980***
0
-0.400***
(0.0594)
(0.0619)
(0.0469)
(0.0298)
Diesel Fuel Price
0.461***
0
-1.44***
-0.590***
-0.278***
(0.0248)
(0.0601)
(0.0458)
(0.0260)
Petrol Car Price
-0.596***
-0.0397***
1.08***
0
0.0520***
(0.0331)
(0.00430)
(0.0481)
(0.00960)
Diesel Car Price
0.820***
0
-1.63***
-0.0345***
-0.128***
(0.0480)
(0.0693)
(0.00640)
(0.0107)
Income
0.280***
0.350***
0.515***
0.377***
0.371***
(0.0202)
(0.0243)
(0.0367)
(0.0280)
(0.0265)
*p<10%, **p<5%, ***p<1% (based on simulation-robust standared errors)
Notes: This table presents long-run and conditional elasticities of fuel consumption (petrol, diesel,
and total) with respect to price or income using paramter estimates presented in Table B.1. All
long-run elasticities and conditional, own-price elasticities are calculated by increasing price or
income 5% from baseline values. Long-run elasticities are based on changes in total fuel
consumption by all households and reflect changes in vehicle choice and driving distance.
Conditional, own-price elasticities are based on changes in average fuel consumption conditional
on owning a vehicle of a given fuel type. Conditional, cross-price elasticities are, by definition,
equal to zero. Bootstrapped standard errors, in parentheses, are calculated by taking 500 random
draws from a joint normal distribution based on the point estimates and simulation-robust
covariance matrix of the parameter estimates. For each random draw, the elasticities are
calculated and standard errors are obtained from the resulting distribution of elasticities.

40

Table B.3. Policy Simulation Results

Pre-Policy
Baseline

(POLICY 1)
34.46%
Diesel
Fuel Tax

(POLICY 2)
24.65%
Diesel
Car Tax

(POLICY 3)
7.54%
Diesel
Fuel Tax

(POLICY 4)
20.8%
Petrol
Fuel Tax

(POLICY 5)
5.1%
Petrol
Fuel Tax

Market Share
(%)

petrol
diesel

66.4%
33.6%

75.2%
24.8%

75.2%
24.8%

68.6%
31.4%

59.8%
40.2%

64.7%
35.3%

Total Fuel Consumptions
(10 6 L)

petrol
diesel

1970
1250

2240
751

2230
915

2040
1110

1500
1490

1840
1310

Total Fuel Conserved
(%)

6.99%

2.04%

2.04%

6.99%

2.04%

Total CV

15700

9400

4100

13500

3760

3430
9500
2140
-3280

3370
0
2000
4190

856
3090
531
-826

9490
0
-1590
2400

3020
0
-412
619

17.3

-2.55

6.97

14.3

8.15

3150

1050

910

2620

769

3.28

-18.6

-6.91

2.66

-3.60

6

(10 Rs. 2010)
Government Revenue
(10 6 Rs. 2010)
Deadweight Loss/
Liter Conserved
(Without Externality
Abatement Benefit)
(Rs. 2010/L)
Externality Abatement Benefit

petrol fuel
diesel fuel
petrol car
diesel car

(10 6 Rs. 2010)
Deadweight Loss/
Liter Conserved
(With Externality
Abatement Benefit)
(Rs. 2010/L)

Notes: This table presents policy simulation results for year 2010 using paramter estimates presented in Table B.1. 2010 petrol
and diesel fuel prices (in Rs. 2010/liter) were 49.37 and 36.72, respectively. Thus, a 34.46% diesel fuel tax amounts to 12.65
Rs./L and an 7.54% diesel fuel tax amounts to 2.77 Rs./L. In both cases, the existing tax on petrol fuel is assumed equal to
12.65 Rs./L. A 5.1% petrol fuel tax amounts to 1.87 Rs./L and a 20.8% petrol fuel tax amounts to 7.63 Rs./L. In both cases,
the new petrol fuel tax is added to the prevailing petrol fuel prices inclusive of the pre-existing petrol fuel tax. The externality
abatement benefit is calculated as 12.42 Rs. per liter of petrol fuel conserved and 13.14 Rs. per liter of diesel fuel conserved.
Deadweight loss per liter without the externality abatement benefit is calculated as compensating variation per liter minus
government revenue per liter. Deadweight loss per liter with the externality abatement benefit is calculated as compensating
variation per liter minus government revenue per liter minus externality abatement benefit per liter.

41

