                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      VIOLENCE AND THE FORMATION OF HOPELESSNESS AND PESSIMISTIC
              PROSPECTS OF UPWARD MOBILITY IN COLOMBIA

                                        Andrés Moya
                                        Michael Carter

                                      Working Paper 20463
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20463


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2014, Revised February 2018




This paper previously circulated under the title “Violence and the Formation of Hopelessness and
Pessimistic Prospects of Upward Mobility in Colombia.” We thank Steve Boucher, Carlos
Chiapa, Ghada Elabed, Hilary Hoynes, Miriam Golden, Guy Grossman, Rachid Laajaj, Evan
Lieberman, Travis Lybbert, and Juan Fernando Vargas as well as the participants at the Northeast
Development Conference at Harvard University, Households in Conflict Network Workshop at
UC Berkeley, EGAP at Cape Town, and seminars at CIDE, UC Davis, University of Cape Town,
and Universidad de los Andes for useful comments. Gabriela Paredes and María José Torres
provided outstanding research assistance. This paper would have not been possible without the
support of community leaders and local priests, and without the victims’ willingness to
participate and revisit their painful experiences of violence. The Pacific Rim Research
Dissertation Grant, the Programa de Dinámicas Territoriales from RIMISP, and the Henry A.
Jastro Award provided generous funding to collect the data, while the Harry Frank Guggenheim
Foundation provided a dissertation fellowship to Moya. IRB Approval for the collection of
human subjects data was awarded by the University of California, Davis. The usual disclaimers
apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Andrés Moya and Michael Carter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Violence and the Formation of Hopelessness and Pessimistic Prospects of Upward Mobility
in Colombia
Andrés Moya and Michael Carter
NBER Working Paper No. 20463
September 2014, Revised February 2018
JEL No. D03,D84,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

We explore the impact of violence on perceived prospects of upward mobility. For a sample of
victims of violence in Colombia, we bring together data on expected upward mobility, exposure
to violence, and symptoms of psychological trauma. After controlling for material losses and
current circumstances, we find that exposure to more severe violence leads victims’ perceived
prospects of upward mobility to become increasingly hopeless. The estimated impacts are large:
victims exposed to more severe violence expect that the likelihood of being in extreme poverty in
the long-run is more than two times as high than those exposed to less severe violence. Additional
evidence indicates that depression and psychological trauma mediate this result, identifying a
channel by which these pessimistic expectations can become self-confirming. Together, these
findings suggest the existence of a psychological poverty trap and the need to rethink strategies to
assist the economic recovery of the victims of violence.


Andrés Moya
Department of Economics
Universidad de los Andes
Calle 19A # 1 – 37E
Bogotá, Colombia
a.moya@uniandes.edu.co

Michael Carter
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
mrcarter@ucdavis.edu
VIOLENCE  AND  THE  FORMATION  OF  HOPELESSNESS  IN  COLOMBIA  


                             ANDRÉS MOYA AND MICHAEL R. CARTER*

    We explore the impact of violence on perceived prospects of upward
    mobility. For a sample of victims of violence in Colombia, we bring
    together data on expected upward mobility, exposure to violence, and
    symptoms of psychological trauma. After controlling for material losses
    and current circumstances, we find that exposure to more severe violence
    leads victims’ perceived prospects of upward mobility to become
    increasingly hopeless. The estimated impacts are large: victims exposed to
    more severe violence expect that the likelihood of being in extreme poverty
    in the long-run is more than two times as high than those exposed to less
    severe violence. Additional evidence indicates that depression and
    psychological trauma mediate this result, identifying a channel by which
    these pessimistic expectations can become self-confirming. Together, these
    findings suggest the existence of a psychological poverty trap and the need
    to rethink strategies to assist the economic recovery of the victims of
    violence. (JEL: D1; C9; O1; I1; I3)

    Keywords: Violence; Psychological Trauma; Hope; Poverty; Colombia.

* This paper previously circulated under the title “Violence and the Formation of Hopelessness and Pessimistic Prospects
of Upward Mobility in Colombia.” Moya: Assistant Professor, Economics Department, Universidad de los Andes, Calle
19A # 1-37E, Bogotá, Colombia, 111711, a.moya@uniandes.edu.co. Carter: Professor, Agricultural and Resource
Economics, University of California, Davis, and NBER, mrcarter@ucdavis.edu. We thank Steve Boucher, Carlos Chiapa,
Ghada Elabed, Hilary Hoynes, Miriam Golden, Guy Grossman, Rachid Laajaj, Evan Lieberman, Travis Lybbert, and Juan
Fernando Vargas as well as the participants at the Northeast Development Conference at Harvard University, Households
in Conflict Network Workshop at UC Berkeley, EGAP at Cape Town, and seminars at CIDE, UC Davis, University of
Cape Town, and Universidad de los Andes for useful comments. Gabriela Paredes and María José Torres provided
outstanding research assistance. This paper would have not been possible without the support of community leaders and
local priests, and without the victims’ willingness to participate and revisit their painful experiences of violence. The
Pacific Rim Research Dissertation Grant, the Programa de Dinámicas Territoriales from RIMISP, and the Henry A. Jastro
Award provided generous funding to collect the data, while the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation provided a
dissertation fellowship to Moya. IRB Approval for the collection of human subjects data was awarded by the University of
California, Davis. The usual disclaimers apply.
                                                 I. Introduction

        You know, doctor, it’s been a few nights since I do not sleep, I have dreams
        where I see the heads of my neighbors. I see that they cry, that they
        supplicate, ask for mercy. I wake up crying. I start thinking about the farm,
        about my plants in the garden, about our chickens and cattle, and about our
        dogs that wanted to come with us, but we had to scare them away with rocks
        so that they would not follow us. I had never felt this way. I had never seen
        my husband so quiet; I had never seen him cry in silence. […] I do not know
        what’s going to happen with us, only that we have God and that our life will
        never be the same since we are now displaced.1


A victim of the tactics of terror that characterized the battle between warring
factions in the Colombian countryside, the women quoted above poignantly
testifies to both the loss of material assets, as well as the psychological damage
created by her experience of violence and forced displacement.                                          She seems
hopeless regarding her ability to recover and progress.
    We explore whether violence per se induces hopelessness and dampens
perceived prospects of future upward mobility. Prior work has analyzed how
asset losses stemming from violence, forced displacement, and other shocks thrust
victims into chronic poverty (Carter, Little, Mogues, and Negatu, 2006; Ibáñez
and Moya, 2010a, 2010b). In this paper, we explore whether the psychological
consequences brought about by these traumatic events further damage the
perceived prospects of future economic progress and recovery. In doing so,
violence can create a behavioral poverty trap in its own right, akin to that which
can occur with the loss of physical assets.
    Our study is motivated by a burgeoning and interdisciplinary literature on the
nature of hope and beliefs, and their relation to poverty dynamics. Work in this


1
  Doctors Without Borders (2010): Testimony of a woman in Florencia, Caquetá, who was displaced from her hometown
after an armed group arrived to her village, killed and carved up some of her neighbors, and then made her bury them [Own
translation].




                                                                                                                       2
area is driven by the observation that economic behavior is ultimately driven by
what individuals perceive is possible to achieve and what they aspire to achieve
(Appadurai, 2004; Duflo, 2013; Lybbert and Wydick, 2017; Ray, 2006). For
instance, perceptions of limited prospects of upward mobility may dampen goals
and aspirations as a coping strategy––individuals may cease to desire and strive
for things which do not seem possible to achieve.                                 Diminished goals and
aspirations, in turn, will inhibit the incentives to invest and improve current
circumstances, to gather information about the pathways for progress, and even to
modify such perceptions (Appadurai, 2004; Dalton, Ghosal, and Mani, 2011;
Duflo, 2013; Ray, 2006). Hopelessness and a lack of aspirations can thus affect
behavior and poverty dynamics.
  We hypothesize that violence alters perceived prospects of upward mobility
through a psychological mechanism as well as through the more discernible
external constraints.2 Violence brings about external constraints related to the
loss of material and productive assets and the descent into poverty, which will
likely affect victims’ perceptions of what is possible to achieve. In addition, the
nature of the traumatic experiences of violence can also condition victims and
induce depression and hopelessness––this is, perceptions that there are few
pathways for recovery and progress (Sympson, 2000; Yehuda, 2002).                                             The
psychological damage associated with exposure to violence can thus reinforce the
effect of external constraints and influence behavior. This is consistent with the
recent work of Allousch (2017) and de Quidt and Haushoffer (forthcoming) who
find that depression and other forms of psychological trauma diminish human
capabilities and economic performance. Taken together, violence can lead to a
vicious cycle of hopelessness, underachievement, and persistent poverty.



  2
     Lybbert and Wydick (forthcoming) lay out a conceptual framework for analyzing the relationship between external
and internal constraints and how they determine poverty dynamics.




                                                                                                                  3
  To analyze whether victims’ perceived prospects of upward mobility become
increasingly hopeless, we sampled 344 victims of violence in Colombia. In
section III, we describe our sampling strategy and data, which includes measures
of the severity of household-level exposure to different violent events, symptoms
of psychological trauma, and perceived prospects of upward mobility.          For the
latter, we first built upon the work of Krishna (2004, 2006, 2010) and Narayan,
Pritchett, and Soumya (2009) and followed a “stages of progress” approach to
construct a ladder of life appropriate for the study population. Then, we measured
subjects’ perceived prospects for future mobility building upon recent methods to
elicit subjective probabilities (see Delavande, Gine, and McKenzie, 2011).
  Our empirical strategy exploits the variation in the severity of violence,
conditional on the individual’s current position on the ladder of life and asset
losses.   Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that more severe violence
dampens the perceived prospects of upward mobility. The estimated effects are
substantial: an increase of a one standard deviation in the number of violent
events raises the perceived probability of being at the bottom step of the ladder of
life by 66 percent relative to the mean. Since our empirical strategy controls for
the effect of current position on the ladder of life and material restrictions, these
results point to the internal constraints that result from the experience of violence.
In fact, we find that these diminished expectations of mobility are mediated by the
severity of symptoms of depression. We describe these results in detail in section
IV. Then, in section V, we connect with more conventional analysis of poverty
dynamics (e.g., Carter and May 2001), and use these results to estimate transition
matrices that reveal the long-run perceived prospects for upward mobility. We
observe that a one standard deviation in the number of violent events raises the
expected long-run extreme poverty rate by 160 percent.
  The attribution of causality to these findings requires the assumption that the
patterns of violence were exogenous to victims’ ex-ante perceived prospects for




                                                                                    4
upward mobility. Causal attribution would not be appropriate if armed groups
victimized hopeless subjects more severely than other victims. While this kind of
targeting seems most unlikely—if anything armed groups in Colombia targeted
community activists and leaders who would be expected to have ex ante higher
mobility prospects (Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica [CNMH], 2013)—our
data come from a particular time and a place in which armed groups were directly
competing for terrain and eschewed targeted for indiscriminate violence towards
the civilian population (CNMH 2013). In fact, we demonstrate that the variation
in the severity of violence is not correlated with victim’s observable ex-ante
characteristics. Moreover, we test for the robustness of our results using the
subsample of our subjects who were victimized en masse with clearly no
individual targeting. Finally, our results on the underlying psychological
mechanism lend further credence to the notion that our estimated effect of
violence is explained by the consequences of the traumatic exposure per se and
not by a pattern of violence that targeted those with low mobility.
   Our paper speaks to an emerging body of empirical work on the formation and
effects of hope and aspirations. Most of this work has focused on the effects of
positive interventions such as child sponsorship programs (Glewee, Ross, and
Wyddick, 2017), conditional cash transfers (Chiapa, Campos-Vasquez, Huffman,
and Santillán, 2012), exposure to norms, role models, or vicarious experiences of
success (Beaman, Duflo, Pande, and Topalova, 2012; Jensen and Oster, 2009;
Bernard, Dercon, Orkin, and Taffesse, 2014), financial inclusion (Chiapa, Prina,
and Parker, 2016), and social interactions with local leaders (Macours and Vakis,
2014).3 By and large, these studies provide evidence on how the provision of
information and relief of material constraints has positive impacts on the



   3
     Related studies have also identified that asking individuals to set their goals is enough to improve performance and
outcomes among micro entrepreneurs (Cassar and Wydick, 2014) and university students (Hiller and Moya, 2017).




                                                                                                                       5
aspirations of the poor, and on the existence of psychological multipliers that can
create virtuous cycles.
  To date, however, there is few evidence on how hope and beliefs change
following adverse shocks. The study more closely related to ours is the work of
Kosec and Hyunjung (2017), who analyze how a natural disaster affected
aspirations in rural Pakistan.    After controlling for households’ education,
expenditures, and wealth, they find that households who were exposed to a more
severe rainfall shock lowered their aspirations but that access to government
transfers ameliorated such negative impacts.     These results thus suggest that
adverse shocks shape create internal constraints, and that social protection
programs can ease such burdens.
  We contribute to the literature in different ways: First, we provide novel
evidence on the effect of violence on expected upward mobility. Second, and
perhaps more important, by bringing together data on material losses, subjective
beliefs, and psychological trauma, we separately identify the role of internal
constraints that stem from violence and how they influence individuals’ beliefs.
Third, we provide a novel way to elicit perceived prospects of upward mobility
that builds upon and contributes to the recent work on measuring subjective
beliefs (see Delavande, Gine, and McKenzie, 2011). Finally, we also contribute
to the literature on the economic and behavioral consequences of violence and
highlight a different channel through which violence can affect behavior and
poverty dynamics (Bauer, Cassar, Chytilova, and Heinrich, 2014; Bellows and
Miguel, 2009; Blattman, 2009; Callen, Isaqzadeh, Long, and Sprenger, 2014;
Cassar, Grosjean, and Whitt, 2016; Cassar, Grosjean, and Whitt, 2014; Moya,
2017; and Voors et al., 2012).
  In section VI, we conclude our paper by discussing the policy framework for
victims of violence in Colombia and illustrating how standard asset-transfer
programs may be unable to alter long-run poverty dynamics for many victims of




                                                                                 6
violence. In doing so, we emphasize the importance of rethinking the strategies to
assist the socioeconomic recovery of the victims of violence and other
populations exposed to traumatic shocks.

II. Violence and Trauma in Colombia: Context and Conceptual Framework

Colombia has endured decades of violence and civil conflict. In the late 1940s,
political disputes and decades of tension between landlords and peasants led to a
period of civil conflict known as La Violencia (1948-1958). Despite the signing
in 1958 of a peace agreement, violence persisted and leftist guerrillas and right-
winged paramilitary groups emerged soon after. Starting in the 1980’s, illegal
armed groups became heavily involved in the illicit drug production and trade,
leading to the escalation of violence and to increasing patterns of civilian
victimization (CNMH, 2013). In the last decade, conflicts dynamics were altered
by three major events: the demobilization of paramilitary groups in 2006; the
emergence of neo-paramilitary factions that clashed for the control of regions
previously under paramilitary control; and the demobilization in 2017 of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the largest and oldest
guerrilla group in the hemisphere. Our data were collected prior to the 2017
demobilization of the FARC, as mentioned above, during the time period in which
FARC and neo-paramilitary forces were contesting for new terrain.
  Throughout these decades of civil conflict, violence towards civilians has not
been accidental. Instead, it has been a deliberate strategy of armed groups who
rely on vicious and indiscriminate violence to spread fear and gain control of
contested territories (CNMH, 2013). As a result, more than 8.5 million civilians
have been victimized since 1985, including 7.3 million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) (National Victims Unit, n.d). The latter figure represents 15




                                                                                7
percent of the country’s population, and is the highest in the world (United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees [UNHCR], 2016).
  Prior evidence has demonstrated that violence causes a severe loss of assets,
which drives victims into poverty (Ibáñez and Moya, 2010a, 2010b). Victims,
who by and large are displaced from rural to urban areas, abandon their lands and
productive assets, are unable to find suitable employment opportunities since their
agricultural skills are not well suited for urban labor markets, and lose their social
networks.   This massive loss of physical, human, and social capital hinders
income generating activities and increases the vulnerability to poverty.
  Victims’ perceived prospects of upward mobility will likely be damaged by the
external constraints imposed by the such loss of assets and by the descent into
poverty. Building on work of Appadurai (2004), Ray (2006), and Duflo (2012),
this can occur through two mechanisms: First, by the recognition that the loss of
assets pushed them down the endowment space, imposes obvious obstacles for
their ability to move out of poverty, and maybe even destined them to a lower
level of wellbeing. Second, by the observation of poverty among victimized
peers, which, following Ray’s (2006) concept of an aspiration window, provides
information on the limited opportunities for progress.
  In addition, we hypothesize that victims can become hopeless and exaggerate
the perceptions that moving out of poverty is unlikely through a psychological
mechanism. Our hypothesis is motivated by previous research on the prevalence
of psychological trauma among victims of violence and its implications on
behavior.    Victims of violence suffer an array of mood disturbances and
psychopathologies, including anxiety, depression, complex trauma, and
posttraumatic stress disorder (Briere and Spinazzola, 2005; Kessler, Sonnega,
Bromet, Hughes, and Nelson, 1995; Mollica, McInnes, Poole, and Tor, 1988;
Yehuda, 2002). In Colombia, for instance, victims have a high vulnerability to
psychological trauma (Richards et al., 2011; Shultz et al., 2014), which follows a




                                                                                    8
dose-response relationship—that is, more severe and recent violence brings about
higher symptoms of trauma (Doctors Without Borders, 2010; Moya, 2017).
   More important for our discussion, the nature of traumatic experiences can
overwhelm the victims’ coping resources and perpetuate states of avoidance. This
process reduces their willingness to correct their exaggerated beliefs and to
restore their emotional wellbeing. As a result, violence may induce pessimistic
explanatory styles and hopelessness thus creating internal constraints (Sympson,
2000; Yehuda, 2002).4 Moreover, building upon the learned helplessness theory
of depression (Seligman, 1975; Garber and Seligman, 1980), victims’ may remain
hopeless even when there are pathways for recovery––in our context, when no
material poverty trap exists.5
   Taken together, the research above on the psychological consequences of
violence suggests that victims may magnify the obstacles for upward mobility and
incorrectly perceive that there are no prospects for real transformation.6 In doing
so, violence may hinder economic behavior and alter poverty dynamics. This
perspective is amplified by de Quidt and Haushoffer (forthcoming), who argue
that depression, induced by the trauma of violence in our case, further undercuts
individuals’ self-efficacy and economic performance.7




   4
     The loss of agency is also related to a shift towards an external locus of control; the perception that the individual is
unable to control the factors that shape her life (Rotter, 1966).
   5
      Barrett, Carter and Chavas (forthcoming) discuss the co-existence and interactions between material and
psychological poverty traps.
   6
     Our study is not entirely new, or at least not in the Colombian context. Writing in the 1960’s, a few years after the
period of La Violencia had concluded, Lipman and Havens (1965) compared the degree of personality disorganization
between a small sample of subjects who had been displaced during this period of civil conflict, and a sample of urban poor.
Among others, they found that victims did not look forward to the future, which the authors interpreted as being a sign of
hopelessness. In our paper, we provide more recent and rigorous evidence to answer this question.
   7
     While de Quidt and Haushoffer (forthcoming) largely draw on the clinical literature, Allousch (2017) shows using
panel living standards data that depression shocks indeed reduce living standards.




                                                                                                                            9
                                      III. Sample Design and Data

We employ a complex array of data, including exposure to violence, perceived
prospects of upward mobility, psychometric measures, as well as conventional
living standards data. After reviewing the sample design, in this section we detail
the instruments employed to collect these data and present descriptive statistics in
each of these core areas.
                                               A. Sample Design

   In 2011, we conducted fieldwork in the departments of Bolivar, Córdoba, and
Sucre, in Colombia’s Atlantic region, and Tolima, in the Central region. We
chose these departments as a first step to address the concerns of violence having
been targeted and correlated with ex-ante hopes and beliefs. These departments
had experienced increasing levels of violence as a result of the struggles between
different armed groups for the control of three geographical corridors.8
Consistent with the dynamics of civilian victimization in civil conflicts (Kalyvas,
2006), anecdotal evidence suggests that armed groups relied on vicious and
indiscriminate violence towards civilians to spread fear among the population and
gain control of these strategic and contested regions (Human Rights Watch, 2010;
Instituto de Estudios para el Desarrollo y la Paz [Indepaz], 2011; CNMH, 2013).
This pattern of violence makes it likely that the severity of violence experienced
by any particular individual should be orthogonal to individual characteristics,
creating quasi-experimental variation in the severity of exposure to violence.
   In each department, we used administrative data from the National Victims Unit
to identify the main municipalities of residence of victims who had been

   8
      In the Atlantic region, neo-paramilitary groups emerged after the paramilitary peace demobilization in 2006 and
clashed over control of the Nudo del Paramillo and Montes the María—two corridors with favorable conditions for the
illegal drug trade (Human Rights Watch, 2010; Indepaz, 2011). In the Central region, the FARC retreated to the Cañon de
las Hermosas—a corridor in the Central Andes that facilitates the movement of troops and the trafficking of illegal drugs
to the Pacific Ocean, after the Colombian military intensified its operations against this group in 2004 (National
Ombudsman’s Office, 2009).




                                                                                                                     10
victimized and displaced from the vicinity of the above corridors.9 We visited
these municipalities and organized community meetings where we explained the
projects’ objectives, including the recall of experiences of violence, and
highlighted that participation was voluntary and that participants could opt-out at
any time.10 In each meeting, we invited one-third of interested individuals to
participate.11
   We sampled 344 victims of violence who had been victimized in, and displaced
from, the rural areas of 34 different municipalities and resided in the urban
locations where fieldwork was conducted.12 The sample includes 132 individuals
from nine different villages who had been victimized and displaced en masse by
cross fire from armed groups.                       In the context of these mass displacements,
individual targeting was likely non-existent.                               Figure A1 in the Appendix
illustrates the geographical distribution of the municipalities from which victims
were displaced, and of the intensity of displacement to highlight how the regions
where we conducted fieldwork had been torn by violence.

                                                       B. Data

   In each municipality, enumerators first administered a household survey during
weekdays. After all surveys were completed, we organized weekend sessions
where enumerators first administered the victimization questionnaire and

   9
      Departmental capitals: Sincelejo and Ibagué in the departments of Sucre and Tolima, respectively. Urban centers:
Tierralta and Montelíbano in the department of Córdoba.
   10
        These meetings were organized with the support of local government officials, ombudsmen and Catholic priest, all of
whom were recognized and trusted by victimized and displaced communities. Their support was instrumental to overcome
some of the challenges of conducting fieldwork in contexts of civil conflict, such as interacting with victims, obtaining
their trust, ensuring the safety of participants, and collecting sensitive information on the exposure to violence.
   11
        More than 90 percent of invited subjects accepted to participate. Subjects who declined had been victimized very
recently (less than 6 months before) and it is likely that they were suffering from severe symptoms of trauma. If we indeed
sampled the relatively less traumatized, this would work against our hypothesis. Nevertheless, the rate of non-response is
low considering the context, and we were able to sample subjects experiencing severe symptoms of trauma.
   12
        Moya (2017) uses this sample and data to analyze the effect of violence on risk attitudes. To rule out endogenous
geographic sorting, he further restricts the analysis to 284 victims who had also resided in the region for more than 10
years. In our paper and in Moya (2017) results are robust if we use the full sample, or the more restrictive sample.




                                                                                                                       11
psychometric scale in private, and we then led a group activity to elicit subjects’
perceived prospects of upward mobility. Since we collected sensitive data and
conducted fieldwork in municipalities torn by violence, data were collected at the
local church to guarantee safe, private, and trusted environments for respondents
and enumerators.13              We describe each instrument below and provide sample
statistics. Foreshadowing our later econometric analysis that exploits variation in
exposure to violence, we separately examine descriptive statistics for households
exposed to moderate levels of violence (less than the median exposure) and those
exposed to severe levels of violence.
   Household victimization questionnaire.—At the beginning of the weekend
session, enumerators privately administered a victimization questionnaire that
measured whether a household member experienced different violent events, and
the number of times that each event had occurred in the last 10 years. We use the
number of violent events experienced by the household as a measure for the
severity of violence.14               In addition, we use the number of years since the
displacement as a proxy for the temporal proximity of violence.15
   Panel A of Table 1 presents sample statistics on the nature and severity of the
exposure to violence and highlights three important features: First, all subjects in
the sample had been displaced and 93 percent of them had been exposed to at
least one violent event.16 The most frequent events included being threatened by
an armed group (55%), being caught in the cross fire of armed combat (50%),


   13
       Moya (2017) describes the ethical considerations in collecting sensitive data from victims, and the strategies we
implemented to mitigate negative effects on subjects. These include, stressing that participation was voluntary and that
subjects could skip specific questions or entire modules, defining a protocol for treatment of special cases, and special
training prior to fieldwork on strategies for emotional containment.
    14
       We also measure the severity of violence through a victimization score constructed through principal component
analysis. The results are robust if we use the victimization score in the empirical analysis, and available upon request.
    15
       Although violent events did not necessarily occur at the same time, subjects stated that their displacement was
triggered by a peak in violence. The number of years since the displacement therefore captures the temporal proximity of
the moment when violence was at its highest.
    16
       In Table 1 and in the rest of the analysis, we drop 8 outliers who reported a number of violent events more than 5
standard deviations above the mean. Results are robust if we keep these observations.




                                                                                                                     12
suffering the assassination of a household member (24%), suffering a violent
attack (15%), and/or experiencing and surviving a massacre (8%).                                                     Second,
subjects had been exposed to an average of 6.6 violent events and the
victimization occurred 2.5 years on average before the data collection. Third,
there is considerable variation in the severity and temporal proximity of violence.
                                         TABLE 1—EXPOSURE TO VIOLENCE
                                                                                  Total       Moderate       Severe

                                                                                   [1]           [2]           [3]

        A. Exposure to Violence
           Victim: exposed to at least one event (=1)                              0.93         0.88          1.00
                                                                                  [0.253]      [0.321]         [0]
           Severity: number of violent events                                      6.64         2.04          13.25
                                                                                  [8.293]      [1.229]       [9.563]
           Temporal proximity: years since violence                                2.52         2.50          2.55
                                                                                  [3.318]      [3.410]       [3.193]

           Hh member exposed to a combat (=1)                                      0.50         0.34          0.73
                                                                                  [0.501]      [0.476]       [0.445]

           Hh member exposed was threatened (=1)                                   0.55         0.44          0.71
                                                                                  [0.498]      [0.498]       [0.455]

           Hh member suffered the assassination of a hh member (=1)                0.24         0.13          0.41
                                                                                  [0.430]      [0.333]       [0.494]

           Hh member exposed to an attack (=1)                                     0.15         0.05          0.30
                                                                                  [0.359]      [0.209]       [0.462]

           Hh member exposed to a massacre (=1)                                    0.08         0.02          0.17
                                                                                  [0.272]      [0.122]       [0.380]

           Hh member was ordered to migrate (=1)                                   0.42         0.36          0.49
                                                                                  [0.494]      [0.482]       [0.502]

           Hh member exposed to another violent event (=1)                         0.26         0.14          0.44
                                                                                  [0.439]      [0.344]       [0.498]

        B. Psychological Trauma - % Above Cutoff (T>63)
           Depression                                                              0.38         0.35          0.42
                                                                                  [0.486]      [0.478]       [0.495]

           Anxiety                                                                 0.26         0.23          0.30
                                                                                  [0.439]      [0.423]       [0.459]

           PTSD                                                                    0.21         0.17          0.25
                                                                                  [0.405]      [0.378]       [0.437]

         Observations                                                              336          198           138
Notes: Summary statistics on household-level exposure to violence and symptoms of psychological trauma. Columns 1
reports sample statistics for the full sample, while columns 2 and 3 report statistics according to an arbitrary stratification
of the data: whether the household was exposed to a number of violent events that were below (moderate violence) or
above (severe violence) the median number of violent events. Standard deviations are reported in brackets.




                                                                                                                           13
   Panel A of Table 1 presents sample statistics on the nature and severity of the
exposure to violence and highlights three important features: First, all subjects in
the sample had been displaced and 93 percent of them had been exposed to at
least one violent event.17 The most frequent events included being threatened by
an armed group (55%), being caught in the cross fire of armed combat (50%),
suffering the assassination of a household member (24%), suffering a violent
attack (15%), and/or experiencing and surviving a massacre (8%).                                              Second,
subjects had been exposed to an average of 6.6 violent events and the
victimization occurred 2.5 years on average before the data collection. Third,
there is considerable variation in the severity and temporal proximity of violence.
   Psychometric Scale.—Next, enumerators privately administered a locally
adapted version of the Symptoms Checklist 90 R (SCL 90-R).                                               This scale
measured the experience of symptoms that are associated with different
manifestations of psychological trauma, such as headaches, back pains, and
uneasiness among others, over the previous three months.18 The responses to
different subsets of symptoms provide measures of the extent and severity of nine
different psychopathologies, including depression, anxiety, and a global severity
index (GSI).19 These measures include a continuous standardized T-score and an
indicator variable that denotes whether the subject scores above a critical
threshold (Ti>63) and is at risk of developing a clinical psychopathology.20




   17
       In Table 1 and in the rest of the analysis, we drop 8 outliers who reported a number of violent events more than 5
standard deviations above the mean. Results are robust if we keep these observations.
   18
      The SCL 90-R has reliable psychometric properties and has been widely implemented in developing countries and in
conflict scenarios (Casullo, 2004). For this sample, the Cronbach alpha of 0.94 indicates an excellent internal
consistency—the extent to which all items measure the same constructs.
   19
      The GSI measures the overall severity of symptoms of psychological trauma.
   20
       Responses for each question are scaled from 0 to 4, indicating a range of no symptoms to daily symptoms in the last
three months. Scores on the relevant questions for each psychopathology are added and divided by the total number of
questions answered. Then, a T-score is standardized with mean 50 and standard deviation 10: (Ti = 10 + 50 ´ score).




                                                                                                                      14
                                         FIGURE 1. PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA
Notes: Box-plot distribution of depression and anxiety, and the Global Severity Index. Sample statistics are reported
according to an arbitrary stratification of the data: whether the household was exposed to a number of violent events that
were below (moderate violence) or above (severe violence) the median number of violent events. The dotted line depicts
the level above which individuals are at risk of developing clinical cases.


   Figure 1 illustrates the box-plot distributions of the depression, anxiety, and
GSI scores according to whether subjects had been exposed to moderate or severe
violence as previously defined.                      The dotted line in each plot indicates the
threshold above which a subject is considered at risk. In conformity with the
studies in clinical psychology, the data suggests that the psychological
consequences of violence follow a dose–response relationship: a more severe
experience of violence brings about more symptoms of depression and anxiety
and of psychological trauma in general—that is, a higher GSI score. Moreover, at
the time of the data collection, 38 and 26 percent of the subjects were at risk of
developing depression and anxiety disorders, respectively (see Table 1, Panel B).




                                                                                                                      15
These figures are higher among the group exposed to severe violence and
considerably higher than those for the Colombian population (Moya, 2017).21
   Perceived Prospects of Upward Mobility.—At the end of the weekend session,
we conducted a group activity to elicit victims’ pre-violence and current living
standards and their perceived prospects of upward mobility. For this purpose, we
built upon the work of Krishna (2004, 2006, 2010) and Narayan, Pritchett, and
Kapoor (2009), and designed a six-step ladder of life that portrayed different
levels of living standards among victimized communities.22 We characterized
each step of the ladder over five dimensions—housing, land, labor income,
children’s schooling, and consumption. To ensure that our ladder of life provided
an accurate representation of the living standards of victims of violence, we
characterized each step based on the World Bank’s Moving Out of Poverty
Colombia case study, which constructed ladders of life for victimized and non-
victimized communities across the country (see Matijasevic, et al., 2007; and
Narayan and Petesch, 2010). In our ladder, the bottom two steps illustrated the
more salient characteristics of victims living in extreme poverty, whereas the top
three steps portrayed the characteristics of non-poor victims (see Figure 2).23
   We measured subjects’ perceptions using the ladder of life as follows: First, we
explained that we wanted to understand the socioeconomic changes that occurred
to each participant as a result of their exposure to violence and their displacement.
To this end, we introduced the ladder of life, used visual aids to describe the

   21
      Appendix Table A1 provides a more detailed characterization of the scores of the 9 psychopathologies captured by
the SCL-90 for the full sample and the sample of subjects who were victimized en masse.
   22
       The “stages of progress” approach of Krishna (2004, 2006, 2010) and the “ladder of life” approach of Narayan,
Pritchett, and Kapoor (2009) have been used to identify how the poor understand poverty and the strategies, pathways, and
major life events that have affected individual and community poverty dynamics. This is often carried out during focus
groups where participants define the different levels of wellbeing or living standards (stages of progress or steps in the
ladder of life) within a community. Participants then describe the characteristics of each level, identify where the
community poverty line would be located, and discuss the pathways in which households move out or into poverty.
   23
      Instead of defining a ladder of life for each community or group, as it is the common practice in previous work, we
defined a single ladder of life for all groups. This allowed us to: (1) compare victims’ perceptions regardless of the
municipality and community in which they were residing at the time of fieldwork; and (2) resemble comparable pre and
post-violence living standards to identify movements up or down the ladder of life over this period.




                                                                                                                      16
characteristics at each step, and provided examples of upward, stagnant, and
downward mobility not related to violence. Subjects received a booklet with the
illustration of the ladder, and placed a stone at the step that resembled their
household’s pre-violence living standards, and another one for the current living
standards. This was carried out in private, with the assistance of enumerators.


                                                                        Subjective probabilities
                 Pre-violence wellbeing       Current wellbeing
                                                                        of future position




                                                                                                                            Richest




                                Poorest


                                                                  STEPS

                                     1              2               3                 4                  5              6

             Housing           No place to     Precarious     Basic             House in           House in       House in
                               live            housing w/o    housing with      good               good           good
                                               public         public            conditions         conditions     conditions
                                               services       services

             Lands             No access to    No access to   Access to a       Lands, crops       Lands,         Lands,
                               land            land           plot of land      and animals        crops,         crops,
                                                                                                   animals and    animals and
                                                                                                   hires          acre workers
                                                                                                   laborers

             Income            No source of    Day to day     Employed          Stable job or      Good job or    Good job or
                               income          informal job   with a stable     small              business and   business and
                                                              source of         business           hires some     hires several
                                                              income                               employees      employee

             Schooling         Cannot          Cannot         Children go       Children           Children       Children
                               a↵ord to        a↵ord to       all the way       finish high        finish high    finish high
                               send their      send their     to high           school             school         school and
                               kids to         kids to        school                                              access higher
                               school          school                                                             ed.

             Consumption       Cannot feed     Able to feed   Able to feed      Able to feed       Able to feed   Able to feed
                               the             the            the               the                the            the
                               household       household      household         household          household      household
                                                                                with an            with an        with an
                                                                                appropriate        appropriate    appropriate
                                                                                diet               diet           diet


                                                FIGURE 2. LADDER OF LIFE
Notes: Graphical depiction of the ladder of life. Each step of the ladder was characterized over 5 dimensions (housing,
lands, income, schooling, and consumption). Subjects were first asked to place one stone at the step that resembled their
living standards before the episodes of violence, and a different one for the current living standards. Then, they were asked
to distribute 12 stones in the steps of the ladder where they believed they could end up in the following year.




                                                                                                                                      17
   Second, we explained that we also wanted to understand how participants
perceived their future.              For this purpose, we built upon recent work on the
elicitation of subjective probabilities of future events without explicitly referring
to the concept of probabilities (see Delavande, Gine, and McKenzie, 2011). We
handed out 12 stones to each subject and asked them to place them in the steps of
the ladder of life where they thought they could end up in the following year. To
explain this activity, we only mentioned that they should place more (less) stones
in a step if they thought that it was more (less) likely that they would be able to
achieve those living standards in a year. After this explanation, subjects placed
the 12 stones over the ladder of life depicted in the booklet and enumerators
recorded their answers. The relative number of stones at each step provides a
measure of the subjective probability of reaching that position on the ladder.
   Figure 3 illustrates the distributions of pre-violence and current positions on the
ladder of life, and the distributions for the subjective probabilities of being at each
step in the following year.24 The data in the first panel indicates that before the
episodes of violence, 37 percent of the subjects were in extreme poverty—at the
first two steps of the ladder—, 44 percent were at the 3rd step, and 18 percent were
at or above the 4th step.                   Moreover, we observe minor differences in the
distributions between subjects exposed to moderate and severe violence.
Consistent with the work of Ibáñez and Moya (2010a, 2010b), the data in the
second panel indicates that violence and displacement drove victims into poverty
and condensed the asset and income distributions downwards.                                           Overall, 91
percent of the subjects reported that they were currently in extreme poverty, while
less than two percent were at or above the 4th step. In this case, we observe
differences according to the severity of violence; while 86 percent of the subjects
exposed to moderate violence reported that they were currently at the bottom two

   24
      Table A2 in the Appendix reports the averages for pre-violence and current locations in the ladder, as well as the
average probabilities for being at each step of the ladder in the next year, and two-sample mean differences.




                                                                                                                    18
steps of the ladder, this figure increases to 96 for those exposed to severe
violence.


                                                 Pre-violence location
                      .8
                      .6
                      .4
                      .2
                      0




                                 1     2    3   4     5   6         1    2    3     4    5    6
                                           Moderate                           Severe



                                                      Current location
                      .8
                      .6
                      .4
                      .2
                      0




                                 1     2    3   4     5   6         1    2    3     4    5    6
                                           Moderate                            Severe



                                     Subjective probabilities for future location
                      .8
                      .6
                      .4
                      .2
                      0




                                 1     2    3   4     5   6         1    2    3     4    5    6
                                           Moderate                           Severe




    FIGURE 3. PAST AND CURRENT POSITIONS AND PERCEIVED PROSPECTS OF UPWARD MOBILITY
Notes: Box-plot distribution of the pre-violence and current positions on the ladder, and on the subjective probabilities of
reaching each step of the ladder within a year. The data is stratified according to whether the household was exposed
moderate or severe violence as defined previously.


   Finally, the bottom panel of Figure 3 illustrates the perceived prospects for each
step of the ladder. The data in the figure first indicates that the victims in the
sample are somewhat optimist. Although most victims fell to the bottom of the




                                                                                                                        19
ladder, the distributions of subjective probabilities for future positions resemble
and even exceed the distributions of pre-violence positions. However, when we
stratify the data according to the severity of violence, we observe that those who
were exposed to more severe violence appear more hopeless. Whereas subjects
who experienced moderate violence perceive that the probability of being in
extreme poverty is 28 percent on average, this figure increases to 41 percent for
those who experienced severe violence (a 46 percent increase).
  Household Survey.—Enumerators administered a household survey prior to
collection of the violence and psychometric data described above. The survey
captured information on current and retrospective socioeconomic and
demographic characteristics of subjects and their households. The latter allow us
to characterize the households’ pre-violence and analyze whether the severity of
violence was associated with specific characteristics. The survey also included a
question on whether subjects looked towards the following year with hope and
optimism or with hopelessness and despair, and a Likert scale question on
whether they believed that it was likely, unlikely, or very unlikely that their
economic circumstances will improve in a year.          These questions provide
alternative measures of the degree of hopelessness and allow us to assess the
validity of the perceived prospects of upward mobility described above.
  Table 2 reports sample statistics and differences between the current and
retrospective characteristics of subjects exposed to moderate and severe violence.
The data in panels A and B indicates that there are no significant differences
between subjects who were moderately and severely victimized, other than their
current age, and the household’s pre-violence participation in community
organizations. While organizational membership is not the same thing as being a
community leader, which according to CNMH (2013) were sometimes targeted in
other areas of the country, this unexpected statistic motivates subsequent
robustness tests.    Nevertheless, as discussed previously, the targeting of




                                                                                20
households who participate or lead community organizations would work against
the hypothesis that violence dampens mobility prospects.

              TABLE 2—SAMPLE BALANCE: PRE-VIOLENCE & CURRENT CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                                   Total    Moderate      Severe
                                                                                    [1]       [2]          [3]
         A. Current characteristics
          Age                                                                      41.05      39.70      42.99**
                                                                                  [13.32]     [12.96]     [13.64]

          Male (=1)                                                                0.39        0.38        0.41
                                                                                  [0.488]     [0.486]     [0.493]

          Household Head (=1)                                                      0.78        0.80        0.75
                                                                                  [0.415]     [0.399]     [0.437]

          Literate (=1)                                                            4.47        4.59        4.30
                                                                                  [2.035]     [1.930]     [2.173]

          Household size                                                           0.82        0.83        0.82
                                                                                  [0.381]     [0.378]     [0.387]

          Log yearly per capita consumption ($COP)                                 3.80        3.76        3.85
                                                                                  [0.864]     [0.835]     [0.904]

         B. Ex-ante (pre-displacement) characteristics
          Household head was male (=1)                                             0.66        0.65        0.68
                                                                                  [0.474]     [0.478]     [0.469]

          Highest level of education in the household (years)                      8.49        8.63        8.28
                                                                                  [3.697]     [3.581]     [3.861]

          Household main activity was off-farm labor (=1)                          0.47        0.47        0.47
                                                                                  [0.500]     [0.501]     [0.501]

          Household main activity was agriculture (=1)                             0.59        0.57        0.61
                                                                                  [0.494]     [0.497]     [0.489]

          Lands owned (Ha)                                                         7.22        6.09        8.86
                                                                                  [23.05]     [15.14]     [31.06]

          Hh head participated in at least one social organization (=1)            0.44        0.40       0.50*
                                                                                  [0.498]     [0.491]     [0.502]

         C. Hopelessness - Survey Measures
          Looks towards the following year with hopelessness and despair (=1)      0.55        0.49       0.62**
                                                                                  [0.499]     [0.501]     [0.486]

          Highly unlikely that economic circumstances will improve (=1)            0.31        0.25      0.40***
                                                                                  [0.463]     [0.433]     [0.491]

         Observations                                                               336        198          138
Notes: Panel A and B report data on subjects’ current and pre-violence characteristics. Panel C reports data on the survey-
based measures of hopelessness. Asterisks in column 3 indicate the significance of the mean-difference test between the
moderate and severe victimization groups. Standard deviations reported in brackets. *p < 0.1. ** p < 0.05. ***p < 0.01.


   Finally, Panel C in Table 2 indicates that subjects exposed to more severe
violence are more likely to look forward to the following year with hopelessness




                                                                                                                       21
and perceive that it is highly unlikely that their economic circumstances will
improve. These differences are consistent with the data in Figure 2, and thus
suggest that subjects understood the tasks during the ladder of life activity and
that the probabilities for being at each step of the ladder accurately portray their
perceived prospects of upward mobility.

   IV. The Effect of Violence on Perceived Prospects of Upward Mobility

In this section, we first employ our quasi-experimental strategy to test whether
more severe violence damages the perceived prospects of upward mobility. We
then discuss the assumptions behind this empirical strategy and analyze the
validity of our results using the sample of subjects who were victimized en masse.
We further test the robustness of our results using alternative specifications of the
econometric model and key variables. To conclude, we analyze the underlying
psychological channel to highlight the role of internal constrains in shaping
victims’ perceived prospects of upward mobility.

            A. Violence and Perceived Prospects of Upward Mobility

  To analyze the effect of violence on victims’ perceived prospects of upward
mobility, we exploit the variation in the severity of violence, controlling for the
current step of the ladder of life and other individual and household
characteristics. This strategy allows us to compare subjects who were at the same
step, and therefore faced similar external constraints, but who had been exposed
to different levels of violence. In doing so, we highlight the effects stemming
from the exposure to violence, which we hypothesize reflect the internal
constrains created by such traumatic experiences.
  For each future step of the ladder 𝑘, we estimate model 1, where we regress
   &'(
𝑝 𝑆$%  = 𝑘 —the perceived probability of being in step 𝑘 in the following year




                                                                                  22
for household h in region r—on 𝑉$% , the standardized number of violent events to
                                                              &
which the household h was exposed, its quadratic term, and 𝚰 𝑆$% = 𝑗 , a binary
indicator for the current position on the ladder. Since few subjects were at or
above the 4th step of the ladder (see Figure 3), we condensed the top 3 steps into a
single step that characterizes to the non-poor victims.25
                                                                                3
                        &'(                                          0                    &
                   𝑝   𝑆$%     = 𝑘 = γ. + γ( 𝑉$% +               γ0 𝑉$%   +         𝛿2 𝚰 𝑆$% =𝑗 +
                                                                              24(

                            Γ( ′𝑋8& + Γ0 ′𝑋$&9( + 𝜉% + 𝜀$% , ∀	  𝑘 ∈ 	   1,4                                  (1)
                                             &
   In model 1, we also control for a vector 𝑋$% of current individual covariates,
such as each subject’s age, gender, and years of education, which provide a
measure of the subject’s level of human capital.26                                     The matrix of current
covariates also includes whether the subject is the household head, and whether
the household experienced an economic shock or the death of a member for
reasons not related to violence. We also control for a matrix 𝑋$&9( of ex-ante
household characteristics, including the size of the household’s landholdings,
which provides a measure of the extent of asset losses, whether agriculture was
the households’ main economic activity, and the pre-violence organizational
membership variable, which Table 2 revealed to be unbalanced between the low
and high severity exposure groups. Finally, the model includes a region-specific
fixed effect 𝜉% , and a White-robust error term 𝜀$% .




   25
      Results are robust if we estimate the system of equations on the six steps, as well as if we drop the controls for the
current location on the ladder. Results are available upon request.
   26
      We do not control for physical capital since few subject reported ownership or access to productive assets.




                                                                                                                        23
                   TABLE 3—VIOLENCE &PERCEIVED PROSPECTS OF UPWARD M OBILITY

                                                p(Step t+1 = 1)    p(Step t+1 = 2)    p(Step t+1 = 3)   p(Step t+1 = 4)



   # of violent events (standardized)              0.036***             0.037             -0.016            -0.057**
                                                     [0.013]            [0.024]           [0.019]            [0.028]

   # of violent events squared (standardized)        -0.005             -0.009             0.008             0.005
                                                     [0.005]            [0.008]           [0.005]            [0.011]

   Step t = 2                                       -0.038**          -0.174***          0.080***          0.132***
                                                     [0.017]            [0.025]           [0.029]            [0.037]

   Step t = 3                                       -0.054**          -0.255***           -0.033           0.342***
                                                     [0.023]            [0.036]           [0.044]            [0.069]

   Step t = 4                                      -0.062***          -0.285***           -0.043           0.389***
                                                     [0.017]            [0.050]           [0.087]            [0.126]

   Constant                                          0.104*           0.382***           0.361***            0.153
                                                     [0.053]            [0.075]           [0.070]            [0.095]



   Hh exante and current controls                     Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
   R-squared                                          0.10               0.25              0.08               0.21
   Observations                                       311                311                311               311
    Mean value of dependent variable                  0.067              0.267             0.337             0.329
Notes: Each column reports the results of estimating model 1 on the perceived probabilities of being in each step of the
ladder of life in the following year. The table reports the coefficients for the severity of violence, measured by the
standardized number of all violent events to which a household was exposed, its quadratic term, and a binary indicator for
the current position on the ladder. The bottom step of the ladder is the omitted category. As described in equation 1, each
model includes a set of current and ex-ante covariates and a regional fixed effect. Current covariates include the subject’s
age, gender, and years of education, whether he or she is the household head, and whether the household experienced an
economic shock or the death of a household member for reasons not related to violence. Ex-ante covariates include the
household size, size of land holdings, participation of a household member in local organizations, and participation of the
household in agricultural work. Estimated coefficients of the covariates and fixed effect are not reported but are available
upon request. White-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *p < 0.10. **p < 0.05. ***p < 0.01.


   As expected, the results also indicate that the current position on the ladder has
a strong and significant effect on the perceived prospects of upward mobility. As
subjects move up on the ladder of life and their circumstances improve, the
perceptions of the likelihood of being in poverty fall, whereas those for moving
up the ladder increase. For example, relative to subjects at the second step of the
ladder, those at the bottom step perceive that the likelihood of remaining in the
bottom of the ladder is 4 percentage points higher, while the likelihood of moving
up to the top step is 13 percentage points lower. These results are intuitive—
objectively, it is more difficult for a subject at the bottom of the ladder to move to




                                                                                                                        24
the top of the ladder in the span of a year than for subjects further up in the ladder.
The results thus suggest that subjects accurately perceive how current
socioeconomic circumstances and the related external constraints influence their
prospects of upward mobility.
  Taken together, the results in Table 3 indicate that subjects who were exposed
to more severe violence perceive that they live in a different world, one with
diminished prospects for upward mobility.         Since we compare subjects with
similar living standards, the differences between two otherwise similar victims
who were exposed to different levels of violence, point to the existence of
persistent internal constraints by which violence begets hopelessness.

                          B. Assumptions for Identification

  The attribution of causality to the results in Table 3 hinges on the assumption
that the severity of violence was exogenous to pre-violence perceived prospects
for upward mobility. The results would thus be biased if armed groups exerted
more violence on individuals or households based on characteristics that were
correlated with their ex-ante levels beliefs and levels of hope. While the
information available for the time and place from which our data come suggest
that violence was indiscriminate and random (see Section II), we replicate here
the strategies used by Moya (2017) to test for the validity of this information and
robustness of our results.
  First, we analyze whether the severity of violence was based on ex-ante
observable characteristics. In Table 2, we had observed that the households’
participation in local organizations differed across the groups exposed to
moderate and severe violence.        In addition, qualitative analysis of conflict
dynamics identified that in general, although not in the regions where we
collected our data, the households’ land size increases the likelihood of being




                                                                                    25
targeted and victimized by armed groups (2013). As already mentioned, any bias
induced by such non-random exposure to violence would likely bias downwards
the estimated impact of violence. Moreover, under the assumption of conditional
unconfoundedness (Imbens, 2003), we remove the biases that stem from
observable pre-violence differences by controlling for these characteristics in
        &9(
matrix 𝑋$%  in model 1. Finally, following Bellows and Miguel (2009), we
conduct a more thorough analysis and regress the number of violent events to
which a household was exposed and the victimization score, on a set of ex-ante
household characteristics (see Table A3 in the Appendix). The results indicate
that the severity of violence was neither based on specific observable
characteristics–– including pre-violence group membership––nor was it jointly
determined by the set of observables.
   Naturally, this does not ensure that the severity of the victimization was not
based on unobservables—this is, by characteristics that we were unable to
measure, but that the armed groups could somehow observe. As mentioned, in
our study regions which were newly contested terrain, armed groups relied on
indiscriminate violence against civilians as a strategy to obtain territorial
supremacy (CNMH, 2013).27 This is consistent with the logic of violence towards
civilians in civil wars (Kalyvas, 2006). Therefore, the severity of violence would
be driven by unobservables only if civilians made themselves more conspicuous
and put themselves at risk. In a context of widespread violence and civil conflict,
it is unlikely that such behaviors would characterize the more hopeless subjects.
   To further support the validity of our empirical strategy, we analyze the
robustness of the results on the sample of subjects who were victimized en masse,


   27
       By doing so, armed groups spread fear and undermined the popular support for their opponents, which allowed them
to control of the movements, activities, preferences, and habits of the population. This constituted, in the words or former
combatants, the most effective mechanism to achieve territorial dominance. For this reason, assassinations, mutilations,
and massacres, among other manifestations of violent, were often randomly carried out in public spaces; the more vicious
the type of violence, the more effective (CNMH, 2013).




                                                                                                                        26
with their entire villages in massacres or in the crossfire of combat between illegal
armed groups. Therefore, the severity of violence for this subsample is arguably
random.28 The results reported Appendix Table A5 indicate that the severity of
violence brings about a qualitatively robust effect on the perceived prospects of
being in extreme poverty. 29 While this effect is not statistically significant, as the
standard error increases considerably due to the smaller sample, the point estimate
is stronger in magnitude than what we observed in Table 3––a 5 percentage point
increase in the perceived prospects of remaining at the bottom of the ladder.
Moreover, we again find a statistically significant effect on the perceived
prospects of moving to the top of the ladder. In this case, the point estimate
indicates an even stronger 9 percentage points effect on the subjective probability
of moving out of poverty.
   Together, the results from this subsection suggest that we portray the causal
effects of violence based on the statistical and qualitative evidence that indicates
that the severity of violence was not driven by observable or unobservable
characteristics, and the robustness of the results on a subsample for which the
severity of violence was exogenous to pre-violence characteristics.

                                         C. Alternative Specifications

   In this section, we address three concerns regarding the specification of model
1. First, in model 1 we ignored the pre-violence positions on the ladder of life,
which may have been correlated with a host of individual and household skills
and could act as a reference point for the victims’ perceived prospects of upward


   28
       The characteristics of massive victimizations can be portrayed by the emblematic massacre of the municipality of El
Salado in the department of Bolivar, where some subjects in our sample were victimized. In February 2002, over 300
paramilitaries arrived to the municipality head and order the inhabitants to gather in the central plaza. Paramilitaries then
selected the victims at random (literally), and tortured and killed them in front of everybody else. Paramilitaries abandoned
the town 3 days later, after murdering 70 civilians. All of the survivors migrated soon after (CNMH, 2013).
   29
       In this analysis, we do not control for the current position on the ladder, since there is even fewer variation in this
characteristic for this subsample.




                                                                                                                          27
mobility. In Appendix Table A6, we estimate model 1 including a set of binary
indicators of the pre-violence position on the ladder of life. The results indicate
that the effect of the severity of violence and the current position on the ladder
have a robust and significant effect on victims’ perceptions, while the pre-
violence position does not have a significant effect.
  Second, the results in Table 3 may hinge on whether the characteristics of each
step of the ladder of life accurately represented the living standards for subjects in
our sample, and whether subjects with similar living standards placed themselves
at the same step. Al alternative is to control for objective measure of the current
living standards. For this reason, in Appendix Table A7 we estimate model 1, but
now controlling for the measured per capita consumption, which was calculated
using a standard consumption module included in the household survey. Again,
the results indicate a robust and significant effect of violence on the perceived
prospects of being at the bottom step of the ladder of life and of moving to the top
step. In addition, the households’ per capita consumption portrays the effect of
the current step of the ladder of life that we had observed in Table 3: higher levels
of consumption have a positive and significant effect on the perceived probability
of reaching the top step of the ladder and a negative and significant effect on the
perceived probability of being at the second step of the ladder.
  Finally, we may be concerned that the subjects did not fully understand the
subjective probability elicitation task and that there is significant error in their
responses. In Appendix Table A8, we analyze the robustness of our results using
the survey-based measures of hopelessness as our dependent variables in model 1.
Again, we find a robust effect: a more severe exposure to violence increases the
probability that subjects look to the future with hopelessness and despair, and
perceptions that it is highly unlikely that the household’s socioeconomic
circumstances will improve within a year.




                                                                                   28
                            D. Exploring the Psychological Mechanism

   In this section, we assess whether the effect of violence on victims’ perceived
prospects of upward mobility is mediated or explained by the psychological
consequences of violence. For this purpose, we first document the way in which
more severe and recent violence brings about higher symptoms of depression,
anxiety and other manifestations of psychological trauma. Then, we exploit the
variation in the symptoms of depression to understand how they alter the victims’
perceived prospects of upward mobility. Finally, we conduct a mediation analysis
to test whether depression explains the effect of violence of victims’ perceived
prospects of upward mobility. Finding that the reduced form effects of violence
are consistent with the psychological theory outlined in Section II is interesting in
its own right, and would add further credibility to our core identification strategy.
   First, we analyze how the symptoms of psychological trauma vary according to
the severity and temporal proximity of violence. For this purpose, we replicate
the analysis of Moya (2017) and regress the T-scores for depression, anxiety, or
GSI on the standardized number of violent events, the number of years since the
episodes of violence, and their interaction.30 In conformity with the data in Figure
2, the results indicate that a more severe and recent exposure to violence produces
more severe symptoms of depression and anxiety, and a higher GSI score (see
Appendix Table A9). For instance, an increase of one standard deviation in the
severity of violence increases the depression and anxiety T-scores by 0.7 and 1
points (see Columns 1 and 3). Likewise, it increases the probability that the
symptoms of these two disorders are above the critical threshold by 7 and 5
percentage points, respectively (see Columns 2 and 4). The latter effects account



   30
      In addition, we control for the subjects age and gender to account for well-known differences in the suseptibility to
psychological trauma among men and women and across age groups, and include the regional fixed effect. The results are
robust if we do not control for these characteristics or for the regional fixed effect.




                                                                                                                       29
for an 18-percentage increase relative to the mean, and are consistent with the
studies in psychology outlined before on the dose-response relationship between
violence and trauma (Mollica et al., 1988; Doctors Without Borders, 2010).
  Having established the effects of violence on different psychopathologies, we
now address whether psychological trauma is the mechanism through which
violence induces hopeless perceived prospects of upward mobility.                                                                    For this
purpose, we estimate a model 2 where we regress 𝑝$% 𝑆 &'( = 𝑘 on 𝐷$% , the T-
score for the symptoms of depression, and its quadratic term. Again, we include
                                                                             &
binary indicators for the current position of the household on the ladder 𝚰 𝑆$% =
                             &       &9(
𝑗 , control for the vectors 𝑋$% and 𝑋$%  of current individual and pre-violence
household covariates, and include a regional fixed effect 𝜉% .
                                                                                                              3
               &'(                         0                                                                              &
            𝑝 𝑆$%  = 𝑘 = β. + β( 𝐷$% + β0 𝐷$% +                                                                     𝛿2 𝚰 𝑆$% =𝑗 +
                                                                                                           24(

            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Γ( ′𝑋8& + Γ0 ′𝑋$&9( + 𝜉% + 𝜀$% , ∀	  𝑘 ∈ 	   1,4     (2)

  Panel A of Table 4 reports the results of model 2 and confirms our hypothesis
regarding the effect of depression on the victims’ perceived prospects of upward
mobility. The results indicate that an increase of one point in the depression T-
score raises the perceived probability of being at the bottom two steps of the
ladder by 3 and 7 percentage points percentage points, respectively. In addition, it
lowers the perceived probability of reaching the top of the ladder by 9 percentage
points. These effects are remarkably similar in magnitude to the effects of the
severity of violence. The data in the table indicate, in addition, that the effect of
the current step of the ladder persists when we control for the extent of
psychological trauma.                            Taken together, these results suggest that the
psychological consequences of violence are the mechanism that explains why
victims exposed to more severe violence become more hopeless.




                                                                                                                                             30
   To provide a more thorough analysis of the way in which depression underlies
the effect of violence on victims’ perceptions, we conduct a mediation analysis
following Acharya, Blackwell, and Sen (2016). We estimate the average
controlled direct effect of violence—this is, the causal effect of violence when the
effect of depression is accounted for.                           This approach allows analyzing whether
depression is one mechanism through which violence influences victims’
perceptions, and whether other mechanisms contribute to this relationship.31
   The average direct controlled effect of violence is estimated through the
following two-stages: In the first stage, we estimate model 1 controlling for the
depression T-score and its squared term. Then, we demediate the dependent
variable by removing the estimated effect of depression, its squared term, and the
current position on the ladder. In the second stage, we estimate the average
controlled direct effect of violence by regressing the demediated dependent
variable on the severity of violence. Formally, for each future step 𝑘 ∈ 1,4 , we
estimate the following model:
                                                                                                    3
             &'(                                          0                            0                       &
        𝑝   𝑆$%    = 𝑘 = γ. + γ( 𝑉$% +                γ0 𝑉$%    + γD 𝐷$% +         γ3 𝐷$%     +          𝛿2 𝚰 𝑆$% =𝑗 +
                                                                                                  24(
                                                &
                                   	  	  Γ(E 𝑋$% + Γ0E 𝑋$&9( + 𝜉% + 𝜀$%                                            (3a);

  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  𝑝	   	   𝑆 &'( = 𝑘 = α. + α( 𝑉$ + α0 𝑉$0 + Γ0E 𝑋8&9( + 𝜉% + 𝜇8              (3b);
         &'(              &'(                    0
where 𝑝 𝑆$%  = 𝑘 = 	  𝑝 𝑆$%  = 𝑘 − γD 𝐷$% + γ3 𝐷$% − 𝛿2 is the demediated
measure of the victims’ perceived prospects of reaching step 𝑘 of the ladder, and
𝜇8 is the consistent error term estimated through bootstrapping.32



   31
       This method provides an alternative to the standard mediation method, where one simultaneously controls for the
treatment and mediating variables. As Acharya et al. (2016) discuss, this often leads to biased and inconsistent estimates as
a result of M-bias or posttreatment bias.
    32
       Unbiased and consistent standard errors can be obtained deriving a consistent estimator for the variance of 𝛼( for
linear models or through bootstrapping. Here, we employ the latter method.




                                                                                                                         31
                        TABLE 4—DEPRESSION AND PERCEIVED PROSPECTS OF UPWARD M OBILITY

                                                 p(Step t+1 = 1)    p(Step t+1 = 2)   p(Step t+1 = 3)    p(Step t+1 = 4)

   A. Reduced Form: Depression T-score
           Depression                               0.032**            0.072**             -0.013            -0.090*
                                                     [0.016]            [0.033]            [0.028]            [0.046]

           Depression2                              -0.000**           -0.001**              0               0.001**
                                                     [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]

           Step t = 2                                 0.000             0.000              0.000              0.000
                                                     [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]

           Step t = 3                              -0.047***          -0.184***          0.087***           0.144***
                                                     [0.018]            [0.025]            [0.028]            [0.037]

           Step t = 4                              -0.068***          -0.266***            -0.029           0.362***
                                                     [0.024]            [0.035]            [0.044]            [0.067]

           Constant                                  -0.836            -1.906*             0.775             2.966**
                                                     [0.522]            [1.055]            [0.896]            [1.500]


   Hh exante and current controls                      Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
   R2                                                 0.08               0.25               0.08               0.21
   Observations                                        307               307                307                307
   B. Mediation Analysis: Average Controlled Direct Effect of Violence
   # of violent events (standardized)              0.03                0.04                -0.02              -0.06
                                                      [1.71]             [1.43]            [0.78]             [1.83]

   # of violent events squared (standardized)         0.00               -0.01              0.01               0.01
                                                      [0.27]             [0.74]            [1.11]             [0.37]


   Hh exante and current controls                      Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
       2
   R                                                  0.08               0.25               0.08               0.21
   Observations                                        307               307                307                307
   Mean value of dependent variable                   0.067             0.267              0.337              0.329
Notes: Each column reports the results of estimating model 1 on the perceived probabilities of being in each step of the
ladder. Panel A reports the estimated coefficients for the severity of symptoms of depression, its quadratic term, and the
current position on the ladder. The models include a regional fixed effect and current and ex-ante covariates. Estimated
coefficients for these covariates are available upon request. White-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Panel B
reports the average direct controlled effect of violence once the effect of depression and the current position on the ladder
are removed. Standard errors are reported in brackets and were obtained through bootstrapping with 1,000 repetitions. *p <
0.10. **p < 0.05. ***p < 0.01.

  Panel B of Table 4 reports the average direct controlled effect of violence that
results from the second stage of model 3. The results indicate that we do not
reject the null hypothesis. This means that once we account for the effect of
depression, violence does not have an additional effect on victims’ perceived
prospects of upward mobility. Therefore, the results indicate that the effect of




                                                                                                                        32
violence that we observed in Table 3 is driven by the psychological consequences
of violence. This result is consistent with the literature in psychology (Sympson,
2000; Yehuda, 2002), and demonstrates that the mechanism through which
traumatic experiences of violence can induce hopelessness and perceptions that
there are no pathways for real progress.

             V. Violence and Long-Run Perceived Poverty Dynamics

The implications of the results above can be better understood by simulating the
long-run distributions that are associated with the victims’ perceived prospects for
upward mobility. For this purpose, we use the estimated coefficients from Table
3, to construct the transition matrices that define the perceived probabilities of
transitioning from one step of the ladder to another one over a year, and simulate
the associated long-run distribution for different levels of violence. This allows
us to illustrate how the experience of more severe violence implies a less
favorable long-term distribution.
  Define the one period transition matrix P that defines the perceived probability
of transitioning from current ladder step 𝑗 to ladder step 𝑘 within a year:
                                                 p((   ⋯   p(3
                                  P = 	  	      ⋮    ⋱    ⋮ ,
                                                 p3(   ⋯   p33
where element pOP is the perceived probability that an individual at step 𝑗 in period
𝑡 will be at step 𝑘 in period 𝑡 + 1. Note that this structure can accommodate a
wide variety of probability processes ranging from convergent to divergent or
processes.   In general, perceived prospects for downward mobility would be
signaled by the lower triangle.
  Furthermore, let λS 	  be the 4x1 vector that denotes the population distribution
across the 4 steps of the ladder of life in period 𝑡.             Given P, the expected
distribution of the population in period 𝑡 + 1 will be λS'( 	  =	  P′λS . If we further




                                                                                      33
assume that the transition process is governed by a stable Markovian process in
which transition probabilities only depend on the current position, then
λS'0 	  =	  P′ P′λS . For a well-defined probability matrix, the population distribution
will converge in the long-run to the stable equilibrium distribution given by the
eigenvector λU = P′λU .
   Note that following model 1, in the previous section we estimated a set of
equations for the perceived probabilities associated with each future step 𝑘 on the
ladder of life for subjects currently at each step 𝑗. Hence, each equation in model
1 provides the information necessary to construct the corresponding column of the
transition matrix. To calculate the element pOP , we first estimate the equation for
the probability of being at step 𝑘 in the following period, 𝑝 𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝&'( = 𝑘 . Then,
we set the individual and household controls at their mean values and calculate
the predicted probability for step 𝑘, conditional on the current step of the ladder 𝑗,
and across different levels of violence 𝑣. Formally, the predicted conditional
probability pOP , for a subject at step 𝑗, who was exposed to given level of violence
𝑣, will be given by:
              	  	  	  	  	  	  𝑝2X 𝑣 = 𝛾. + 𝛾0 𝑣 + 𝛾0 𝑣 0 + 𝛿Z + 𝛤( 𝑋8& + 𝛤0 ′𝑋$&9( + 𝜉% 	  	  	  	     (4)

   Table 5 displays the simulated transition matrices and the associated population
long-run distributions when violence is set at the values for the 10th and 75th
percentiles—a one standard deviation increase.33 The effect of violence on the
perceived prospects for upward mobility can be observed by noting that the
perceived probabilities in the lower triangle of the transition matrix are higher for
subjects exposed to more severe violence than for those exposed to less violence.
Moreover, the associated long-run distributions reveal that if an average victim
were to experience an increase in the severity of violence from the 10th to the 75th

   33
       Table A10 in the Appendix reports transition matrix and long-run population distributions for different percentiles of
the distributions of the severity of violence.




                                                                                                                         34
percentile, the perceived likelihood of ending up in extreme poverty would
increase by 8 percentage points. This entails a sizeable 160 percent effect and
further highlights how the exposure to more severe violence leads victims’
perceived prospects of upward mobility to become increasingly hopeless.34

                             TABLE 5—TRANSITION M ATRICES AND LONG-RUN PROSPECTS OF UPWARD M OBILITY
                                 Violence - 10th percentile                                   Violence - 75th percentile
                                      Step in Period t                                             Step in Period t
                                                               de                                                           de
                                 1       2      3         4                                   1       2      3         4

                             1   6%    31%    32%        30%   0%                         1   9%    35%    31%        25%   4%
        Step in period t-1




                                                                     Step in period t-1
                             2   2%    14%    40%        43%   5%                         2   6%    17%    39%        38%   9%

                             3   1%     6%    29%        64%   29%                        3   4%     9%    27%        59%   28%

                             4   0%     3%    28%        69%   66%                        4   3%     6%    27%        64%   59%
Notes: Transition matrices that define the perceived probabilities of transitioning from one step of the ladder to another one
over some time period, and associated long-run distributions for two levels of violence: at the values of the 10th and 75th
percentiles. Each element of the transition matrix is based on the estimation of model 4.


   To further illustrate this point, Figure 4 plots the evolution of the extreme
poverty headcount—this is, the percentage of victimized households who are in
extreme poverty at different moments of time based on transition matrices for the
two levels of violence specified above. The figure illustrates how the extreme
poverty headcount falls relatively quickly, in conformity with the victims’
perceptions outlined in Figure 3. However, the figure also illustrates how the
transitional dynamics diverge rather quickly signaling a large increment in the
number of victims that expect to be in extreme poverty because of the exposure to
more severe violence and the associated psychological consequences.
   Of course, these long-run estimates are subject to the proviso that the actual
socioeconomic dynamics can be characterized by a Markov process, and that the


   34
       Likewise, a one standard deviation increase in the severity of violence lowers the likelihood of reaching the top of
the ladder by 8 percentage points; a 13 percent difference.




                                                                                                                                  35
transitional matrices remained unaltered over time even as the socioeconomic
circumstances of the household improve.                              Yet, we argue that this a good
characterization of victims’ perceived prospects since the results from the
previous section indicate that the effect of violence persists over time and is
independent of the levels of wellbeing. Therefore, the results above sharply
illustrate how violence operates as an additional force that dampens victims’
perceived prospects of future economic advance and can bring about a behavioral
poverty trap. This speaks to the work of Sen (1999), who suggested that internal
constraints can be more binding than the more noticeable economic constraints,
and can create a behavioral poverty trap.




                         FIGURE 4. SIMULATED EXTREME POVERTY HEADCOUNT
  Notes: Simulated evolution of the extreme poverty headcount based on the transition matrices depicted in Table 5.




                                                                                                                      36
                    VI. Discussion and Policy Implications

In this paper, we have analyzed if the exposure to violence more severe violence
leads victims’ perceived prospects of upward mobility to become increasingly
hopeless.   We focused on a group of victims of violence in Colombia and
collected data on their exposure to violence, symptoms of psychological trauma,
and perceived prospects of upward mobility.        Our results indicate that the
exposure to more severe violence dampens the perceived prospects of upward
mobility. Importantly, this effect persists even after we account for the effect of
current levels of wellbeing, consumption, education, and asset losses. The effect
of violence therefore signals to the existence of internal constraints, that go
beyond the “true” obstacles or external constraints imposed by violence and
forced displacement.        In fact, we demonstrate that the psychological
consequences of violence, and the severity of symptoms of depression in
particular, are the mechanism through which violence begets hopelessness.
  Taken together, our results echo the testimony of the victim at the beginning of
this paper, which portrays how violence restricted her ability to hope for a better
future. More generally, our findings are consistent with those of psychological
studies that show that the experience of trauma triggers depressive explanatory
styles and can induce learned helplessness. Violence can therefore hinder the
victims’ willingness to try to make the best out of what they have, and contribute
to the persistence of poverty. Precisely, the simulation analysis of the previous
section, highlights that the psychological consequences of violence can become
more binding than the more discernible external constraints and create a
behavioral poverty trap.
  One of the limitations of our analysis is that we are unable to observe whether
the perceived prospects of upward mobility affect behavior and actual
socioeconomic transitions. However, we believe that this is possible by drawing




                                                                                37
upon the work of Cuartas and Moya (2016), who followed our methodological
approach to collect data on perceived prospects of upward mobility from a
subsample of the Colombian Longitudinal Survey (ELCA for its Spanish
acronym).    Their analysis indicates that the perceived prospects of upward
mobility, which were measured in 2011, have a strong and significant impact on
households’ economic trajectories between 2011 and 2013.           Moreover, their
results indicate that the effect persists when they control for a host of observable
characteristics related to the households’ physical, human, and social assets.
Hence, their results also point to the role of internal constraints in shaping the
perceived prospects and the actual patterns of socioeconomic mobility.
  Our paper has important policy implications and suggests reconsidering the
strategies to assist the victims of violence and other negative shocks. In the case
of Colombia, for example, the Government has set a progressive set of laws and
implemented comprehensive programs to assist the victims since 1997. These
include humanitarian and conditional cash transfers and access to subsidized
education and health, which are thought to provide a safety net to minimize the
negative consequences of violence and forced displacement. In addition, the
Government has laid out a strategy to promote the socioeconomic recovery of
victims through asset and land transfers, job training programs, and indemnities
up to US$8,000, among others. Unfortunately, the psychological consequences of
violence have been largely neglected and mental health programs are scarce and
poorly funded. According to data of the Colombian Ministry of Health, between
2013 and 2016, less than 4 percent of the victims in the country have received
psychological assistance, while less than 1% of the funds allocated by the
Government for the victims’ recovery are invested in mental health programs.
This is unfortunate since our results suggest that the psychological consequences
of violence set seeds for persistent poverty.




                                                                                 38
   To conclude, we conduct a simple thought experiment to illustrate how
psychological trauma may hinder the effectiveness of other, more traditional types
of programs.           For this purpose, we return to the simulation analysis of the
previous section and assess how the long-run poverty dynamics depicted in Figure
4 would change if we provided an asset transfer to the victims exposed to more
severe violence, but without implementing any psychological assistance that
could alleviate the internal constraints. In particular, we simulate the poverty
headcount across time using the initial population distribution and the transition
matrices depicted in Table 5. After period 1, we provide an asset transfer to the
victims at the 75th percentile of the distribution of the severity of violence that
pushes them one step upwards in the ladder of life.




   FIGURE 5. SIMULATED EXTREME POVERTY HEADCOUNT UNDER A STANDARD ASSET TRANSFER
Notes: Simulated evolution of the extreme poverty headcount based on the transition matrices depicted in Table 5, and an
asset transfer for the victims exposed to more severe violence that pushes them one step upwards in the ladder of life in
period 1.


   Figure 5 illustrates the evolution of the extreme poverty headcount for the
victims exposed to low violence, and those exposed to more severe violence with




                                                                                                                     39
and without the asset transfer. The figure indicates that in the medium run, the
asset transfer lowers the extreme poverty headcount for the victims exposed to
more severe violence, and would alleviate material and external constraints.
Nevertheless, the figure also indicates that in the long run, the extreme poverty
head count for victims exposed to more severe violence converges to the previous
level without the asset transfer. The dynamics in Figure 5 therefore indicate that
even if victims live a world of convergent socioeconomic mobility, the
psychological consequences of violence can render standard interventions
ineffective and alter the long run distribution of well-being. Our paper thus
provides additional justification for a better understanding the psychological
consequences of violence and how they influence poverty dynamics, and for
designing and implementing psychological programs for victims of violence.




                                                                               40
                                           REFERENCES

Acharya A., Blackwell, M., and Sen, M. (2016) Explaining causal findings without bias: Detecting and
  assessing     direct    effects.    American     Political     Science       Review,       110(3),     512-529
  doi:10.1017/S0003055416000216
Allousch, M. (2017). Income, Psychological Well-being, and the Dynamics of Poverty: Evidence from South
  Africa, working paper, University of California, Davis.
Appadurai, A. (2004). The capacity to aspire: Culture and the terms of recognition. In V. Rao, and M. Walton
  (Eds.), Culture and public action (pp. 59–84). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Barrett, C., M.R. Carter and J-P Chavas (forthcoming). The economics of poverty traps. In C. Barrett, M.R.
  Carter and J-P Chavas (Eds.). The economics of poverty traps (pp. xx-yy). Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press.
Bernard, T., Dercon, S., Orkin, K., and Taffesse, A.S. (2015). Will Video Kill the Radio Star? Assessing the
  Potential of Targeted Exposure to Role Models through Video. The World Bank Economic Review, 29(1),
  226–237. doi:10.1093/wber/lhv014
Bauer, M., Cassar, A., Chytilova, J., and Henrich, J. (2014). War’s enduring effects on the development of
  egalitarian   motivations     and    in-group    biases.     Psychological      Science,      25(1),    47–57.
  doi:10.1177/0956797613493444.
Bellows, J., and Miguel, E. (2009). War and local collective action in Sierra Leone. Journal of Public
  Economics, 93(11–12), 1144–1157. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2009.07.012.
Blattman, C. (2009). From violence to voting: War and political participation in Uganda. American Political
  Science Review, 103(2), 231–247. doi:10.1017/S0003055409090212.
Briere, J.and Spinazzola, J. (2005). Phenomenology and psychological assessment of complex posttraumatic
  states. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 18, 401–412. doi:10.1002/jts.20048
Callen, M., Isaqzadeh, M., Long, J. D., and Sprenger, C. (2014). Violence and risk preference: Experimental
  evidence from Afghanistan. American Economic Review, 104(1), 123–148. doi:10.1257/aer.104.1.123.
Carter, M.R., and May, J. (2001). One Kind of Freedom: Poverty Dynamics in Post-apartheid South Africa.
  World Development, 29(12), 1987-2006. doi: 10.1016/S0305-750X(01)00089-4
Carter, M. R., and Barrett, C. B. (2006). The Economics of Poverty Traps and Persistent Poverty: An Asset-
  Based Approach. Journal of Development Studies, 42(2), pp. 178–199. doi:10.1080/00220380500405261
Carter, M. R., Little, P.D., Mogues, T., and Negatu, W. (2007). Poverty Traps and Natural Disasters in
  Ethiopia and Honduras. World Development, 35(5), 835-856. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2006.09.010
Cassar, A., Grosjean, P., and Whitt, S. (2014). Social preferences of ex-combatants: Survey and experimental
  evidence from postwar Tajikistan. In K. Wärneryd (Ed.), The economics of conflict: Theory and empirical
  evidence (pp. 231–262). Cambridge MA: MIT Press. doi:10.7551/mitpress/9780262026895.001.0001.
Cassar, A., Grosjean, P., and Whitt, S. (2013). Legacies of violence: Trust and market development. Journal
  of Economic Growth, 18(3), 285–318. doi:
Cassar, A., and Wyddick, B. (2017) What Raises Achievement among the Poor? Experimentally testing
  Goals, Incentives, and Support Groups in Medellin, Colombia. University of San Francisco. Unpublished
  Manuscript.
Casullo, M. M. (2004). El inventario de síntomas SCL-90-R de L. Derogatis. Adaptación UBA.
Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica (CNMH). (2013). ¡Basta ya!: Colombia: Memorias de guerra y
  dignidad.                                           Retrieved                                          from
  http://www.centrodememoriahistorica.gov.co/micrositios/informeGeneral/descargas.html.
Chiapa, C., Prina, S., and Parker, A. (2016). The Effects of Financial Inclusion on Children's Schooling, and
  Parental Aspirations and Expectations. Journal of International Development, 28(5), 683-696.
Cuartas, J., and Moya, A. (2016). Self-Fulfilling Prophecies: Expectations, Psychological Distress, and Social
  Mobility in Colombia. Working Paper.
Dalton, P. S., Ghosal, S., and Mani, A. (2016). Poverty and aspirations failure. The Economic Journal, 126
  (590) 165-188. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12210.
De Quidt, J. and H, Haushofer (forthcoming). Depression through the Lens of Economics: A Research
  Agenda. In C. Barrett, M.R. Carter and J-P Chavas (Eds.). The economics of poverty traps (pp. xx-yy).
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jonathan de Quidt† Johannes Haushofer
Doctors Without Borders. (2006). Living with fear: The cycle of violence in Colombia. Retrieved from
  https://issuu.com/msf_australia/docs/colombia_living_in_fear_0406.
Duflo, E. (2013). Hope, aspirations, and the design of the fight against poverty. Stanford, CA: Stanford
  University Center for Ethics in Society, [Lecture]. 2 October.
Glewee, P., Ross, P.H., & Wydick, B. (2017) Developing Hope Among Impoverished Children: Using Child
Self-Portraits to Measure Poverty Program Impacts. Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming doi:
  10.3368/jhr.53.2.0816-8112R1
Garber, J., and Seligman, M.E.P. (1980). Human Helplessness: Theory and Applications. New York:
  Academic Press.
Human     Rights     Watch.     (2010).   World   report    2010:   Events    of   2009.    Retrieved    from
  http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/wr2010.pdf.
Ibáñez, A. M., and Moya, A. (2010a). Vulnerability of victims of civil conflicts: Empirical evidence for the
  displaced        population      in     Colombia.        World     Development,        38(4),     647–663.
  doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2009.11.015.
Ibáñez, A. M., and Moya, A. (2010b). Do conflicts create poverty traps? Asset losses and recovery for
  displaced households in Colombia. In R. Di Tella, S. Edwards, and E. Schargrodsky (Eds.), The
  economics of crime: Lessons for and from Latin America (pp. 137–172). Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199378296.001.0001
Imbens, G. (2003). Sensitivity to Exogeneity Assumptions in Program Evaluation. American Economic




                                                                                                          42
  Review 93(2), 126–132. doi:10.1257/000282803321946921
Instituto de Estudios para el Desarrollo y la Paz (Indepaz). (2011). Seventh report of presence of
  narcoparamilitary        groups      in       2011.      Retrieved      from     www.indepaz.org.co/wp-
  content/uploads/2012/02/S%C3%A9ptimo-informe-versi%C3%B3n-ingl%C3%A9s-of-
  Narcoparamilitary-Groups-in-2011.pdf.
Jensen, R., and Oster, E. (2009). The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women's Status in India. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1057–1094. doi:10.1162/qjec.2009.124.3.1057.
Lipman, A., and Havens, E. (1965). The Colombian Violencia: An Ex Post Facto Experiment. Social Forces,
  44(2), 238–245. doi:10.1093/sf/44.2.238
Lybbert, T.J., and Wydick, B. (forthcoming). Hope as aspirations, agency, and pathways: poverty dynamics
  and microfinance in Oaxaca, Mexico. In Barrett, C., M.R., Carter, and J.P. Chavas (Eds.). The Economics
  of Poverty Traps. University of Chicago Press. (forthcoming).
Kalyvas, S. (2006). The logic of violence in civil war. Cambridge studies in comparative politics. New York:
  Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1086/522394
Kessler, R. C, Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., and Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder
  in   the   national   comorbidity   survey.   Archives   of   General   Psychiatry,   52(12),   1048–1060.
  doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1995.03950240066012.
Kosec, K., and Hyunjung C. (2017). Aspirations and the role of social protection: evidence from a natural
  disaster in rural Pakistan. World Development, 97, 49-66. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.03.039
Krishna, A. (2001). Moving from the Stock of Social Capital to the Flow of Benefits: The Role of Agency.
  World Development, 29(6), 925-243. doi:/10.1016/S0305-750X(01)00020-1
Krishna, A. (2004). Escaping Poverty and Becoming Poor: Who Gains, Who Loses, and Why? World
  Development, 32(1), 121-136. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2003.08.002
Krishna, A. (2006). Pathways out of and into poverty in 36 villages of Andhra Pradesh, India. World
  Development, 34(2), 271-288. doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2005.08.003
  Lipman, A., and Havens, A.E. (1965). The Colombian violencia: An ex post facto experiment. Social
Forces, 44(2). 238-245. doi.org/10.1093/sf/44.2.238
Macours, K., and Vakis, R. (2014). Changing households' investment behaviors through social interactions
  with local leaders: evidence from a randomized transfer programme. Economic Journal, 124, 607–633.
  doi:10.1111/ecoj.12145
Matijasevic, M.T, Velásquez, L., Villada, C., and Ramírez, M. (2007). Moving Out of Poverty: understanding
  freedom, growth, and democracy from the bottom-up. Colombia National Synthesis Report. Retrieved
  from                           http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMOVOUTPOV/Resources/2104215-
  1187710751691/Colombia_synthesis.pdf
Mollica, R. F., McInnes, K., Poole, C., and Tor, S. (1998). Dose-effect relationships of trauma to symptoms
  of depression and post-traumatic stress disorder among Cambodian survivors of mass violence. The British
  Journal of Psychiatry, 173(6), 482-488. doi: 10.1192/bjp.173.6.482




                                                                                                         43
Moya, A. (2018). Violence, psychological trauma, and risk attitudes: Evidence from victims of violence in
  Colombia. Journal of Development Economics, 131, 15-27. doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2017.11.001
Narayan, D., Pritchett, L., and Kapoor, S. (2009). Moving Out of Poverty: Success from the Bottom Up.
  Moving Out of Poverty, Volume 2. Washington, DC: World Bank and Palgrave Macmillan.
  https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/11838
Narayan, D., and Petesch, P. (2010). Moving Out of Poverty: Rising from the Ashes of Conflict. Moving Out
  of    Poverty,      Volume    4.    Washington,    DC:        World    Bank       and    Palgrave   Macmillan.
  https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/11837
National    Victims     Unit.   (n.d.).   National   victims’     unit   official    registry.   Retrieved   from
  http://rni.unidadvictimas.gov.co.
Ray, D. (2006). Aspirations, poverty, and economic change. In A. Banerjee, R. Benabou, and D. Mookherjee
  (Eds.), Understanding poverty (pp. 409–443). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Richards, A., Ospina-Duque, J., Barrera-Valencia, M., Escobar-Rincón, J., Ardila-Gutiérrez, M., Metzler, T.,
  and Marmar, C. (2011). Posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety and depression symptoms, and psychosocial
  treatment needs in Colombians internally displaced by armed conflict: A mixed-method evaluation.
  Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 3(4), 384–393. doi:10.1037/a0022257.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement.
  Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80(1), 1-28. doi:10.1037/h0092976
Seligman, M.E.P. (1975). Helplessness: On Depression, Development and, Death. San Francisco: W.H.
  Freeman
Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom. Oxford University Press.
Shultz, J. M., Garfin, D. R., Espinel, Z., Araya, R., Oquendo, M. A., Wainberg, M. L., … Neria, Y. (2014).
  Internally displaced “victims of armed conflict” in Colombia: The trajectory and trauma signature of
  forced migration. Current Psychiatry Reports, 16(10), 475. doi:10.1007/s11920-014-0475-7.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). (2016). Population statistics. Retrieved from
  http://popstats.unhcr.org/en/overview.
Voors, M. J., Nillesen, E. E., Verwimp, P., Bulte, E. H., Lensink, R., and Van Soest, D. P. (2012). Violent
  conflict and behavior: A field experiment in Burundi. American Economic Review, 102(2), 941–964.
  doi:10.1257/aer.102.2.941.
Yehuda, R. (2002). Post-traumatic stress disorder. New England Journal of Medicine, 346, 108–114.
  doi:10.1056/NEJMra012941.




                                                                                                              44
