NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSERVATION POLICIES:
WHO RESPONDS TO PRICE AND WHO RESPONDS TO PRESCRIPTION?
Casey J. Wichman
Laura O. Taylor
Roger H. von Haefen
Working Paper 20466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20466
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

Partial support for this research by the Center for Environmental and Resource Economic Policy (NC
State University) and the Environmental Finance Center (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank participants at the following workshops and conferences
for helpful suggestions: Camp Resources, Appalachian State University, the Association of Public
Policy Analysis and Management, the NC Water Resources Research Institute, the Property and Environment
Research Center, and the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association Annual Meetings. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Casey J. Wichman, Laura O. Taylor, and Roger H. von Haefen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Conservation Policies: Who Responds to Price and Who Responds to Prescription?
Casey J. Wichman, Laura O. Taylor, and Roger H. von Haefen
NBER Working Paper No. 20466
September 2014
JEL No. D12,H42,L51,L95,Q25
ABSTRACT
The efficiency properties of price and non-price instruments for conservation in environmental policy
are well understood. Yet, there is little evidence comparing the effectiveness of these instruments,
especially when considering water resource management. We exploit a rich panel of residential water
consumption to examine heterogeneous responses to both price and non-price conservation policies
during times of drought while controlling for unobservable household characteristics. Our empirical
models suggest that the burden of pricing policies fall disproportionately on low-income households
and fail to reduce consumption among households who generally are large consumers of water. However,
prescriptive policies such as restrictions on outdoor water use result in uniform responses across income
classes while simultaneously targeting reductions from households with irrigation systems or historically
high consumption.
Casey J. Wichman
Departmennt of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
University of Maryland
2200 Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
wichman@umd.edu
Laura O. Taylor
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
North Carolina State University
University Box 8109
Raleigh, NC 27695-8109
laura_taylor@ncsu.edu

Roger H. von Haefen
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
4338 Nelson Hall
North Carolina State University Box 8109
Raleigh, NC 27695-8109
and NBER
roger_von_haefen@ncsu.edu

CONSERVATION POLICIES:
WHO RESPONDS TO PRICE AND WHO RESPONDS TO PRESCRIPTION?
Casey J. Wichman, Laura O. Taylor, and Roger H. von Haefen1
August 2014

Abstract
The efficiency properties of price and non-price instruments for conservation in environmental
policy are well understood. Yet, there is little evidence comparing the effectiveness of these
instruments, especially when considering water resource management. We exploit a rich panel of
residential water consumption to examine heterogeneous responses to both price and non-price
conservation policies during times of drought while controlling for unobservable household
characteristics. Our empirical models suggest that the burden of pricing policies fall
disproportionately on low-income households and fail to reduce consumption among households
who generally are large consumers of water. However, prescriptive policies such as restrictions
on outdoor water use result in uniform responses across income classes while simultaneously
targeting reductions from households with irrigation systems or historically high consumption.
JEL Codes: Q25, D12, H42, L51, L95
Keywords: Water demand, non-price policies, price regulation, conservation, drought

1. Introduction
Although prescriptive policies are commonly employed by resource managers to
encourage conservation, economists tend to advocate for pricing mechanisms to achieve
environmental goals since they are typically more efficient.

However, many

environmental management contexts involve resources whose prices are regulated by
utility commissions or federal oversight. As such, the use of pricing tools to encourage
conservation is politically challenging. This is particularly true in the case of water
1

Wichman: Dept. of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of Maryland, College Park,
wichman@umd.edu. Taylor and von Haefen: Dept. of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Center for
Environmental and Resource Economic Policy, North Carolina State University, laura_taylor@ncsu.edu
and rhhaefen@ncsu.edu, respectively. Partial support for this research by the Center for Environmental
and Resource Economic Policy (NC State University) and the Environmental Finance Center (University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank participants at the following
workshops and conferences for helpful suggestions: Camp Resources, Appalachian State University, the
Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management, the NC Water Resources Research Institute, the
Property and Environment Research Center, and the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association
Annual Meetings.

resource management. Efficiency would dictate that price reflects long-run marginal cost
of provision, including scarcity rents, which is typically markedly higher than regulated
market prices (Mansur and Olmstead, 2012). As such, non-price strategies, also referred
to as prescriptive policies, have become popular demand management tools for water
conservation during periods of drought in which the short-run reliability of water
resource systems are at risk. These strategies can take the form of restrictions on outdoor
water use (Castledine et al., 2014; Renwick and Green, 2000), information campaigns
(Coleman, 1999), social comparisons (Ferraro and Price, 2013), or financial incentives
for technology adoption (Bennear et al., 2013; Renwick and Archibald, 1998).2
Despite growing usage of non-price policies in environmental contexts, and a
corresponding literature measuring their effectiveness, there is little evidence of the
relative merits of pricing versus prescriptive restrictions using household-level panel that
allows consideration of both policy types simultaneously, and we have even less evidence
about the heterogeneity in responsiveness to these conservation tools across households.
These responses are important to understand because water utilities and policy makers are
concerned about the regressive incidence of pricing policies on lower income households.
Further, an important goal of water utilities is to manage the use of households in the
upper-tail of the consumption distribution as a means to help reduce water infrastructure
over-capitalization. While efficient pricing such as dynamic increasing block rates could
address these concerns, as mentioned above they are not generally politically feasible.
In this research, we provide evidence on important observable household
characteristics that influence responsiveness to demand-side management policies, while

2

Select examples of these tools being utilized in the energy sector to manage household demand include
social comparisons (Alcott 2011) and financial incentives for technology adoption (Alberini et al. 2013).

2

econometrically controlling for unobservable household attributes. Olmstead and Stavins
(2009) lay out an exhaustive comparison of price and non-price policies and conclude
that neither prices nor prescriptive policies are superior in their distributional bona fides,
despite prices being a more cost-effective solution. However, we provide strong
empirical evidence that prescriptive conservation policies display more palatable
distributional features than price regulation.
Our analysis exploits a rich dataset of water monthly consumption for 1,727
households across six municipalities in North Carolina. The data span a two-and-a-half
year period that includes months in which North Carolina was in a severe drought and
months in which there were normal conditions. There is variation in drought conditions,
price and non-price policies both within the municipalities over time and across
municipalities. Further, for each household we observe the household’s income, lot-size
and whether or not an irrigation system is present. Given the long panel and rich variation
in key variables, we are able to identify price and non-price policy responses that reflect
month-to-month decisions within a household while controlling for time-invariant
unobservable household characteristics that might bias results.
Results indicate that mandatory (voluntary) prescriptive policies focused on outdoor
watering restrictions achieve approximately a ten percent (three percent) reduction in
aggregate demand. Given the inelastic price responsiveness of households, an average
price increase of more than 30% would be required to achieve the same ten percent
reduction in water use that the prescriptive mandatory policies achieved. This price
increase would imply a 20 percent increase in the average customer’s monthly
expenditures on water.

3

Additionally, results from our empirical models suggest that there is important
heterogeneity in how households respond to price. Overall, our results suggest that when
pricing mechanisms are implemented to affect consumption patterns, the conservation
burden falls primarily on lower-income households. The evidence suggests that highincome households are significantly less responsive to price, and households with
irrigation systems are found to be completely unresponsive to the price changes that
occurred during our sample period.

On the other hand, there is a notable lack of

heterogeneity among households in their responsiveness to voluntary and mandatory
prescriptive policies with the important exception of households with irrigation systems
and/or those that are large-volume consumers. Households with irrigation systems and
households in the upper 20th percentile of average consumption in their municipality are
found to be almost twice as responsive to mandatory policies than other households.
These results are robust to different model specifications and various definitions of key
variables.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we motivate our
empirics by highlighting the unique data used in the analysis. The third section presents
empirical models of residential water demand that incorporate household heterogeneity
explicitly and presents key empirical results and sensitivity analyses. In the final section,
we discuss the policy implications of our results and offer concluding remarks.

2. Data
Thirty consecutive months of household-level billing data are coupled with survey
responses for 1,727 households in six municipalities across North Carolina. The data

4

have rich spatial and temporal variation in weather conditions, water rate structures,
household water consumption, and demand-side management programs. We describe
each of these features below.
Household monthly water use is observed for the period July 2006 through December
2008, which spans two summers with persistent drought conditions and one summer with
normal conditions. The six municipalities providing water utility billing data are listed
in Table 1 along with summary statistics for the households surveyed in each community.
The municipalities span the three geographic regions of North Carolina and the average
weather and growing conditions varies across these municipalities as a result.
Fayetteville and Greenville are in the coastal plan region of the state and are the warmest
with average July maximum temperatures of 90 degrees.

Hendersonville is in the

mountainous, western part of the state and is the coolest municipality with average July
maximum temperatures of 84 degrees. Charlotte, High Point, and Chapel Hill are in the
central Piedmont region of the state and have weather closer to that of coastal plain, with
average July maximum temperatures between 88 and 90 degrees.
Monthly water billing data including water and sewer usage were obtained for singlefamily, detached housing in each of these municipalities. A random sample of households
with complete billing data was selected for a telephone interview that collected
information on household demographics and irrigation habits. Telephone interviews took
place during August and September 2009 and were conducted by Agricultural Statistics

5

Division of the N.C. Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.3 As indicated in
Table 1, between 225 and 388 surveys are available for each municipality.4

2.1 Household Characteristics
Overall, the survey respondents are high-income households. As indicated in Panel A
of Table 1, the sample mean income is $123,034 and the median is $112,500.5 Mean
income varies by municipality, ranging from $88,622 in Fayetteville to $183,987 in
Chapel Hill. Overall, the households in our sample have substantially higher income than
the median for N.C. in 2010 ($45,570). However, our sample is 100% homeowners and
median income for just homeowners in urbanized areas is not readily available. It is
possible to compare home values between our sample and the median within each
municipality’s boundary as reported by Census. As reported in Table 1, median home
values in our sample vary from $187,500 in Fayetteville and High Point to $325,000 in
Chapel Hill. For five of the six municipalities, the median home value for the sample is
on average approximately 30% higher than Census reported median home value for the
entire municipality. The exception is Chapel Hill in which the median value for our
sample of homes is 9% lower than the median home value for all of Chapel Hill.
Mean home square footage is approximately 2,700 square feet across each of our
municipalities, and the mean lot size is 0.6 acres, with the exception of Hendersonville,
which has an average of 1.1 acre per household.

3

The average household size in the

Phone numbers were purchased from InfoUSA, a private vendor since the participating water utilities
generally did not maintain phone numbers for their customers.
4
Note, the billing and survey data are drawn from each water utility service area and thus encompasses a
broader population than just residents from within the city limits.
5
Due to item non-response, household income data is taken from InfoUSA, the vendor providing
household phone numbers. These income data are more disaggregated than survey-reported income.

6

sample varies from 2.34 to 2.86 individuals per home, while the average for North
Carolina during this time period was 2.47 individuals per dwelling unit of any type.

2.2 Water Consumption and Pricing
Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics for household water use. The mean
monthly household consumption is 5,289 gallons per month for the entire sample, which
is very close to the average consumption in N.C. of 5,259 gallons per month per
household.6 The distribution of water use among households is right-skewed as indicated
by medians being less than means for all municipalities. As indicated in the last row of
Panel B, the 90th percentile of monthly water use among our sample is nearly double the
magnitude of mean monthly use.7 Across municipalities, residents in Charlotte consume
the most water on average, and Hendersonville consumes the least.
Panel C in Table 1 reports the prices paid by utility customers per 1,000 gallons
consumed. Each utility bills customers on a monthly basis and combines water and
sewer charges in one bill. Average and marginal volumetric charges for combined water
and sewer use are constructed for each household in each month based on their ex post
water consumption and published utility rate sheets.

Four municipalities have an

increasing block rate structure during at least part of the study period and two have a flatrate structure. Because all municipalities charge a base (fixed) service fee for water and

6

Average consumption for N.C. is constructed using an estimated per-capita consumption of 70 gallons per
day in 2005 (Kenny, et al., 2009).
7
Several municipalities in our study round consumption to the nearest thousand gallons each month for
billing purposes. This factor explains the prevalence of 2,000 gallons as the 10th percentile of consumption
for the sample.

7

sewer use, the average and marginal prices for water consumed diverge in all
communities, not just those with increasing block rates.8
As indicated in Panel C, there is considerable heterogeneity in water prices across the
municipalities.

Mean average price across municipalities varies from $6.78 to $13.06

per thousand gallons, with Charlotte customers paying the lowest average prices and
customers in Hendersonville paying the highest. The differences in average prices are
primarily driven by the wide variety in the fixed base service fee across municipalities
($3.49 to $17.95, see the third row of Panel C). Fixed fees are not reflected in marginal
prices, and thus the variation in the mean marginal price paid is less than that of average
price, varying from $6.70 to $10.03 across municipalities.
Figure 1 indicates the variability in water consumption over the study period. As
shown, Charlotte has visibly higher average per capita consumption than the rest of the
municipalities, with large peaks in the summer of both 2006 and 2007. Peak summer
consumption in Chapel Hill is somewhat smaller than Charlotte in 2006 and 2007, but is
the lowest among all municipalities in 2008. During summer 2008, it is Greenville that
exhibits the largest summer peak. Fayetteville tracks with Greenville in early summer,
but then reduces average consumption by mid-summer and is among the lowest for the
sample during late summer, 2008. Overall, there is a clear reduction in the peak for the
summer of 2008 for all of the utilities. In the winter months, average consumption in
Charlotte is consistently higher than the remaining five municipalities who all have
similar consumption levels.

8

The two municipalities with flat rates actually had in place a declining rate structure for at least part of the
study period. However, the first block was so large (e.g., up to 40,000 gallons per month) that nearly 100%
of their customers fell well within the first block. Thus, we treat these two communities as having a flatrate structure.

8

Figure 2 presents the variation in prices paid by water customers over the study
period. As shown in Panel A, Charlotte customers paid the lowest average prices while
Chapel Hill, High Point, and Hendersonville customers paid the highest average prices.
An overall increasing trend in average prices across all municipalities is evident as well.
This increasing trend is driven by changes in rate structures implemented by each utility
over the study period. All of the municipalities increased their prices in some way over
the study period. In particular, Chapel Hill customers faced a uniform water rate until
July 2007, after which an increasing block rate structure was adopted. In addition to
adopting an increasing block rate, Chapel Hill also implemented seasonal and droughtinduced surcharges in their rate schedule.
Panel B in Figure 2 presents mean marginal prices over time and indicates that
Hendersonville exhibits the consistently highest marginal price with little variation over
time, while Chapel Hill is the most variable with mean marginal prices peaking higher
than any other municipality due to an aggressive drought pricing mechanism. Greenville
and Charlotte display the lowest marginal prices, reflecting similar trends to average
prices, though Charlotte’s introduction of increasing block rates in the summer of 2008
raises the observed marginal price in the later months. Overall, the comparison of Panels
A and B provides an indication that average prices are more time-variant than marginal
prices within a municipality.

2.3 Drought and Policy Parameters
An integral part of this research is the presence of significant drought conditions
throughout North Carolina beginning in the summer of 2007.

9

Table 2 presents a

summary index of monthly drought conditions in each municipality throughout the study
period, along with an indicator of whether voluntary (V) or mandatory (M) watering
restrictions were in place for the majority of that month. An average over of the weekly
drought conditions is computed to determine the average status for each month. Weekly
drought conditions are described by one of six categories ranging from “normal
conditions” (=0) to “exceptional drought” (=5), the most severe category possible.9 Thus,
if in all weeks of a month a municipality is recorded as having “exceptional drought,” the
index for that month would be 5.0. Average conditions over the month are represented in
Table 2 by shades of gray in which the darkest shade with dots indicates a month in
which at least half the weeks were categorized as “extreme” or “exceptional drought” and
diagonal lines indicate a month in which all weeks were classified as having exceptional
drought. No color in Table 2 indicates a month in which the average drought condition
across weeks in that month is less than 1.0 (see footnote 1, Table 2 for more details).
As indicated in Table 2, by September 2007 all regions were in severe drought and
were subsequently elevated to exceptional drought status, the most severe classification
by December 2007. The drought conditions persisted until April 2008, and gradually
returned to normal levels afterwards.
Water utilities in North Carolina responded to the 2007 drought by encouraging
residential conservation through voluntary or mandatory outdoor watering restrictions.
Across municipalities, voluntary restrictions typically took the form of asking customers
to limit outdoor lawn and garden watering to 2-3 days a week in a pattern determined by

9

Specifically, the categories are 0=normal conditions, 1=abnormally dry, 2=moderate drought, 3=severe
drought, 4=extreme drought, and 5=exceptional drought. The definition of each drought category is
available from the U.S. Drought Monitor at http://droughtmonitor.unl.edu/monitor.html, last accessed
February 19, 2012.

10

their street address and/or watering only late in the evening or early morning.

In

addition, customers were also asked to limit other nonessential uses of water such as car
washing and home/driveway washing. Mandatory restrictions were generally of the same
form as the voluntary restrictions, but in some instances the austerity of the actions were
increased, as described below.
Table 2 presents the months when voluntary and mandatory restrictions were in place
and Table 3 summarizes the restrictions broadly for each municipality. As indicated in
Table 2, all municipalities in our sample employed either voluntary or mandatory
restrictions during the study period, while Greenville (Fayetteville) never implemented a
voluntary (mandatory) policy. Two of the six municipalities (Fayetteville and Charlotte)
implemented mandatory restrictions as early as May 2007 and September 2007,
respectively, and kept them in place through the rest of our study period.10
During the peak growing seasons, Charlotte and Fayetteville implemented similar
mandatory restrictions. In summer 2007, both these municipalities limited outdoor lawn
watering to two days per week. In summer 2008, Charlotte further reduced this to one
day per week while Fayetteville continued to allow two days per week. High Point and
Chapel Hill implemented mandatory restrictions on outdoor water use, but not during the
primary growing season or for only one month in the case of High Point. Finally,
Hendersonville implemented mandatory restrictions during the last two months of
summer 2008 that disallowed watering of lawns, while Greenville never moved from
voluntary into mandatory restrictions. Overall, there is some degree of heterogeneity in
the austerity of watering restrictions and enforcement across municipalities. However,

10

Since the 2002 drought, Fayetteville’s default drought policy is to implement mandatory restrictions
corresponding to the irrigation months (May-September).

11

we do not directly model this heterogeneity since policies are generally similar the
majority of the time. In the few instances that very strict mandatory restrictions were put
in place (i.e., a complete ban on outdoor watering), the restriction was exceptionally
short-lived or during off-peak seasons where outdoor watering is minimal anyway.

3. Empirical strategy and results
To identify water consumption responsiveness to price and prescription policies, we
develop a panel instrumental variables (IV) model that addresses price endogeneity and
incorporates unobserved household heterogeneity through household-specific fixed
effects.11 Our baseline specification takes the form:
ln(qikt ) = β1 ln(APikt-1 ) + β2 Voluntarykt + β3 Mandatorykt + Wkt + θt + αi + εikt ,

(1)

where the natural log of monthly water consumption (qikt) for household i in municipality
k in month t is regressed on the instrumented natural log of the average price paid per
1,000 gallons of water in the previous month (APikt-1), indicator variables for whether or
not a voluntary or mandatory water restriction policy was in place during the month
(Voluntarykt and Mandatorykt, respectively), a vector of six covariates capturing weather
conditions over the month (Wkt), and month and household fixed effects (θt and αi,
respectively). The random error term is given by εikt. Since Equation (1) does not
account for the upward sloping demand inherent in block pricing, we follow Olmstead

11

All models were also estimated in a random effects framework to exploit cross-sectional variation in the
data and check the robustness of results. A series of Hausman tests rejects the hypothesis that the random
effects estimator is consistent for all but the simplest specification with a p-value less than 0.01. The
consistency of the within-estimator and ability to control for unobserved household characteristics make the
fixed effects model the preferred specification. Random effects estimates are available from the authors
upon request.

12

(2009) by instrumenting the natural log of lagged average price by the natural log of
marginal prices at arbitrary levels of consumption as follows:

ln pikt‐1
where MP

J
j 1

j

δj ln MPkt‐1

πln basekt‐1

θt αi

ikt ,

(2)

is the marginal price per thousand gallons for the next unit of water

consumed for a monthly consumption level at j thousand gallons. We use the instrument
set j = {1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 15, 20} to capture variation in rate structures among the
distribution of consumption, while allowing all municipalities to have the same number
of instruments regardless of the number of price tiers observed for a particular
municipality at any point in time.12 Also, base

is the base service fee for water and

sewer use, and all else is defined as in Equation (1).13 The rationale for these instruments
is that they are correlated with the price a household pays since they are representative of
the entire rate structure for a particular utility, however the individual household’s
consumption choice does not affect the utility’s rate schedule. Kleibergen-Paap Wald Fstatistics are computed to test the hypothesis that the instruments in the first-stage
regression are jointly significant predictors of average price in the presence of withinhousehold error correlation and clustered standard errors, and are all significant at the 1%
level (Kleibergen and Paap, 2006).
The first two panels of Table 4 provide definitions and summary statistics for each of
the variables included in equations (1) and (2). Average price is the ex post average price
calculated by dividing the total billed amount by total consumption. Average rather than
marginal prices are used in our main analysis for several reasons. First, it is likely that
12

Models were estimated with several sets of instruments corresponding to different consumption levels
and different numbers of marginal prices; coefficient estimates for average price in the second-stage
regression are stable across different instrument choices in the first-stage.
13
All models were estimated using the “xtivreg2” routine in Stata 11.2 with standard errors robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the household level (Schaffer, 2005).

13

consumers do not know their precise level of consumption throughout the billing period
and, hence, do not know the marginal price being charged at any point in time. Thus it is
likely that households respond to their total bill from the previous month when
considering altering planned water consumption in the current period, indicating an
average price concept is appropriate. This concept is supported by Wichman (2014) and
Ito (2014) who both use quasi-experimental research designs and find that consumers
respond to average price rather than marginal price when facing tiered rate structures.
From an econometric standpoint, assuming that consumer’s respond to their previous bill
also allows for the avoidance of contemporaneous correlation with consumption by
incorporating lagged average price in the econometric specification (Wichman, 2014).
Further, average prices exhibit stronger temporal variation than marginal prices in our
sample, which improves identification in empirical models that control for unobserved,
time-invariant factors at the household level.14
As indicated in Panel B of Table 4, voluntary watering restrictions were in place 15%
of the months in our sample and mandatory restrictions were in place 32% of the months.
Weather covariates included in the model (Wkt) include monthly rainfall, mean monthly
maximum temperature, a quadratic term for each of these two variables, and an
interaction term between monthly rainfall and mean monthly maximum temperature.
These weather variables are included because water usage is driven by current weather
conditions while drought conditions (and associated policy instruments) are the result of
14

Models were also estimated assuming households respond to the marginal price of the last 1,000 gallons
consumed controlling for infra-marginal rate changes affecting virtual income according to Taylor-Nordin
models of demand with non-linear budget constraints (c.f., Olmstead, 2009). Estimated price elasticities are
generally similar when marginal price is included in the model instead of average price. Importantly,
results regarding the impacts of voluntary and mandatory prescriptive policies are largely invariant to the
choice of average versus marginal price. As such, we report only models using average price. The full set
of results using marginal price are available from the authors upon request.

14

cumulative weather, storage, and demand patterns. In other words, it is possible to have a
reasonably wet month (with little irrigation need), but be in category four or five drought
in that month. As such, current weather conditions are important determinants of water
use and are not collinear with drought (or policy) status.
Equation (1) estimates the average effect of voluntary and mandatory restrictions
across all municipalities. However, as noted earlier, the municipalities differ in the
precise mix of policies implemented. As such, we estimate municipality-specific policy
effects as follows:

 ikt-1 ) + β Voluntary  4 β Voluntary * Muni 
ln(q ikt )  β1ln(AP
 k 1 2k
2
kt
kt
k

(3)

β3Mandatory kt   k4 1β3k Mandatory kt * Muni k  Wkt γ  θ t  αi ε ikt ,
where voluntary and mandatory policies are now interacted with dummy variables for
each municipality, Munik, and all else is as defined for equation (1). While the demand
management programs are broadly similar across municipalities, the idiosyncratic
features of each municipality’s voluntary and mandatory programs, such as the precise
mix of prescriptions implemented and regulatory enforcement levels, are captured in β2k
and β3k, respectively. Recall that Fayetteville never implemented a voluntary policy and
Greenville never implemented a mandatory policy, thus these municipalities are not
interacted to obtain municipal-specific policy effects. We choose Hendersonville to serve
as the omitted category.
Heterogeneity across households is introduced to the model by interacting a vector of
household characteristics, HH , with both price and non-price policies: 15

15

When estimating equation (4), the demographic interactions with average price also provide additional
instruments in the first stage regression presented in equation (2). Specifically, the set of marginal prices
and base charges in equation (2) is interacted with each household characteristic included in equation (4).

15

ln(qikt ) = β1 ln(APikt-1 )

β1j ln(APikt-1 ) ∗ HH

+ Wkt γ
(4)

+β Volkt
β Mandkt

β Volkt *Muni
β Mandkt *Muni

β Volkt *HH
β Mandkt *HH

+ θt + αi

εikt .

Household characteristics included in HHik include income, lot size, the presence of an
in-ground irrigation system, and two categorical variables that indicate whether or not a
household has historically very high or very low consumption patterns.
Panel C of Table 4 presents the variables included in the vector household
characteristics assumed to influence consumption, HHj.

Specifically, an indicator

variable for whether the household’s income was above $75,000 per annum is included
along with three categorical variables indicating the lot size (small lots are the category
left out of the model) and whether the household has an in-ground irrigation system. In
addition, we also include variables that describe each household’s average water
consumption pattern prior to any prescriptive demand-side management policies
restrictions being in place (see Panel C, Table 4).16 Specifically, we identify households
whose average consumption is in the upper 20% or lower 20% of the distribution for their
municipality prior to watering restrictions being enacted. The response of high-volume
water users to both price and prescriptive management tools is of particular interest
because these households have a higher degree of discretionary water use and are

16

There is no period in our data in which Fayetteville households had not already been exposed to
permanent mandatory watering restrictions. For purposes of computing consumptive groups, we treat these
households as if they were introduced to non-price policies in August 2007 to be consistent with other
municipalities. Note also that Charlotte implemented voluntary restrictions in June 2007, so we restrict the
classification of high/low users within this municipality to the period prior to June 2007.

16

presumably less sensitive to price incentives.17 Managing the demands of high-volume
users is thought to be a key component of reducing peak-demands, which is an important
goal for water managers who seek to avoid over-capitalization in the delivery system. In
this effort, we explore the heterogeneity in response to prices and prescription policies by
“consumptive class” by modeling average consumption in the pre-policy period as a
time-invariant household characteristic that is incorporated in the vector

in

equation (4).18

3.1 Results
Select coefficients for the models in equations (1), (3) and (4) are presented in Table
5. Not reported for succinctness are weather covariates or month and household fixed
effects.19 The first column in Table 5 presents the results from estimation of equation (1)
and suggests an average price elasticity across the entire sample of -0.28, which
compares favorably with previous estimates in the literature. Espey et al. (1997) conduct
a meta-analysis of water price elasticity estimates from across the U.S., and find an
overall mean of -0.51 with a short-run median of -0.38, roughly consistent with our
estimates.20 Our results also fall within the range of price elasticities estimated in more
17

Although Ferraro and Price (2013) show that water customers with historical consumption above the
mean display a stronger response to a conservation message that appealed to social norms, we have little
evidence on the responsiveness of high-volume users to non-price policies outside this specific example.
18
Of course, we recognize that including a function of the dependent variable as a regressor potentially
introduces endogeneity into our estimating equation. Thus, we present results for estimation of equation
(4) both with and without covariates describing average household consumption prior to prescriptive
management tools being in place. We also considered a quantile regression approach (accounting for timeinvariant unobservables and endogenous covariates in the spirit of Harding and Lamarche (2009)) and the
results were largely consistent with the heterogeneity models presented in this paper. See Wichman (2011).
19
Weather covariates had the expected sign and significance in all models. Full results are available from
the authors. The first-stage IV regression results (equation 2) are also available from the authors upon
request.
20
Dalhuisen et al. (2003) re-examine the Espey et al. findings with a larger set of data and find that 90% of
price elasticity estimates fall between 0 and -0.75.

17

recent literature that conditions on seasonal and household heterogeneity (e.g.,
Baerenklau et al. 2014, Wichman 2014, Klaiber et al. 2014, Mansur and Olmstead 2011,
Nataraj and Hanemann 2011, Halich and Stephenson 2009, Olmstead 2009, and
Olmstead et al. 2007). These studies report a price elasticity range between -0.12 and 1.93. However, estimates from these recent studies are concentrated within the inelastic
range and the modal estimates lie roughly between -0.3 and -0.5, which is similar to our
range, albeit slightly higher. Our relatively smaller elasticity estimates can be explained
by the fact that we are estimating short-run responses to changes in price within a
household, controlling for time-invariant household characteristics. The extent to which
estimates from other research are higher may reflect correlation between water use and
unobservable household characteristics not included in those models. Thus, research that
uses cross-sectional variation in price to identify price elasticities may overstate the
average impact of price changes for a given household.
The estimated average response to voluntary and mandatory watering restrictions
across the entire sample (Column 1, Table 5) was a 3.2% and 9.2% reduction in water
consumption, respectively, and both are significant at the 1% level. These estimates
imply that after controlling for observable weather variables and unobserved timeinvariant characteristics at the month and household level, prescriptive conservation
policies have a significant negative effect on residential water demand. Our findings are
generally consistent with recent research. For example, Halich and Stephenson (2009)
explore changes in municipal-level average water use when voluntary and mandatory
conservation policies were implemented in 21 municipalities in Virginia. Their results
indicate that voluntary restrictions could reduce consumption by as much as seven

18

percent, but they also find no response to voluntary restrictions in some communities.
Mandatory restrictions were found to reduce consumption by between four and 22
percent. The variation within each policy’s effectiveness is attributed to varying levels of
municipal effort in disseminating information and varying levels of enforcement.
Several studies have explored non-price policy effectiveness in the western U.S.
using aggregate municipal (or utility-level) water consumption data.

For example,

Michelsen et al. (1999) analyze water use in seven municipalities throughout the
Southwest and find that non-price programs reduced water demand between one and four
percent. However, Michelsen et al. do not distinguish between voluntary and mandatory
programs even though both seem to have been in place at some point over their study
period. By contrast, Renwick and Green (2000) find quite large impacts of non-price
programs on average water demand in eight California municipalities, ranging from an
eight percent reduction in average water use when information campaigns are used to a
29 percent reduction in average water use when watering restrictions are in place.21 As a
counterpoint to Halich and Stephenson (2009), Renwick and Green (2000), and Renwick
and Archibald (1998), our relatively smaller estimates capture the effect of variation of
policies within a household, which again suggests that unobserved heterogeneity may
bias policy estimates away from zero. In addition, there are significant differences in the
study areas. It may not be appropriate to compare conservation policies in a humid, but

21

Similarly, Renwick and Archibald (1998) estimate that mandatory restrictions in coastal California
resulted in a 16-28% reduction in average municipal water use that varied by the average housing density
within the service area, which the authors take to be a proxy for irrigation preferences.

19

drought-prone area such as North Carolina, to that of arid communities in the Southwest
or coastal California.22
Estimation results for the model in equation (3) that incorporates municipal-specific
average effects are presented in Table 5, Column (2), Panel B. The municipality
interaction term captures the average effect of the idiosyncratic components of each
municipality’s voluntary or mandatory watering restriction program, and results indicate
that there is considerable heterogeneity in household responses to these prescriptive
programs between municipalities. With respect to voluntary policies, results indicate that
households in Hendersonville (the municipality left out of the model), Greenville and
High Point all had quantitatively similar responses to voluntary restrictions, reducing use
approximately 4.5 percent. Chapel Hill residents were most responsive to voluntary
policies, reducing water consumption approximately 12.5 percent during months in which
these policies were in place, and the models indicate that households in Charlotte
increased their water consumption by approximately 5.4 percent during months when
voluntary restrictions were in place.

The positive relationship between water

consumption and voluntary restrictions for Charlotte is consistent across all models. One
explanation for these puzzling results could be that Charlotte’s voluntary program was
initiated in June 2007 and continued only through August, 2007. These months were the
very beginning of the drought, and water scarcity had not yet become severe nor
consistent state-wide (see Table 2). Thus, the perception (or knowledge) of households

22

In related work, Castledine et al. (2014) exploit daily household-level water consumption in Reno,
Nevada and find that day-of-week mandatory watering restrictions result in “rigidity penalties” of 20 to 25
percent of weekly water use. In other words, households choose to irrigate on their assigned days, days
regardless of prevailing weather conditions and irrigate suboptimally as a result. The authors conclude that
rigid day-of-the-week irrigation restrictions result in higher water use peaks and less efficient average water
use than what would occur under a more flexible policy regime.

20

about the need to participate in any voluntary steps to reduce watering might not yet have
been noteworthy.23
Mandatory watering restrictions had a similar impact across four of the five
municipalities, resulting in an 11.5 percent reduction in water use (see column (2), Table
5). The marginal effects for mandatory watering restrictions are at least double those for
voluntary restrictions in three municipalities (Hendersonville, High Point, and Charlotte),
and are significantly different from voluntary policies at the one-percent level for these
three municipalities. Mandatory restrictions are also estimated to result in a slightly
larger response than voluntary restrictions in Chapel Hill (-12.7%), although the
difference between the two policies is not statistically different.

We note that the

household response to mandatory policies in Charlotte is similar to Hendersonville, High
Point, and Chapel Hill. This similarity supports the notion that the perverse response to
voluntary restrictions in Charlotte is an artifact of the timing and short duration of its
voluntary policy rather than a fundamental behavioral response to voluntary restrictions
by households in this municipality.
Finally, the marginal effect of mandatory policies on water use in Fayetteville (-1.5%)
is small and only significant at the 10% level.

This is likely due to the fact that

Fayetteville had a continuous mandatory policy in place from April 1st through
23

While we might expect no effect of a voluntary watering restriction in this context, a positive and
statistically significant marginal effect is still counterintuitive. Possible reasons for a positive coefficient
center on households with irrigation systems. The model indicates no response to the voluntary policy if
Charlotte households with irrigation systems are dropped (coef. = 0.004, std. error = 0.017). Households
with irrigation systems would appear to increase their usage during the three months the voluntary policy
was in place if either moisture sensors on the systems increased irrigation intensity and there was no
response by households to offset the automatic system, or households altered their irrigation settings to
allow for prolonged periods of watering prior to mandatory restrictions being enacted. Another possibility
is that households increased watering intensity in response to the water utility publicizing that mandatory
restrictions could be forthcoming if water consumption was not decreased (e.g., Charlotte-Mecklenberg
Utility, 2007). Here again, if households anticipated future mandatory restrictions, they may alter irrigation
systems to water more intensely and preserve lawn heath while there was no penalty for violation.

21

September 30th each year since 2002. Our model identifies the average water use in
months with mandatory restrictions (April through September) relative to the average
monthly consumption in months without restrictions, which for this municipality are the
months of October through March when outdoor watering needs are minimal. As such, it
is not surprising that there is not a significant reduction in use in months with mandatory
restrictions relative to this baseline for this municipality.
Heterogeneity with regards to household characteristics is presented in the last three
columns of Table 5. Column (3) excludes consumptive heterogeneity, while columns (4)
and (5) include interaction terms with whether a household was below the 20th or above
the 80th percentile of water consumption for their municipality prior to implementation of
watering restrictions (see Table 4 for variable definitions). Because of the correlation
between having an irrigation system and being in the upper 80th percentile of
consumption, we present a model in column (5) that excludes the dummy variable for
irrigation system while including consumption heterogeneity. We also exclude whether
or not the household is on a larger lot in column (5), although there is little correlation
between lot size and being in the upper 80th percentile of consumption in the data.24
Results indicate that there is important heterogeneity in the responsiveness of
households to prices. Columns (3) and (4) indicate that households in higher income
brackets (>$75,000 per year) and households with irrigation systems are substantially less
price-elastic. Higher income households display a price elasticity that is one-third the
magnitude (in absolute value) than households with income less than $75,000 per year (-

24

Fifty-six percent of households with an irrigation system are also in the 80th percentile of consumption,
while only 21 and 19 percent of households on a medium lot or a large lot, respectively, are in the 80th
percentile of consumption.

22

0.235 as compared to -0.763, respectively). Relative to the baseline marginal effect, the
additional effect of an irrigation system reduces the price elasticity to zero.
The coefficient for the interaction between lot sizes and price presented in Columns
(3) and (4) are not statistically significant. Although lot size is often used as a proxy for
preference for outdoor water use (Baerenklau et al., 2014, Renwick and Green, 2000; and
Mansur and Olmstead, 2012), our results suggest that irrigation systems and historical
consumption patterns capture a more explicit correlation between water use and
sensitivity to price.
Finally, columns (4) and (5) indicate that households in the lowest consumptive
percentile (<20th percentile) are least price elastic. Column (4) indicates that households
in the highest consumptive group (>80th percentile) are somewhat more price elastic than
those in the middle 60th percentile (the category left out of the model), although this
result is small and not robust to the exclusion of other household characteristics. Lower
price sensitivity among households with the most modest consumption (the lowest 20th
percentile) is not surprising given their consumption likely reflects only necessary use.
Given we only observe prices trending upwards, and if we assume low-use households
simply cannot make further substantive reductions in water use, we would expect our
models to indicate lower price sensitivity for this group. Similarly, households in the
highest consumptive group are almost assuredly using the marginal unit of water in
landscapes and other outdoor uses for which more discretion is available for adjusting
consumption in response to higher prices.
Interestingly, both Klaiber et al. (2014) and Baerenklau et al. (2014) find an opposite
relationship between consumptive levels and price elasticities, both finding that the

23

lowest consumptive levels are the most price sensitive.

A potential reason for the

divergence in our results is that our price-elasticity identification is based on withinhousehold variation in prices while simultaneously controlling for the effect of
household-level income on consumption. Klaiber et al. (2014) do not have householdlevel data. Their unit of observation is from aggregate census block-group data.
Although Baerenklau et al. (2014) utilize household consumption data, they match these
households to census tract-level income measures.

Census tracts typically include

approximately 5,000 households and thus are not likely to adequately capture income
effects necessary to isolate price sensitivity of modest water consumers separate from
lower-income levels that might also result in lower consumption.
The municipal-specific effects for voluntary and mandatory policies are invariant to
the inclusion of household characteristics, and remain nearly identical across models (see
Panel B). Panel C presents the coefficient estimates for household characteristics
interacted with voluntary and mandatory policies. As compared to heterogeneity in price
responsiveness, it is striking how little heterogeneity there is in response to voluntary or
mandatory watering restrictions. As indicated in columns (3) through (5), it is only
households in the highest consumptive percentile (>80th percentile) that exhibit any
statistically significant differential response to voluntary policies. Households in the 80th
percentile of the consumption distribution on average reduce consumption by an
additional five to six percentage points during periods of voluntary restrictions.
Interestingly, we see that during periods when mandatory policies are in place,
households with irrigation systems are substantially more responsive than households
without irrigation systems, more than doubling the average response to mandatory

24

policies. This finding is notable when compared the degree to which households with
irrigation systems were much less responsive to changes in price. With regards to
consumptive heterogeneity, households that are in the highest consumptive group (>80th
percentile consumption) reduce their consumption an additional 10 to 11 percent.
Columns (4) and (5) also indicate that households in the lowest consumptive group are
less responsive to mandatory policies as compared to households in the middle of the
consumption distribution.

3.2 Sensitivity analysis and robustness checks
To examine the robustness of our results, we first present models that consider
alternative definitions of household characteristics. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6
replace the dummy variable for households with income greater than $75,000 with a
series of dummy variables that indicate the income quartile in which the household falls.
The dummy variable indicating that a household is in the lowest quartile {≤$55,000} is
the category left out of the model, and the variables Inc Q2, Inc Q3, and Inc Q4 indicate a
household is in the second, third, or fourth (top) income quartile—representing the ranges
{>$55,000 and ≤ $95,000}, {>$95,000 and ≤ $150,000}, and {>$150,000}, respectively.
All other covariates are exactly the same as for the models presented in columns (3) and
(4) in Table 5. Municipal-specific interaction terms with the dummy variables indicating
whether or not a voluntary or mandatory policy (Table 5, Panel B) are not reported in
Table 6 for succinctness. Results for these variables are stable and consistent with those
reported in Table 5.

25

As indicated in the first two columns of Table 6, all included income quartiles are
positive and significant, though the highest quartile exhibits the least degree of price
sensitivity. Results also continue to suggest that there is not an economically relevant
difference among households with differing incomes in responses to voluntary or
mandatory policies, though the second quartile of income is marginally significant for
voluntary policies. Although not reported, also estimated are models that replace income
quartiles with terciles (the three categories are ≤$65,000; >$65,000 and ≤$112,500;
>$112,500) and these models continue to suggest a similar result: it is the households in
the highest brackets of income that are least price responsive, and there is no qualitative
difference in response to voluntary or mandatory policies among income groups.
Columns (3) and (4) explore an alternative way to characterize lot-size heterogeneity
by creating a dummy variable indicating whether or not a lot is larger than three-quarters
of an acre (Lot >3/4 acre). Under this definition, there is no significant heterogeneity in
the responsiveness of households on the largest lots (Lot >3/4 acre) to price, indicating
that the categorization of what constitutes a large lot does not affect the lack of
heterogeneous responses to price. However, the models in columns (3) and (4) now
indicate that households on the largest lots are somewhat more responsive to voluntary
policies and relatively less responsive to mandatory policies. While the estimated effects
are economically small, they are not irrelevant as they suggest that it is only households
on very large lots that exhibit policy responsiveness.
Column (5) in Table 6 explores how households are characterized in terms of their
historic water consumption by narrowing the definition of “high” and “low” users. The
model presented in column (5) includes dummy variables that indicate whether a

26

household is above the 90th percentile in consumption prior to any policy beginning
(>90th cons) or below the 10th percentile (<10th cons). Results continue to suggest
households that are the largest consumers of water on average prior to any policy
implementation are more responsive to price, voluntary policies, and mandatory policies.
The magnitude of these effects are larger as compared to the analogous results in Table 5.
Coefficient estimates also indicate that households in the lowest 10th percentile of
consumption are less responsive to price, not different in their response to voluntary
policies, and more responsive to mandatory policies and the magnitude of these results
are similar to those in Table 5. Lastly, we note that narrowing the definition of “high
users” to just those households in the top 90th percentile of consumption results in a price
elasticity estimate for households with an irrigation that is positive and statistically
significant.

5. Conclusions
In this research, we employ panel data on household-level water use to explore
responses to both pricing and prescriptive policies that are employed by utilities to
manage demand in times of scarcity. Monthly water consumption is observed over twoand-a-half years for 1,727 households in six municipalities geographically dispersed
across North Carolina.

Both voluntary and mandatory water use restrictions are

employed at various times by the municipalities in our sample, and water rates vary
across municipalities and within municipalities over time. This rich panel data allows us
to improve upon the econometric strategies of recent research that uses aggregate data
(Renwick and Green, 2000; Klaiber et al., 2014; Halich and Stephenson, 2009), limited

27

panel data (Olmstead, 2009; Mansur and Olmstead, 2012), or is unable to explore both
pricing and prescriptive policies within the same framework (Nataraj and Hanemann,
2011; Ferraro and Price, 2013; Castledine et al., 2014; and Wichman, 2014). Our policy
conclusions are identified by observed short-run, within-household decisions over water
use in response to both price changes and prescriptive policies implemented during
drought periods, while controlling for unobserved household characteristics in a fixedeffects framework.
Overall, we find that mandatory restrictions are effective demand management tools,
reducing household consumption by an average of ten to 13 percent across the
municipalities that employ these restrictions on a temporary basis. Voluntary restrictions
are observed to be less effective than mandatory restrictions, reducing consumption by
approximately three percent, although this result varies across municipalities. We extend
our understanding of how households respond to these prescriptive policies by exploring
the heterogeneity in household responses to both price and prescriptive policies with
respect to income levels, lot sizes, historical consumption levels, and the presence of
irrigation systems. Of note are the results concerning household income and responses to
both price and prescriptive mechanisms. Our results corroborate the findings of previous
research that higher income households are less sensitive to changes in price (e.g.,
Mansur and Olmstead, 2012; Renwick and Archibald, 1998). However, we find no
evidence of heterogeneous responsiveness to non-price policies among income classes.
Taken as a whole, the results imply that the incidence of pricing policies will fall more
heavily on poorer households, while both voluntary and mandatory drought restrictions
are relatively equitable across income groups.

28

Perhaps our most striking result arises from households that have in-ground irrigation
systems. We find that households with irrigation systems are virtually unresponsive to
changes in price. This result can be explained by the fact that the decision to turn on an
automatic irrigation system is made on an extensive margin, and so small fluctuations in
price are not likely to affect month-to-month changes in irrigation intensity.
Additionally, we find that households with irrigation systems do not respond to voluntary
water restrictions. However, they exhibit more than double the response to mandatory
watering restrictions as compared to households without irrigation systems, reducing total
consumption by 20 percent or more.
Understanding how “high use” households respond to watering restrictions is also of
particular interest. In addition to reducing average use, utilities are interested in reducing
use by those in the upper-tail of the distribution to help avoid over-capitalization of the
water delivery infrastructure. As theory predicts, water customers with high historical
usage tend to be slightly more sensitive to price than the average household, whereas
historically low users are less price sensitive. This result mirrors the motivation for the
adoption of increasing block rate pricing structures on the merits of maintaining
affordability for low use households and incentivizing conservation among high use
households.

Additionally, high use households are shown to exhibit a response to

mandatory restrictions on the same magnitude as households with irrigation systems,
decreasing total usage by approximately twenty percent. However, unlike households
with irrigation systems, those with the high historic consumption are also more
responsive to voluntary policies than more moderate consumption households, reducing
consumption by a total of eight percent.

29

To put responsiveness to prescriptive policies into monetary terms, for comparison,
we compute the equivalent price increase necessary to achieve the same reduction in
water use for both voluntary and mandatory policies. A voluntary policy that reduced
average consumption by three percent within our study reflects a price increase of $1.08
relative to a $10 average price per thousand gallons.25 This increase corresponds to a 7.5
percent increase in the average consumer’s monthly bill.

For mandatory policies

resulting in a nine percent average reduction in quantity consumed, a $3.25 increase in
average price per thousand gallons is necessary to achieve the same reduction. This price
increase represents a substantial 20.6 percent increase in the average monthly bill, and if
applied evenly it would imply a $3.7 million increase in aggregate monthly expenditures
on water for the estimated 250,000 residential customers served by the six utilities in our
sample.26
While efficient water pricing is preferred on welfare grounds by economists, and the
regressive incidence of price policies can largely be addressed through non-uniform
increases across consumption blocks (Olmstead and Stavins, 2009, Mansur and
Olmstead. 2011, and Baerenklau et al. 2014), price increases of the magnitude suggested
above to achieve substantial short-run reductions in water consumption are unrealistic
policy choices for most U.S. municipalities.

Further, our results imply that price

increases are likely to be ineffectual at reducing outdoor irrigation among households
25

⁄
The change in price is calculated using the formula: ∆
∆ ⁄ where is the average price
in the sample, is the estimated price elasticity, ∆ is the change in quantity demanded induced by the
policy, and is the sample average water use (all averages used can be obtained from summary statistics in
Table 1 and estimation results from Table 5, Model 1).
26
There are 374,216 total customer accounts in the municipalities in our study according to 2008 rate
summary tables compiled by the Environmental Finance Center at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill (found here: http://www.efc.sog.unc.edu/reslib/item/tables-water-and-wastewater-rates-andrate-structures-north-carolina-january-2008. Last Accessed: July 15, 2014). Assuming, conservatively, that
one-third of these accounts are non-residential, we multiply the policy-equivalent increase in customer bills
by the assumed number of residential customers (249,477) for both voluntary and mandatory policies.

30

with irrigation systems. As an alternative to prices, mandatory restrictions on outdoor
use are shown to be effective conservation tools that achieve uniform responses across
income classes while simultaneously achieving significant consumption reductions of
approximately twenty percent among households with high historical consumption or
with in-ground irrigation systems. Although we do not directly consider the relative
efficiency properties of prices and prescriptive policies in this research, our results
suggest that non-price policies may have palatable distributional features that align with
intended policy goals.

This result, combined with political concerns, suggests that

carefully constructed mandatory restrictions can be an important component of the
policy-maker’s tool kit. If efficient pricing of water is to gain public support, it is
important for utility managers, policymakers, and researchers to examine and promote
pricing structures that balance the competing objectives of incentivizing conservation,
maintaining revenue stability, and remaining equitable.

31

References
Alberini, Anna, Will Gans, and Charles Towe, 2013. “Free riding, upsizing, and energy
efficiency incentives in Maryland homes.” Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Working Paper.
Alcott, Hunt, 2011. “Social norms and energy conservation.” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 95(9-10), pp. 1082–1095.
Baerenklau, Kenneth A., Kurt A. Schwabe, and Ariel Dinar, 2014. “The residential water
demand effect of increasing block rate water budgets.” Land Economics, Vol. 90(4), pp.
683-699.
Bennear, Lori, Jonathan Lee and Laura O. Taylor, 2013. “Municipal Rebate Programs for
Environmental Retrofits: An Evaluation of Additionality and Cost-Effectiveness.”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 32(2), pp. 350-372.
Castledine, A., K. Moeltner, M. K. Price, S. Stoddard, 2014. “Free to choose: Promoting
conservation by relaxing outdoor watering restrictions.” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, in press.
Coleman, Eric A., 2009. “A comparison of demand-side water management strategies
using disaggregate data.” Public Works Management & Policy, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 215223.
Corral, Leonardo, Anthony C. Fisher, and Nile W. Hatch, 1998. “Price and Non-price
influences on water conservation: An econometric model of aggregate demand under
nonlinear budget constraint.” Agricultural Economics Association Annual Meeting, Salt
Lake City, June 1998.
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility. 2007. “Conserve water now to avoid mandatory
restrictions later,” Charlotte News and Observer, June 1, 2007, pg 10A, accessible at
http://cmudata.com/newsstoryarchive.cfm, Last Accessed: August, 27, 2014.
Dalhuisen, J., Florax, R., de Groot, H. and Nijkamp, P., 2003. “Price and income
elasticities of residential water demand: A meta-analysis.” Land Economics, Vol. 79(2),
pp. 292-308.
Espey, M., J. Espey, and W.D. Shaw, (1997). “Price elasticity of residential demand for
water: A meta-analysis.” Water Resources Research, 33(6), pp. 1369-1374.
Ferraro, Paul J., Juan Jose Miranda, and Michael K. Price, (2011). “The Persistence of
Treatment Effects with Norm-Based Policy Instruments: Evidence from a Randomized
Environmental Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings, 101(3), pp. 318-322.

32

Ferraro, Paul J. and Michael K. Price, 2013. “Using non-pecuniary strategies to influence
behavior: Evidence from a large-scale field experiment.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 95, No. 1, pp. 64-73.
Ferraro, Paul J. and Juan Jose Miranda, 2014. “Can panel data designs and estimators
substitute for randomized controlled trials in the evaluation of social programs?”
Working Paper.
Ferraro, Paul J. and Casey J. Wichman, 2014. “A design replication study with panel data
and two control groups.” Working Paper.
Halich, Greg, and Kurt Stephenson, 2009. “Residential water-use restrictions and
municipal effort.” Land Economics, Vol. 84, No. 4, pp. 614-626.
Harding, Matthew and Carlos Lamarche, 2009. “A quantile regression approach for
estimating panel data models using instrumental variables.” Economic Letters, Vol. 104,
pp. 133-135.
Ito, Koichiro, 2014. “Do consumers respond to marginal or average price: Evidence from
nonlinear electricity pricing.” The American Economic Review, Vol 104, No. 2, pp. 537563.
Klaiber, H. Allen, V. Kerry Smith, Michael Kaminsky, and Aaron Strong, 2014.
“Measuring price elasticities for residential water demand with limited information.”
Land Economics, Vol. 90, No. 1, pp. 100-113.
Kleibergen, F. and Paap, R. 2006. Generalized Reduced Rank Tests Using the Singular
Value Decomposition. Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 133, pp. 97-126.
Kenny, J.F., Barber, N.L., Hutson, S.S., Linsey, K.S., Lovelace, J.K., and Maupin, M.A.,
2009, Estimated use of water in the United States in 2005: U.S. Geological Survey
Circular 1344, 52 pp, available at http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1344/, last accessed February
23, 2012.
Mansur, Erin T. & Olmstead, Sheila M., 2012. "The value of scarce water: Measuring the
inefficiency of municipal regulations." Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 71(3), pp. 332346.
Michelsen, Ari M., J. Thomas McGuckin, and Donna Stumpf, 1999. “ Nonprice water
conservation programs as a demand management tool.” Journal of the American Water
Resources Association, Vol. 35, No. 3, pp. 593-602.
Nataraj, Shanthi and W. Michael Hanemann, 2011. “Does marginal price matter? A
regression discontinuity approach to estimating water demand.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, Vol. 61, pp. 198-212.

33

Nieswiadomy, Michael L. and David J. Molina, 1989. “Comparing Residential Water
Demand Estimates under Decreasing and Increasing Block Rates Using Household Level
Data.” Land Economics, Vol. 65(3), pp. 280-289.
Olmstead, Shelia M., 2009. “Reduced-form versus structural models of water demand
under nonlinear prices.” Journal of Business & Economics and Statistics, Vol. 27, No 1,
pp. 84-94.
Olmstead, Sheila, M., W. Michael Hanemann, and Robert N. Stavins, 2007. “Water
demand under alternative price structures.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, Vol. 54, pp. 181-198.
Olmstead, Sheila M. and Robert N. Stavins, 2009. “Comparing price and nonprice
approaches to urban water conservation.” Water Resources Research, Vol. 45.
Renwick, Mary E. and Sandra O. Archibald, 1998. “Demand side management policies
for residential water use: Who bears the conservation burden?” Land Economics, Vol.
47(3), pp. 343- 359.
Renwick, Mary E. and Green, Richard D., 2000. “Do Residential Water Demand Side
Management Policies Measure Up? An Analysis of Eight California Water Agencies.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management Vol. 40, pp. 37-55.
Schaffer, Mark E., 2005. "XTIVREG2: Stata module to perform extended IV/2SLS,
GMM and AC/HAC, LIML and k-class regression for panel data models," Statistical
Software Components, S456501, Boston College Department of Economics, revised 24
Jul 2012.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2009. “Water on tap: What you need to know.”
Environmental Protection Agency, December, 2009.
Wichman, Casey J., 2011. “Who responds to non-price policies? A reduced form analysis
of residential water demand.” Master’s thesis, North Carolina State University.
Wichman, Casey J., 2014. “Perceived price in residential water demand: Evidence from a
natural experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, in press.

34

Table 1. Summary Statistics.

Households (N)

Chapel
Hill
234

Charlotte
363

Panel A:

FayetteVille
388

GreenVille
226

HenderSonville
245

High
Point
271

Total
1,727

Demographic Characteristics

Mean HH Income
(std. dev.)
[Median]

183,987
(115,693)
[162,500]

135,520
(97,469)
[112,500]

88,622
(56,627)
[85,000]

107,931
(66,176)
[112,500]

124,692
114,697
(88,834) (59,002)
[112,500] [112,500]

123,034
(87,140)
[112,500]

Mean Home Value
(std. dev.)
[Median]

355,203
(133,218)
[325,000]

244,868
(124,512)
[225,000]

141,645
(54,530)
[137,500]

188,328
(79,609)
[187,500]

188,220
290,638
(142,735) (70,960)
[275,000] [187,500]

226,214
(124,512)
[187,500]

Mean Lot Acreage
(std. dev.)
[Median]
Mean Home sqft.
(std. dev.)
[Median]
Mean HH Size
(std. dev.)
[Median]

0.553
(0.676)
[0.420]
2,725
(808.1)
[2,750]
2.858
(1.314)
[2.0]

0.532
(1.378)
[0.295]
2,711
(939.2)
[2,250]
2.573
(1.183)
[2.0]

0.633
(1.614)
[0.420]
2,790
(1188.5)
[2,250]
2.473
(1.217)
[2.0]

0.526
(0.607)
[0.420]
2,633
(980.0)
[2,250]
2.378
(1.086)
[2.0]

1.122
(3.008)
[0.630]
2,793
(1085.6)
[2,250]
2.335
(1.041)
[2.0]

0.634
(1.603)
[0.420]
2,718
(1003.7)
[2,250]
2.540
(1.198)
[2.0]

Monthly Household Water Consumption: 30 Month Average
(1,000 gallons)

Panel B:
Mean
(std. dev.)
[Median]
[10th – 90th
Percentile]

5.232
(3.825)
[4.000]

6.235
(4.795)
[5.236]

5.099
(3.649)
[4.000]

5.560
(4.104)
[4.480]

4.717
(3.649)
[3.800]

4.668
(3.031)
[3.740]

5.289
(3.947)
[4.480]

[2.0–9.0]

[2.2–11.2]

[2.0–9.0]

[2.2–9.7]

[1.9–8.5]

[1.5–8.2]

[2.0–9.0]

Monthly Average Effective Water Charges by Municipality
(30 month average, per 1,000 gallons) a

Panel C:
Mean AP
Mean MP
Mean Base Charge
a

0.513
(1.020)
[0.420]
2,636
(908.9)
[2,250]
2.618
(1.231)
[2.0]

12.44
8.95
17.95

6.78
7.02
3.49

8.79
7.62
7.70

9.10
6.70
12.59

13.06
10.03
13.39

Effective prices are calculated as monthly prices paid by consumers adjusted for inflation.

35

11.90
8.23
15.26

10.00
7.99
10.90

Table 2. Drought conditions and policy responses by municipality.a
Chapel Hill
Jul
Aug
Sep
2006
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
2007
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
2008
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

Charlotte

Fayetteville

Greenville

Hendersonville

High Point

M
M
M

V

V
M
M
M
M
M
V
V

V
V
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

V
V
V
V
V
V

a

V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
M
M
V
V
V

V
M
V
V
V
V

Drought conditions are reported weekly using a scale in which 0 equals normal conditions and 5 equals exceptional
drought (see Section 2.3 for a detailed description). Average conditions over the month are represented by shades of
gray in which the darkest shade with diagonal lines indicates a month in which all weeks were classified as having
“exceptional drought,” and no color indicates a month in which the average drought condition across weeks in that
month is less than 1.0. The lightest gray indicates an average of 1 to 1.99, and each successively darker shade of
gray indicates monthly averages that range from 2 to 2.99, 3 to 3.99, and (with dots), 4 to 4.99. If a voluntary or
mandatory watering restriction was in place for at least half the month, the cell is labeled with a V or M,
respectively.

36

Table 3. Components of Voluntary and Mandatory Restrictions Implemented.a

Voluntary Restrictions

Mandatory Restrictions

Turf
irrigation

Other
outdoor use

Turf irrigation

Odd-even

Limited

X

Limitedb

Hendersonville (HV)

Limited

Limited

X

Xc

X

Greenville (GV)

Limited

X

High Point (HP)

Odd-even

X

X

Xc

X

Chapel Hill (CH)

Fayetteville (FV)
Charlotte (CLT)

Limited

a

Non-turf
irrigation

Other
outdoor use
X

Odd-even

Xd

X: Sep07–Mar08
Limited:
Apr–Sep08
Odd-even:
Sep–Dec08

X: Sep07–
Apr08
Limited:
May–Dec08

An “X” indicates a complete restriction (ban) is suggested during voluntary restrictions or required during
mandatory restrictions. “Odd-even” denotes an alternating watering schedule based on household's street address
and “Limited” denotes that there are time-of-day or other miscellaneous water-use restrictions.
b
Non-turf irrigation was completely prohibited in the last month in which mandatory restrictions were in place.
c
Limited watering of vegetable gardens only are allowed.
d
Complete restriction on other outdoor uses added to mandatory restrictions in November 2007.

37

Table 4. Variable definitions and summary statistics.
Variable Name

Mean (std. dev.)
{N = 48,166}

Definition

Rainkt

Panel A: Consumption and Fees
Monthly water consumption for household i in municipality k in
month t (1,000 gallons).
Average price per 1,000 gallons consumed by household i in
municipality k in month t, computed as total service fee divided
by quantity of water consumed during the billing cycle.
Marginal price per 1,000 gallons in price block j in municipality
k in month t.
Base service fee for water and sewer use charged in municipality
k in month t.
Panel B: Policy and Weather
=1 if a voluntary water restriction was in place for any part of a
month; =0 otherwise.
=1 if a mandatory water restriction was in place for any part of
a month; =0 otherwise.
Monthly rainfall, in inches.a

Tempkt

Mean of daily mean maximum temperatures during the month.a

qikt
APikt
MPjkt
Basekt

Voluntarykt
Mandatorykt

Small lot

Panel C: Household Characteristics
=1 if household income is greater than $75,000 per year; =0
otherwise.
=1 if household has installed an in-ground irrigation system;
=0 otherwise.
=1 if lot size <=0.25 acres; =0 otherwise.

Medlot

=1 if lot size is >0.25 acre but <=0.50; =0 otherwise.

Biglot

=1 if lot size is greater than 0.50 acre; =0 otherwise.

>80th cons

=1 if mean household consumption before non-price policies
were implemented (July 2006—Aug 2007) is above the 80th
percentile; =0 otherwise.b
=1 if mean household consumption before non-price policies
were implemented (July 2006—Aug 2007) is below the 20th
percentile; =0 otherwise.b

>75k inc
Irrsys

<20th cons
a

5.29
(3.95)
$10.00
(3.24)
$7.99
(1.55)
$11.25
(5.25)
0.15
(0.36)
0.32
(0.47)
3.69
(2.21)
72.28
(13.07)
0.72
[HH=1,238]
0.07
[HH=127]
0.19
[HH=323]
0.39
[HH=678]
0.42
[HH=726]
0.20
[HH=343]
0.20
[HH=353]

Monthly rainfall and mean maximum temperature measurements were obtained from the N.C. State Climate office and
is measured at a representative weather station for each municipality.
b
The consumption range is July 2006—May 2007 for Charlotte due to the earlier adoption of voluntary restrictions.

38

Table 5. Base Model Resultsa
Variable

(1)

AvgPrice

-0.277***
(0.045)

AvgPrice*

Coefficient (Std. Err.)
(2)
(3)
Panel A
-0.132***
(0.048)

…>75k Inc
…Irr Sys
…Med lot
…Big lot

-0.763***
(0.140)
0.528***
(0.103)
0.769***
(0.194)
-0.014
(0.127)
0.167
(0.130)

…>80th cons.
…<20th cons.

Voluntary
Voluntary*

-0.032***
(0.005)
...Chapel Hill
…Greenville
…High Point
…Charlotte

Mandatory
Mandatory*

-0.092***
(0.005)
…Chapel Hill
…High Point
…Fayetteville
…Charlotte

Panel Bb
-0.047***
-0.034*
(0.010)
(0.018)
-0.078***
-0.085***
(0.020)
(0.021)
-0.002
-0.005
(0.015)
(0.015)
-0.005
-0.006
(0.014)
(0.015)
0.101***
0.097***
(0.020)
(0.020)
-0.115***
-0.096***
(0.023)
(0.027)
-0.012
-0.013
(0.026)
(0.027)
0.015
0.004
(0.033)
(0.034)
0.100***
0.105***
(0.024)
(0.024)
-0.017
-0.002
(0.025)
(0.025)

39

(4)

(5)

-0.846***
(0.139)
0.583***
(0.104)
0.976***
(0.199)
0.046
(0.126)
0.154
(0.128)
-0.170*
(0.101)
0.562***
(0.133)

-0.779***
(0.098)
0.686***
(0.105)

0.048
(0.101)
0.745***
(0.136)

-0.027
-0.033**
(0.019)
(0.014)
-0.081***
-0.082***
(0.021)
(0.021)
-0.002
-0.001
(0.015)
(0.015)
-0.009
-0.008
(0.015)
(0.014)
0.101***
0.106***
(0.020)
(0.020)
-0.102***
-0.100***
(0.028)
(0.025)
-0.000
-0.008
(0.027)
(0.027)
0.007
0.011
(0.034)
(0.034)
0.098***
0.092***
(0.025)
(0.024)
0.009
-0.002
(0.025)
(0.025)
continued, next page

Table 5. Continued.
Variable
Voluntary*

(1)
Panel C

Coefficient (Std. Err.)
(2)
(3)

…>75k Inc

-0.011
(0.011)
0.040
(0.034)
0.006
(0.016)
-0.012
(0.016)

…Irr Sys
…Med lot
…Big lot
…>80th cons.
…<20th cons.
Mandatory*

…>75k Inc

-0.004
(0.012)
-0.148***
(0.030)
-0.022
(0.015)
-0.004
(0.015)

…Irr Sys
…Med lot
…Big lot
…>80th cons.
…<20th cons.

(4)

(5)

-0.005
(0.012)
0.056
(0.034)
0.003
(0.016)
-0.011
(0.016)
-0.058***
(0.015)
-0.008
(0.014)
0.009
(0.012)
-0.113***
(0.030)
-0.016
(0.015)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.099***
(0.015)
0.032**
(0.015)

-0.003
(0.012)

-0.052***
(0.015)
-0.013
(0.014)
-0.000
(0.012)

-0.111***
(0.015)
0.027*
(0.015)

0.097
Within R-squared
0.114
0.108
0.099
0.103
All models include 48,166 observations (1,727 households) and include weather covariates, month
and household fixed effects as described for equation (1). Significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
level is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. All models report standard errors that are robust to
an unknown form of heteroskedasticity and clustered at the household level.
a

b

Fayetteville is not interacted with the voluntary policy dummy variable because Fayetteville had no
voluntary policies during the study period. Similarly, Greenville had no mandatory policies during
the study period and is thus not interacted with the mandatory policy dummy variable.
Hendersonville is the left out category for both voluntary and mandatory policies.

40

Table 6. Results Using Alternative Measures of Key Covariatesa
Coefficient (Std. Err.)
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
AvgPrice
AvgPrice*

…Inc Q2
…Inc Q3
…Inc Q4

-0.814***
(0.148)
0.328**
(0.144)
0.299**
(0.131)
0.737***
(0.126)

-0.875***
(0.148)
0.369**
(0.145)
0.331**
(0.130)
0.745***
(0.127)

…>75k Inc
…Irr Sys
…Med Lot
…Big Lot

0.696***
(0.193)
0.021
(0.127)
0.181
(0.131)

0.927***
(0.197)
0.086
(0.126)
0.172
(0.127)

…Lot >3/4 acre
…>80th cons.

-0.675***
(0.097)

-0.750***
(0.101)

-0.853***
(0.135)

0.517***
(0.104)
0.746***
(0.194)

0.582***
(0.105)
0.958***
(0.199)

0.504***
(0.104)
1.201***
(0.211)
0.151
(0.124)
0.263**
(0.126)

-0.019
(0.119)

-0.071
(0.118)
-0.165
(0.101)
0.625***
(0.135)

-0.211**
(0.101)
0.587***
(0.133)

…<20th cons.
…>90th cons.

-0.478***
(0.148)
0.358**
(0.175)

…<10th cons.
Voluntary*

…Inc Q2
…Inc Q3
…Inc Q4

-0.027*
(0.015)
-0.016
(0.015)
0.006
(0.015)

-0.028*
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.015)
0.020
(0.015)

…>75k Inc
…Irr Sys
…Med Lot
…Big Lot

(5)

0.034
(0.034)
0.004
(0.016)
-0.012
(0.016)

0.050
(0.034)
0.001
(0.016)
-0.010
(0.016)

41

-0.012
(0.011)
0.040
(0.034)

-0.007
(0.012)
0.055
(0.034)

-0.004
(0.012)
0.052
(0.035)
-0.002
(0.016)
-0.015
(0.016)
continued, next page

Table 6. Continued
Variable

(1)
…Lot>3/4 acre
…>80th cons.
…<20th cons.

Coefficient (Std. Err.)
(3)
(4)
-0.032**
-0.028*
(0.015)
(0.015)
-0.065***
-0.057***
(0.015)
(0.015)
-0.003
-0.008
(0.014)
(0.014)
(2)

…>90th cons.

-0.070***
(0.022)
-0.002
(0.019)

…<10th cons.
Mandatory* …Inc Q2
…Inc Q3
…Inc Q4

-0.003
(0.015)
0.015
(0.015)
-0.013
(0.016)

-0.000
(0.015)
0.028*
(0.016)
0.019
(0.017)

…>75k Inc
…Irr Sys
…Med Lot
…Big Lot

-0.149***
(0.030)
-0.022
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.015)

-0.119***
(0.030)
-0.015
(0.015)
0.001
(0.015)

…Lot>3/4 acre
…>80th cons.
…<20th cons.

(5)

-0.103***
(0.015)
0.037**
(0.015)

…>90th cons.

-0.004
(0.012)
-0.146***
(0.030)

0.008
(0.012)
-0.111***
(0.030)

0.021
(0.013)

0.022*
(0.013)
-0.101***
(0.015)
0.031**
(0.015)

0.008
(0.012)
-0.095***
(0.030)
-0.018
(0.015)
-0.002
(0.015)

-0.158***
(0.025)
0.056***
(0.019)

…<10th cons.

Within R-squared
0.098
0.098
0.099
0.096
0.101
All models include 48,166 observations (1,727 households) and include and include weather
covariates, month and household fixed effects as described for equation (1). Also included, but not
reported here for succinctness, are municipal-specific interaction terms with the dummy variables
indicating whether or not a voluntary or mandatory policy was in place during the month (these
covariates are reported in Table 5, Panel B and change little across models in Table 5 or 6). Significance
at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. All models report standard
errors that are robust to an unknown form of heteroskedasticity and clustered at the household level.

a

42

Figure 1. Mean per-capita consumption over time (1,000 gallons).

43

16
Average Price ($/1,000 gallons)
8
10
12
14

20
09
m
1

20
08
m
7

20
08
m
1

20
07
m
7

20
07
m
1

6

20
06
m
7

Chapel Hill
Greenville

Charlotte
Hendersonville

20
09
m
1

20
08
m
7

20
08
m
1

20
07
m
7

20
07
m
1

20
06
m
7

5

Marginal Price ($/1,000 gallons)
6
7
8
9
10

11

Panel A. Monthly Mean Average Price per 1,000 gallons consumed.

Fayetteville
High Point

Panel B: Monthly Mean Marginal Price for Last 1,000 Gallons Consumed.
Figure 2. Mean Monthly Average and Marginal Prices.

44

