NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO LARGER HEALTH INSURANCE SUBSIDIES BENEFIT PATIENTS OR PRODUCERS?
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE ADVANTAGE
Marika Cabral
Michael Geruso
Neale Mahoney
Working Paper 20470
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20470
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We thank Jason Abaluck, Christopher Afendulis, Michael Chernew, Amy Finkelstein, Matthew Grennan,
Jonathan Kolstad, Amanda Kowalski, Timothy Layton, Matthew Notowidigdo, Robert Town, and
seminar participants at the 2014 AHEC meeting, Duke Microeconomics Jamboree, Harvard, 2015
HEC Montreal Summer IO Conference, MIT, 2015 NBER Insurance/IO meeting, 2014 NBER Public
Economics meeting, Penn State University, 2013 and 2014 RWJ Scholars in Health Policy Research
Annual Meetings, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Barbara Health Economics˛ Conference, UC Santa Cruz,
University of Chicago, University of Texas at Austin, and Yale for helpful comments. We are grateful
to Abhi Gupta, Mariel Schwartz, and Yin Wei Soon for excellent research assistance. Mahoney acknowledges
the George J. Stigler Center for the Economy and State for financial support. Geruso acknowledges
the Robert Wood Johnson˛Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marika Cabral, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Larger Health Insurance Subsidies Benefit Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare
Advantage
Marika Cabral, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney
NBER Working Paper No. 20470
September 2014, Revised July 2017
JEL No. D4,H22,I11,I13,L1
ABSTRACT
A central question in the debate over privatized Medicare is whether increased government payments
to private Medicare Advantage (MA) plans generate lower premiums for consumers or higher profits
for producers. Using difference-in-differences variation brought about by a sharp legislative change,
we find that MA insurers pass through 45% of increased payments in lower premiums and an additional
9% in more generous benefits. We show that advantageous selection into MA cannot explain this incomplete
pass-through. Instead, our evidence suggests that market power is important, with premium pass-through
rates of 13% in the least competitive markets and 74% in the most competitive.
Marika Cabral
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
One University Station
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
marika.cabral@austin.utexas.edu
Michael Geruso
University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
1 University Station C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
mike.geruso@austin.utexas.edu

Neale Mahoney
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Medicare is the second largest social insurance program in the United States and the primary source
of health insurance for the elderly. In 2012, Medicare spent $572.5 billion on health care, a 4.8%
increase over the previous year.1 Given the large scale of the program and rapid growth in spending,
reforming Medicare is a perpetual policy issue.
One commonly discussed proposal is adjusting subsidies to private Medicare Advantage plans.2
Proponents of larger subsidies argue that increased payments will result in lower premiums or more
generous benefits for Medicare beneficiaries. Opponents argue that such a move would lead to large
profits for insurance companies and health care providers. Naturally, the lines of argument are reversed when a reduction in payments is proposed. At its core, these debates are about economic
incidence: Does increasing government subsidies to private Medicare Advantage plans benefit patients or producers?
In most regions of the country, Medicare beneficiaries can choose to be covered by public feefor-service Traditional Medicare or to obtain subsidized coverage through their choice of a private
Medicare Advantage (MA) insurance plan. MA plans are differentiated from Traditional Medicare in
having restricted provider networks, alternative cost-sharing arrangements, and additional benefits,
such as vision and dental coverage. MA plans have historically been offered by health maintenance
organizations (HMOs). Plans receive a capitation payment from Medicare for each enrolled beneficiary and often charge beneficiaries a supplemental premium.
We examine the incidence of subsidies to private Medicare Advantage plans by studying a sharp
change in capitation payments brought about by the 2000 Benefits Improvement and Protection Act
(BIPA). MA capitation payments vary at the county level. Prior to BIPA, payments were largely determined by historical Traditional Medicare expenditures in the county. BIPA reformed these payments
by instituting a system of rural and urban payment floors that raised payments in 72% of counties.
We show that MA capitation payments in the counties where these floors were binding were on parallel trends before the payment reform but increased by an average of about $600 per beneficiary per
year or 12% when BIPA was implemented, providing us with a source of difference-in-differences
1 Source: http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
NationalHealthExpendData/NHE-Fact-Sheet.html.
2 During our sample period, this private option was called Medicare Part C or Medicare+Choice. Since the passage of
the Medicare Modernization Act in 2003, these plans have been called Medicare Advantage. We use the current naming
convention throughout the paper.

1

variation.
Using this difference-in-differences variation, we find that MA plans passed through approximately half of their capitation payment increases. For each dollar in higher payments, consumer
premiums were reduced by 45 cents at 3 years following the reform.3 Using rich data on product
characteristics, we find an additional 9 cents of pass-through in the actuarial value of plan benefits.4
A 95% confidence interval allows us to rule out a combined pass-through rate outside of 37% to 71%.
Difference-in-differences plots that flexibly allow the effect of the 2001 payment shocks to vary by
year show no impacts in the pre-reform years, providing evidence in support of the parallel trends
identifying assumption. Using monthly data, we show that the decline in premiums occurs precisely
in the first month that these changes were permitted by the regulator.
We confirm the robustness of our findings by estimating difference-in-differences specifications
that isolate subsets of the identifying variation. We obtain similar estimates when we isolate variation
in the size of payment increases across urban and rural counties with the same pre-BIPA Medicare
expenditure, reducing concerns that differential medical cost growth rates across high- and lowspending areas are biasing our results. We obtain similar estimates when we use complementary
variation in the size of payment increases within the sets of urban and rural counties, reducing concerns about bias from separate urban and rural time trends.
The second part of the paper investigates why consumers receive only half of the marginal surplus from this increase in payments.5 Drawing on prior work by Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010)
and Mahoney and Weyl (Forthcoming), we build a model that illustrates that the observed incomplete pass-through could potentially be explained by two factors: the degree of advantageous selection in the market and the market power of private MA insurance plans. If there is substantial
advantageous selection into MA, then private plans will not pass through the increased payments in
reduced premiums because lower premiums will attract enrollees who are differentially more costly
3 Our

preferred baseline 45 cents pass-through estimate comes from looking at the third year after the reform. Because
we find that the pass-through estimates level off between years two and three after the reform, we focus on the estimate
from the third year after the reform, as this estimate seems to represent the medium-run effect.
4 Our product characteristics data include information on physician and specialist co-pays and supplemental benefits
such as drug, dental, vision and hearing aid coverage. To ensure that our estimates capture pass-through on all relevant margins, we additionally analyze survey data from Medicare with subjective quality assessments of every Medicare
Advantage plan. We estimate a precise zero effect on these subjective quality evaluations, indicating that there was no
pass-through on unobservable plan quality.
5 As shown in Weyl and Fabinger (2013), the incidence or ratio of consumer to producer surplus is given by I = CS =
PS
ρ
where ρ is the pass-through rate and θ ∈ [0, 1] is an index of market power. Our baseline estimate of ρ = 0.54
1−(1−θ )ρ
allows us to bound the incidence between 0.54 and 1.17 and implies that consumers receive no more than approximately
half the marginal surplus from the market.

2

on the margin. If firms have market power, then they may not face competitive pressure to pass
through increased payments into lower premiums or more generous benefits.
We use the same difference-in-differences variation to estimate the degree of selection into MA.
The BIPA-induced variation in payments creates variation in premiums and thereby generates quasiexogenous variation in MA coverage. We use this variation in coverage, combined with administrative data on the near-universe of Traditional Medicare beneficiaries, to estimate the slope of the
industry cost curve. Our estimates indicate there is limited advantageous selection into MA on the
margin we study. Within our theoretical framework, the estimates imply that advantageous selection would reduce pass-through under the benchmark of perfect competition to 85%. Alternatively
put, of the combined 46 cents in payments that is not passed through to beneficiaries, selection can
account for 15 cents or about one-third of the shortfall.
We then provide evidence that suggests insurer market power is an important determinant of
incomplete pass-through. Using our difference-in-differences variation, we estimate premium passthrough rates of 74% in the most competitive markets compared to 13% in the markets with the
least competition. This heterogeneity is statistically significant and is robust to measuring market
concentration by the pre-reform number of insurers in each market and the pre-reform insurance
market Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI).6
Our research contributes to a rich literature in public finance that examines the pass-through
of government taxes and subsidies in health insurance. This includes work on health insurance
mandates (Hackmann, Kolstad and Kowalski, 2015), physician and hospital payments (Clemens and
Gottlieb, 2014; Dafny, 2005), Medicaid premium subsidies (Dague, 2014), and payments to Medicare
Part D plans (Carey, 2014). In addition, our research complements a prior literature that uses discrete
choice models to examine the relationship between market power and welfare in Medicare Advantage (Town and Liu, 2003; Dunn, 2010; Lustig, 2010; Curto et al., 2015).7 Our finding of an average
premium pass-through of 45%, with rates approaching 74% in the most competitive counties, sug6 While we do not find evidence that BIPA affected market structure, splitting the sample by pre-BIPA market power is
appropriate because the increase in payments could, at least in principle, affect the number of firms in each county.
7 Our paper is also related to the broader literature on MA including Cawley, Chernew and McLaughlin (2005) who
investigate the impacts of MA payment changes in 1997 on MA plan availability, Gowrisankaran, Town and Barrette (2011)
who estimate the mortality effects of MA enrollment and MA drug coverage, and Duggan, Starc and Vabson (2014) who use
cross-sectional variation in capitation payments between urban and rural counties to examine pass-through of Medicare
Advantage subsidies. While we do not specify micro-foundations for consumer demand, our estimates of limited price
sensitivity complement research by Stockley et al. (2014) on low premium transparency and Nosal (2012) on large switching
costs in the MA market.

3

gests that private markets can efficiently provide Medicare benefits but that not all markets may be
competitive enough to achieve this objective.
Our paper also contributes to a literature on selection in Medicare, with Brown et al. (2011) arguing that selection generates overpayments to MA plans and Newhouse et al. (2012) responding
that selection has been mitigated by improved risk adjustment and other reforms. Prior studies have
investigated selection by examining the cost of individuals who choose to switch from Traditional
Medicare to MA or vice versa. Like these papers, we use data on Traditional Medicare costs to estimate selection into MA. Unlike these papers, our approach allows us to estimate selection using
plausibly exogenous payment variation (Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen, 2010).8 Our finding of little
advantageous selection suggests that policies that aim to reduce selection, while perhaps worthwhile
from a cost-benefit standpoint, would have limited scope to increase pass-through to consumers.9
Our estimates of pass-through are directly relevant for the $156 billion in MA payment reductions
scheduled to take effect under the Affordable Care Act. Counter to claims made by some commentators, our results predict that the incidence of such payment reductions would fall only partially
on Medicare beneficiaries, with a significant fraction of these cuts borne by the supply side of the
market.10,11
More generally, we view our results as emphasizing the importance of market power in health
insurance markets. The delivery of publicly funded health care in the United States has become
increasingly privatized over the past 25 years, with Medicare, Medicaid, and the Affordable Care
Act exchanges adopting managed competition to varying degrees.12 Although evaluating the merits
8 While

the prior literature relies on the assumption that switching between MA and Traditional Medicare is unrelated
to changes in health status, our study makes no such assumption as we rely on plausibly exogenous variation in prices to
identify selection. Another advantage of the present study over the prior literature is that our design allows us to examine
all enrollees, new and old. The prior switcher studies cannot examine new enrollees because effects can be estimated only
among individuals that have at least one year of history in MA or Traditional Medicare prior to a switch in their coverage.
9 Our results are not directly comparable to the selection results of Curto et al. (2015), who measure selection as an
overall mortality rate difference between Traditional Medicare and MA, conditional on risk scores. This is both because
we measure selection in dollars, as a marginal cost curve, and because we estimate selection that is marginal to premium
variation, in the spirit of Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010). Understanding selection based on premium variation that is
driven by MA payment adjustments is especially policy relevant, as these types of payment adjustments are the primary
policy tool—both historically and in current proposals—that are used to induce expansions and contractions of the MA
program.
10 Despite the growth in Medicare Advantage since our period of analysis, many Medicare Advantage markets remain
highly concentrated today. The typical MA market (county) during our time period was highly concentrated (with a mean
insurer HHI of 5,800 in 2000) and this remains true today (with a mean insurer HHI of 4,800 in 2014). To put this in some
perspective, the DOJ thresholds for moderately and highly concentrated markets are 1,500 and 2,500 respectively. As of
2014, 88% of Medicare Advantage markets had insurer HHI values in excess of 2,500.
11 For examples of opposition to the cuts on the basis that seniors bear the burden, see Millman (2014).
12 This trend towards private provision extends beyond the context of Medicare. Many state Medicaid programs have
transitioned to partial or complete private provision within the last several decades. Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater

4

of specific policy proposals is outside the scope of our analysis, our estimates indicate that efforts
to make insurance markets more competitive may be key to increasing consumer surplus in such
settings.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background information
on MA payments and describes our data. Section 3 presents our empirical strategy. Section 4 reports estimates of pass-through. In Section 5 we present the model that allows us to investigate the
determinants of pass-through. Section 6 empirically evaluates the role of selection in explaining incomplete pass-through. In Section 7 we examine the relationship between pass-through and market
concentration. Section 8 concludes.

2
2.1

Background and Data
Medicare Advantage Payments

Private Medicare Advantage (MA) insurance plans are given monthly capitated payments for each
enrolled Medicare beneficiary, equal to a base payment multiplied by the enrollee’s risk score. Insurers can supplement these payments by charging premiums directly to enrollees. Base payments
to MA plans are determined at the county level and are somewhat complex, reflecting the accumulation of legislation over the life of the program. Payments were originally intended to reflect the
costs an individual would incur in Traditional Medicare (TM). Prior to 2001, base payments were
largely determined by historical average monthly costs for the TM program in the enrollee’s county
of residence.13
Our source of identifying variation arises from the 2000 Benefits Improvement and Protection
Act (BIPA). The historical context for BIPA was a contraction in the MA program in the late 1990s
following the 1997 Balanced Budget Act (BBA). The BBA was designed to reduce variation in base
payments across counties with different levels of Medicare spending. The legislation put in place a
payment floor that increased base payments in counties with the lowest TM costs and mechanisms to
(2014) examine the transition to private provision within the Texas Medicaid program, and they find evidence that blackHispanic infant health disparities widen as a result of this transition.
13 Prior to 1998, MA capitation payments were set at 95% of the Average Adjusted Per Capita Cost (AAPCC), which was
an actuarial estimate intended to match expected TM expenditures in the county for the “national average beneficiary.”
Beginning in 1998, county base payments were updated via a complex formula created by the Balanced Budget Act (BBA)
of 1997. Specifically, plans were paid the maximum of (i) a weighted mix of the county rate and the national rate (“the
blend”), (ii) a minimum base payment level implemented by BBA, and (iii) a 2% “minimum update” over the prior year’s
rate, applying in 1998 to the 1997 AAPCC. See Appendix A.1 for additional details.

5

limit the growth of payments in counties with high TM costs. As a result of this reform, enrollment
growth in the MA program slowed, and between 1999 and 2000 the number of MA enrollees shrunk
for the first time since the program’s inception in 1985. Under pressure from insurers to reverse the
payment cuts, Congress passed BIPA in December of 2000 (Achman and Gold, 2002).14
BIPA implemented two floors for county base payments in March 2001. These floors varied with
whether the county was rural or urban and were scheduled to update over time.15 Counties already
receiving base payments in excess of the floors received a uniform 1% increase in their base payment
rates in March 2001. Let j denote counties and t denote years. Base payments b jt are given by

b jt =





if t < 2001

cejt
n


 max cejt , bu( j)t

o

(1)

if t ≥ 2001,

where cejt is the base payment absent the BIPA floors and bu( j)t is the relevant BIPA payment floor,
which depends on the county’s urban status, u( j). In our main analysis, we use premium data from
July of each year. Because BIPA modified payments in March 2001, and plans received special permission to adjust premiums and benefits packages in February 2001 (Committee on Ways and Means,
2004), we assign 2001 as the first post-reform year for all of our variables. We discuss the regulations
that affected the precise timing of plan responses in more detail in Appendix A.2.
The final capitation payment received by MA insurers is determined by multiplying the county
base payment rate by an individual risk adjustment factor to account for the relative costliness of
MA versus TM enrollees. Prior to 2000, this adjustment was done using demographic information:
age, sex, Medicaid status, working status, institutionalization status, and disability status. From
2000 to 2003, the risk adjustment formula additionally placed a small weight on inpatient diagnoses.
Overall, the risk adjustment done prior to 2004 explained no more than 1.5% of the variation in
medical spending (Brown et al., 2011).16 Extensive risk adjustment of MA capitation payments was
introduced in 2004 (see Brown et al., 2011; McWilliams, Hsu and Newhouse, 2012), after our study
14 The bill was introduced in the House in October of 2000 in close to its final form and passed in December. According
to Achman and Gold (2002), Congress passed BIPA in response to pressure from MA insurers to undo the cost-control
provisions of BBA 1997, which constrained MA payment growth.
15 Counties are designated urban if they are associated with an MSA with a population of 250,000 or greater. Rural
counties are those not associated with an MSA, or associated with an MSA below the threshold.
16 The purpose of this risk adjustment was not to correct for geographic variation in illness or utilization, which is fully
captured in the local county average, but to address sorting between TM and MA. Following the prior literature, we focus
solely on the demographic risk adjustment in our analysis.

6

period.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) constructs the risk adjustment factors to
equal 1.0 on average across the entire Medicare population. Because the risk adjustment factor averages 0.94 in our estimation sample, in the analysis that follows we multiply all county base payments
by 0.94 to more accurately track average payments to plans.17 To be consistent, we normalize the risk
scores to have a mean of 1.0 in our sample when, in Section 6, we separately and explicitly estimate
selection between MA and TM.

2.2

Data

We focus on the 7-year time period from 1997 to 2003, which provides us with 4 years of data from
before the passage of BIPA and 3 years of data after the bill was signed into law. We end our sample in 2003 to avoid confounding factors introduced by the 2004 implementation of the Medicare
Modernization Act of 2003 (MMA), which reformed the capitation payment system extensively.18
Most of our analysis relies on publicly available administrative data on the MA program. We
combine data from several sources: MA rate books, which list the administered payment rates for
each county in each year; the annual census of MA insurer contracts offered by county; countylevel MA enrollment summaries; and plan premium data.19 For 2000 to 2003, we are able to obtain
information on the benefits (e.g., copayments, drug coverage) offered by each plan.20 We supplement
the data on plan characteristics with data on subjective consumer evaluations of all MA plans from
the Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Survey (CAHPS) and clinical quality of care measures
from Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). These data are available from 1999
to 2003.
To investigate the importance of selection, we use administrative data on costs and demographics
17 The

average risk score in our estimation sample is different than 1.0 for two primary reasons. First, our estimation
sample excludes individuals that qualify for Medicare through Social Security Disability Insurance. Second, only a subset
of the variables the regulator uses for calculating the demographic risk score are available to us in the administrative data.
In particular, the regulator uses age, sex, Medicaid status, working status, and institutionalized status, and we do not
have information on either working status or institutionalized status. Thus, we calculate demographic risk scores using
information on age, sex, and Medicaid status, assuming individuals are non-institutionalized and non-working.
18 MMA 2003 changed the formula by which the base payment is calculated substantially. In addition, the act introduced
meaningful risk-adjustment applied on top of the base payment rate to calculate the overall capitation payment. Several
prior papers examine the effects of various aspects of MMA 2003 reform including Brown et al. (2011), McWilliams, Hsu
and Newhouse (2012), and Woolston (2012).
19 Plan premium sources vary by year and include the Medicare Compare database, the Medicare Options Compare
database, and an Out of Pocket Cost database provided by CMS.
20 These detailed descriptions of plan benefits are sometimes referred to as Landscape Files or Plan Services Files.

7

for the near-universe of Medicare beneficiaries. We use the CMS Beneficiary Summary File from 1999
to 2003, which includes information on spending for the universe of Traditional Medicare beneficiaries. Additionally, we use the CMS Denominator File from 1999 to 2003, which provides demographic
information for all Medicare beneficiaries.21
We conduct our analysis on a county-year panel dataset. We weight county-level observations by
the number of Medicare beneficiaries in each county so that our findings reflect the experience of the
average Medicare beneficiary. To construct county-level outcomes from plan-level data, we weight
plan level attributes by the plan’s enrollment share in that county. We inflation-adjust all monetary
variables to year 2000 using the CPI-U.
Table 1 displays summary statistics for the pooled 1997 to 2003 sample. Panel A shows values
for the full panel of 3,143 counties. Panel B shows summary statistics for plan characteristics, which
require us to restrict the sample to county-years that have at least one MA plan. In 2000, the year
just prior to the enactment of BIPA, MA plans were available in 680 out of 3,143 counties. These
680 counties collectively contain 67% of all Medicare beneficiaries (19.4 million individuals), and, by
definition, 100% of Medicare beneficiaries who reside in a county with an available MA plan. In the
pooled 1997-2003 panel, MA plans were available in 4,262 out of 22,001 county-years.22 While not all
Medicare beneficiaries had access to MA from 1997-2003, 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries resided
within one of the counties in our primary estimation sample during our period of analysis. In Section
4, we show our source of identifying variation does not have a meaningful effect on entry or exit of
counties from our primary estimation sample (i.e., county-year observations with at least one MA
plan). Nevertheless, Appendix A.8 replicates all our analyses using the balanced panel of counties
with at least one plan in each year between 1997 and 2003, and we show that the results are very
similar.
Panel A shows that base payments average $491 per month for all counties but range from $223
to $778 per month across the sample. Approximately 64% of Medicare beneficiaries live in a county
with at least one plan. MA plans enroll 19% Medicare beneficiaries on average, although counties
21 We

accessed these data through the National Bureau of Economic Research. Pre-1999 data are not available through
the data re-use agreement with CMS.
22 Relative to the entire Medicare program, our effective sample size is much larger than the number of counties alone
would suggest because counties served by an MA plan are on average much larger than counties without an MA plan:
counties served by an MA plan during our time period have 30.3 thousand Medicare beneficiaries on average while counties without an MA plan have 4.0 thousand Medicare beneficiaries on average. Throughout the analysis, we weight countyyear observations by the number of Medicare beneficiaries represented by the observations.

8

with the highest MA penetration rates have enrollment rates close to 70%. In the average county, TM
beneficiaries cost $487 per month.
Panel B restricts the sample to counties with at least one plan. Premiums average $23 per month
and vary substantially. The minimum premium within a county averages $15 per month and the
maximum averages $32. Copayments for physician and specialists visits average $8 and $16, respectively. Approximately 70% of plans offer drug and vision coverage, 28% of plans offer dental
coverage, and 38% cover hearing products. Beneficiaries in the restricted sample can choose among
2.3 plans on average, and enrollment is higher with an MA penetration rate of 29%. Average TM
costs, at $522 per month, are somewhat higher as well.

3

Research Design

In this section we present the research design we use to examine the effects of the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA). We start by showing descriptive evidence of the change in payments
and then present our econometric model.

3.1

Identifying Variation

The top panel of Figure 1 plots payments for each county in the year before (x-axis) and after (y-axis)
the BIPA payment floors came into effect. The bottom two panels plot histograms of the 2000 base
payments, weighted by the county’s Medicare population, for all counties (middle panel) and for
counties with an MA plan in at least one year of the 1997-2003 study period (lower panel). The figure
shows that BIPA led to a sharp increase in payments for a large share of counties, with urban counties
having their base payment rates raised to a minimum of $525 per month and rural counties having
their base payment rates raised to a minimum of $475 per month.
Figure 1 also illustrates the two key sources of variation that we use in our analysis. The first
source of variation arises from the fact that counties with the same base payments prior to BIPA received different payment increases depending on their urban or rural status, with urban counties
receiving increases of $50 per month more than rural counties with the same pre-BIPA base payment level. The second source of variation arises from the fact that counties with the same urban or
rural status received different payment increases depending on their pre-BIPA base payment level.

9

For example, among urban counties affected by the floor, those with lower pre-BIPA base payments
received relatively larger payment increases than those with higher pre-BIPA base payments.
Figure 2 presents maps that illustrate the variation. The shading in this figure corresponds to
the magnitude of the treatment: the difference between the applicable payment floor and the base
rate that would have applied absent the BIPA reform. This is the “distance-to-floor” variable that we
define more precisely below. Counties are binned according to their tercile of distance-to-floor, and
we separately map rural counties (Panel A) and urban counties (Panel B). Darker shading indicates
a higher distance-to-floor (i.e. a larger payment shock), and counties for which the floors were not
binding are shaded white. These maps show that the implementation of the BIPA payment floors,
which were binding for 72% of counties, provides us with a large and geographically diverse source
of identifying variation.23,24
Table 2 provides some basic statistics on the increase in payments. On average, the payment
floors led to a 14.1% payment increase in affected rural counties and a 16.1% increase in affected
urban counties. There was substantial variation, for example, with the bottom quartile of urban floor
counties receiving a payment increase below 8.8% and the top quartile receiving an increase above
22.7%.

3.2

Econometric Model

We examine the effects of this payment change using a difference-in-differences research design that
compares outcomes across counties that were differentially exposed to the BIPA payment floors. Let
j denote counties and t denote years. We measure exposure to BIPA with a distance-to-floor variable,
∆b jt , which isolates the increase in payments solely due to the payment floors:
n
∆b jt = max e
bu( j)t − cejt ,

o
0 ,

(2)

where cejt is the monthly payment in the absence of the floor and e
bu( j)t is the relevant urban or rural
payment floor. We define the instrument in all of the years in our sample so we can test for spurious
responses prior to BIPA and any phased adjustment after the law comes into effect.
23 In

Appendix Figure A1, we show that this variation spans counties of varying population sizes. Overall, 53.7% of
counties with an MA plan received an increase in payments. The figure shows that the percentage of “treated” counties is
fairly stable across the distribution of county sizes.
24 Appendix Figure A2 shows the baseline maps from Figure 2 along with an additional set of maps that conditions on
the sample of counties with an MA plan in at least one year of the 1997-2003 study period.

10

Post-BIPA, we observe the actual county base payment but not the payment in the absence of
the floor. During the post-period, non-floor counties received a 2% update each year. Therefore, to
calculate counterfactual payments for floor counties, cejt , in the post-BIPA period, we simply update
the pre-BIPA payments that we observe by 2% each year:25

cejt =





if t ≤ 2001

c jt


 c j,2001 · 1.02(t−2001) if t > 2001,

(3)

where c jt is the county base payment that we observe in the pre-BIPA period. Similarly, floors are
observed in the post-BIPA period only. The law specified that floors be increased by 2% each year.26
We define counterfactual floors, e
bu( j)t , in the pre-BIPA period by deflating the 2001 floor by 2% per
year:

e
bu( j)t =



(t−2001)
 b
u( j),2001 · 1.02
bu( j)t




if t < 2001

(4)

if t ≥ 2001,

where bu( j)t is the base payment floor that we observe during the post-BIPA period.
Our baseline econometric model is a difference-in-differences specification that allows the coefficient on the distance-to-floor variable, ∆b jt , to flexibly vary by year. Letting y jt be an outcome in
county j in year t, our baseline regression specification takes the form

y jt = α j + αt +

∑

β t × It × ∆b jt + f ( X jt ) + e jt ,

(5)

t6=2000

where α j and αt are county and year fixed effects, f ( X jt ) is a flexible set of controls discussed in
more detail below, and e jt is the error term. The β t s are the coefficients of interest, and we use the
summation notation to make explicit that separate coefficients are estimated for each calendar year.
We normalize β 2000 = 0 so that these estimates can be interpreted as the change in the outcomes
relative to year 2000 when BIPA was passed. We consider β 2003 to be our preferred estimate because
the three-year horizon allows us to capture medium-run effects of the change in payments.
25 Year

2001 is unique in that we observe both c jt and bu( j)t , due to the implementation of the floors in March of that year.
In our analysis, year 2001 always refers to the level of payments for March through December 2001. Since counties received
an additional one-time 1% increase in March 2001, we define c j,2001 as inclusive of this increase.
26 There was an exception in the law for when medical inflation was particularly high, in which case the floors were
updated by a larger amount. See Appendix A.1 for full details.

11

The identifying assumption for this difference-in-differences research design is the parallel trends
assumption: in the absence of BIPA, outcomes for counties that were differentially affected by the
payment floors would have evolved in parallel. We take two approaches to assess the validity of
this assumption. Our first approach is to plot the β t coefficients over time. This approach allows us
to visually determine whether there is evidence of spurious pre-existing trends and to observe any
anticipatory or delayed response to the BIPA payment increases.27
Our second approach is to estimate specifications that isolate the two key subsets of our identifying variation, each addressing a different class of potential confounders. Pre-BIPA base payments
are not randomly assigned and reflect historical FFS costs, raising the possibility that time trends in
relevant characteristics like population health, market structure, and healthcare spending could be
correlated with the distance-to-floor. We address this potential concern by estimating an alternative
specification which isolates variation in distance-to-floor due to urban or rural status while controlling for differential trends in the outcome variable by pre-BIPA base payments. Specifically, we include as controls quartiles of the base payment in year 2000 interacted with year indicators.28 With
this approach, the estimates are largely identified by differences in the payment increases between
urban and rural counties with the same pre-BIPA base payments.
To isolate the complementary variation, we estimate a separate specification that includes as
controls the urban status of the county interacted with year indicators. This complementary approach
controls for differential time trends across urban and rural counties, and the estimates are identified
by differences in the size of the payment increase within the sets of urban and rural counties.29
A recent paper by Duggan, Starc and Vabson (2014), conducted in parallel to our study, uses
cross-sectional variation in capitation payments between urban and rural counties to estimate passthrough in MA. Using data from the post-BIPA time period, the authors estimate a premium pass27 Our primary premium pass-through analysis is over-identified in the sense that we have four years prior to the reform
of pre-period. During the period prior to the reform, 1997-2000, plots of the pre-reform coefficients reveal no evidence that
counties differentially exposed to the reform had differential trends in premiums (see Figure 4). In addition, we report in the
appendix supplemental monthly analysis that zooms into the period just surrounding the implementation of the reform.
This additional evidence demonstrates that premiums sharply decrease in the first month that insurers were allowed to
adjust premiums following the reform. (See Appendix Section A.2 for full analysis.)
28 In principle, perfectly isolating the variation due to urban status would require completely non-parametric pre-BIPA
payment rate × year fixed effect interactions. The choice of quartiles is a compromise between flexibility and overparameterizing the model.
29 This alternative specification controls flexibly for differential trends in the outcome variable across urban and rural
areas by the inclusion of both the year fixed effects and urban × year fixed effects. These allow for fully non-parametric
over-time differences in outcomes across urban and rural counties. In other words, the estimates from this specification
come from isolating the variation within counties with the same urban or rural status.

12

through rate of zero, although their standard errors do not allow them to reject a relatively wide
range of parameters (including our baseline estimate of 45% pass-through below). In contrast, our
difference-in-differences strategy allows us to control for county fixed effects and to estimate specifications that control for differential time trends across counties. Given the importance of place-specific
factors for medical spending (Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams, 2014), we see the ability to control
for county fixed effects and differential time trends as a major advantage of our strategy.
As discussed in Section 2, Congress instituted several earlier payment reforms that affected payments during the pre-period. The most important of these was the payment floor established by the
1997 Balanced Budget Act (BBA) and an additional update to payments for some counties in 2000. To
address any correlation between the effects of these payment reforms and BIPA, we explicitly control
for these two events in all our regression specifications. We control for the BBA floor by constructing
a distance-to-floor measure that is analogous to our BIPA distance-to-floor variable and interacting
this variable with year fixed effects for 1998 onward. We control for the 2000 payment increases by
constructing a variable defined as the difference between the 2% update and the actual update in
2000 and interacting this variable with year fixed effects for 2000 onward. See Appendix A.1 for
more details on these payment changes.
Figure 3 shows the first stage effect of our constructed change in payments variable on actual
monthly payment rates. It plots the coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from the
baseline difference-in-differences specifications (Equation 5) with base payments as the dependent
variable. Table 3 presents parameter estimates from the corresponding regressions. Column 1 shows
estimates from the baseline specification with county and year fixed effects. Column 2 adds controls
for the base payment level in the year 2000 interacted with year indicators to isolate variation due to
the difference between the urban and rural floor. Column 3 includes as controls an urban indicator
interacted with year indicators to isolate variation due to differences in base payments conditional
on urban or rural status. Standard errors in all specifications are clustered by county, with the capped
vertical bars in the plot showing 95% confidence intervals.
Both the figure and table show that a dollar increase in our distance-to-floor variable translates
one-for-one into a change in payments to plans at the county level. This first stage is very precisely
estimated, with all specifications yielding a coefficient of 0.987 to 1.002 for each post-BIPA year and
with standard errors no larger than 0.005. Because the first stage is one and precisely estimated, in

13

the remainder of the paper, we interpret reduced form effects of distance-to-floor on outcomes, such
as premiums and benefits, as resulting from a one-for-one change in monthly base payments.

4

Main Results

In this section, we examine the pass-through of the increase in payments. We start by presenting the
effects on premiums. We then examine the pass-through into plan benefits, such as copayments and
drug coverage. Finally, we examine impacts on plan availability.

4.1

Pass-Through into Premiums

Figure 4 examines the effect on premiums by plotting the coefficients on distance-to-floor × year
interactions from the baseline difference-in-differences specifications (Equation 5) with county-level
mean premiums as the dependent variable. County-level mean premiums are constructed from planlevel data by weighting by the number of enrollees in each plan. Table 4 presents parameter estimates
from the corresponding regression, which includes year and county fixed effects. Table 4 also reports
parameter estimates from additional specifications that isolate different subsets of the identifying
variation described in Section 3. Standard errors in all specifications are clustered by county, with the
capped vertical bars in the plots showing 95% confidence intervals.
The dashed horizontal line at zero in Figure 4 indicates no pass-through and the dashed horizontal line at −1 indicates full pass-through, which occurs when a dollar increase in payments translates
one-for-one into a dollar decline in premiums. The plot shows no evidence of a trend in the period prior to the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA), providing support for our parallel
trends identifying assumption. In the first year following implementation, mean premiums decline
by 30 cents for each dollar increase in payments and level off at a decline of approximately 45 cents
in the third year after the reform. The size of effects in the third year are stable across specifications
in Table 4, ranging from 32 to 45 cents—not statistically different from each other, and in all cases
statistically different from zero (no pass-through) and from one (full pass-through). Difference-indifferences plots corresponding to the alternative specifications in columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 are displayed in Figures A3 and A4. Similar to the baseline result in Figure 4, these plots show no evidence
of a differential trend in premiums prior to the reform. Our preferred estimate of mean pass-through

14

is 45 cents, which is the 2003 estimate from the baseline specification shown in column 1.
Appendix Figure A5 illustrates the effect of this change in monthly payments on the median premium (Panel A), minimum premium (Panel B), and maximum premium (Panel C). Since the typical
county has between two and three plans, these statistics provide an exhaustive characterization of
the distribution of premiums in the typical county. The effects on these other statistics are similar to
the effect on the mean, with the plots showing no evidence of a pre-BIPA effect and a sharp decline
following implementation of the payment floors. The point estimates for these other statistics, shown
in Appendix Table A1, are similar in magnitude to the mean effect, with the 2003 estimates ranging
from 37 to 49 cents for the baseline specification. Like the effect on the mean, the results are robust to
specifications that isolate different subsets of the identifying variation.
One factor that could affect our interpretation of the premiums and benefits pass-through estimates is the fact that plans could not set negative premiums during our time period.30 In principle, a
plan that was constrained from further reducing premiums would have an incentive to pass-through
higher payments in the form of more generous benefits. Relative to an unconstrained setting, this
would bias downward our estimate of premium pass-though and bias upward our estimate of passthrough into benefits, but might not impact on our combined pass-through estimate. In Appendix
Section A.3, we examine this potential issue by estimating Tobit specifications that account for insurers’ inability to set negative premiums. The magnitude of the Tobit estimates are very similar to, and
statistically indistinguishable from, our baseline non-Tobit estimates, confirming that our baseline
results are not driven by this feature of the market.
To summarize the premium pass-through results, we find that mean premiums decline by 45
cents for every dollar of increased monthly payments at 3 years following the reform. This result
is robust to alternative specifications that isolate different subsets of our identifying variation, to
other statistics describing the premium distribution (median, minimum, and maximum), and to Tobit specifications that explicitly account for the fact that plans could not give rebates (charge a negative premium) during our sample period. Appendix A.2 presents additional analysis using monthly
premium data and a tight window around the passage of BIPA that illustrates that the decline in
30 MA was changed after our sample period to allow plans to offer “rebates” that in effect operate as negative premiums.
Examining data from this time period, Stockley et al. (2014) argue that firms do not pass-through higher payments in the
form of rebates because the "Medicare Plan Finder" website does not prominently display this information, reducing the
salience of these premium rebates at the time of purchase.

15

premiums occurs precisely in the first month that these changes were permitted by the regulator.31

4.2

Pass-Through into Benefits

In addition to lowering premiums, plans may have responded to the increased payments by raising
the generosity of their coverage.32 In the standard model of insurance demand, such a change in
plan generosity would operate through an income effect. Consumers facing lower premiums would
be richer and thus might demand more or less generous insurance coverage.33
We investigate pass-through on benefits using data on the main MA plan characteristics marketed to Medicare beneficiaries at the time of enrollment. Specifically, we examine the effect of BIPA
on the mean county-level copayments for physician and specialist visits and the percentage of plans
providing coverage for prescription drugs, dental, vision, and hearing aids. Figure 5 plots the coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences specifications (Equation
5) with measures of plan benefits as the dependent variable. To aid interpretation, we scale the coefficient on the distance-to-floor variable by $50, which is approximately 10% of the $511 mean pre-BIPA
base payment. We have information on plan benefits for 2000 to 2003 and therefore only have one
year of pre-BIPA data. These data are sufficient to identify the effect of BIPA but do not allow us to
perform falsification tests for pre-existing trends, warranting more caution in interpreting the results.
Table 5 displays parameter estimates from the corresponding difference-in-differences regressions
where the coefficient is similarly scaled by $50. The table shows coefficients from the baseline regression specification, with Appendix Table A2 showing the specifications that isolate different subsets of
the identifying variation. Standard errors in all specifications are clustered by county and the capped
vertical bars in the plots show 95% confidence intervals.
Panels A and B of Figure 5 show that the increase in payments had a sharp effect on mean personal physician and specialist copayments. By 2003, the $50 increase in monthly payments reduced
31 After the passage of BIPA in December 2000, the regulator required plans to submit new premiums and benefits by
January 18, 2001, with the new premiums and benefits effective beginning February 2001 (Committee on Ways and Means,
2004). In Appendix Figure A6, we display a monthly sequence of our difference-in-differences coefficient estimates for
premiums. The monthly plot shows a sharp drop in premiums in February 2001, consistent with plans responding in
premium-setting at the first opportunity. We discuss the timing in full detail in Appendix A.2.
32 In addition to varying premiums, insurers in the MA market often vary plan benefits such as copays and drug coverage
across the different geographic markets they serve. Appendix A.4 provides more details on the within-insurer geographic
variation in benefits and premiums.
33 In the CARA specification that is used in much of the literature, there are no income effects, and we would therefore
predict no change in plan generosity. Given that the premium changes are small relative to income, even in specifications
with non-constant risk aversion, we might expect only small changes in plan generosity.

16

physician copayments by $2.63 on a pre-BIPA base of $7.29 and reduced specialist copayments by
$3.13 on a pre-BIPA base of $11.13. The effects are highly statistically significant but modest in economic magnitude. The average Medicare beneficiary had 8 combined physician and specialist visits
per year or two-thirds of a visit per month, implying that the $50 increase in monthly payments
reduced copayment spending by approximately $2 per month.34
Panels C to F of Figure 5 show the effects on the percentage of plans offering drug, dental, vision,
and hearing aid coverage. As before, the effects are scaled to a $50 increase in monthly payments.
The plots show that the increased payments have no effect on drug, dental, and vision coverage but
a relatively large effect on the percentage of plans offering hearing aids.35 By 2003, the parameter
estimate for the effect on hearing aids, shown in column 6 of Table 5, indicates that the $50 increase in
payments raised the share of plans offering hearing aids by 23.8 percentage points on a base of 42.6%.
Appendix Table A2 shows that the benefits effects are stable across our alternative specifications.
To quantify the actuarial value of the change in benefit generosity, we combine these estimates
with data on utilization and payments from the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS),
restricting the sample to individuals who are 65 or older. For dental, vision, hearing aids, and drug
coverage, we calculate the actuarial value of these benefits as the monthly costs paid by the insurance
provider.36 For copayments, we calculate the actuarial value of the insurer’s share of costs by taking
the negative of the copayment amount multiplied by the monthly number of visits.37
Figure 6 plots effects of a $1 increase in payments on this measure of the actuarial value of benefits. The vertical axis offers the same pass-through interpretation as in the premium figures, where a
coefficient of 1 corresponds to a dollar increase in plan benefits for a dollar increase in plan subsidies
due to BIPA. Pass-through is small. The point estimate for 2003, shown in column 7 of the table,
indicates a pass-through rate of 9 cents on the dollar and is marginally statistically significant with a
p-value of 0.05.38 Specifications that isolate alternative subsets of the identifying variation, shown in
34 The

number of provider visits is calculated using the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS).
Town and Barrette (2011) find that higher MA payment rates increased the probability that plans
offered drug coverage, using data spanning 1993—when drug coverage rates were low—through 2000. By our last prereform year, most plans had already adopted drug coverage, possibly accounting for our finding of no incremental effect
of the reform in 2001.
36 In particular, we estimate category-specific coinsurance rates among those MEPS respondents that report supplemental
coverage. We then multiply these category-specific rates by the unconditional total monthly spending in each category,
generating actuarial values of coverage for each supplemental benefit.
37 By the envelope theorem, we can calculate the value to consumers of a small reduction in copayments without needing
to account for any increase in medical utilization caused by the reduced cost-sharing. In addition, since medical utilization
is relatively inelastic, any changes in utilization are likely to be small.
38 If the actuarial value of the increase in plan benefits is larger in high out-of-pocket spending states of the world (where
35 Gowrisankaran,

17

Appendix Table A2, confirm the robustness of the finding that pass-through into benefits is at most
small and in some specifications statistically insignificant.
One potential concern with all pass-through papers is that firms may change product characteristics that the researcher does not observe. We think this is a relatively minor concern in our setting
for two reasons. First, we see all of the product characteristics (e.g., premiums, copayment, vision
coverage) that the consumer sees when purchasing the plan. These are the characteristics that plans
should be most likely to change as they are the most salient plan features and thus the most likely to
affect enrollment. Second, for every Medicare Advantage plan, we also have data on the subjective
plan evaluations of enrolled consumers. These survey data allow us to investigate unobservable (to
the econometrician) changes in plan quality that might not be picked up by our analysis of product
characteristics. In Appendix A.7, we show that our identifying variation has a precisely estimated
zero effect on these evaluations and other measures of plan quality, including measures of clinical
care quality and beneficiary-reported quality of care. This finding is consistent with other research
which shows limited pass-through into plan characteristics that are not easily observed (e.g., Stockley
et al., 2014; Agarwal et al., 2015, 2014).
Taken together, the premiums and benefits results for 2003 yield a combined pass-through estimate of 54 cents on the dollar. A 95% confidence interval allows us to rule out a combined passthrough effect outside the range of 37 cents to 71 cents.39

4.3

Plan Availability

If there are fixed costs of entry, then the increase in payments might have had an effect on plan
availability. Figure 7 plots the coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-indifferences specifications (Equation 5) with different measures of plan availability as the dependent
variable.40 Table 6 shows the corresponding regression estimates, including alternative specifications
the marginal utility of consumption is higher) than in low out-of-pocket spending states of the world (where the marginal
utility of consumption is lower), then the pass-through into benefits might have additional consumption-smoothing value
to consumers which is not captured by the baseline actuarial value estimate. Additional analysis in Appendix A.6 illustrates
that any additional consumption-smoothing value from the change in plan benefits is small in this setting (roughly 1 cent
per dollar).
39 This confidence interval is constructed by bootstrapping standard errors for the sum of our distance-to-floor coefficients
from the premium and actuarial value of benefits regressions. The bootstrap calculation uses 200 random samples of
counties drawn with replacement.
40 There was a possible change to the regulator’s reporting between 1999 and 2000 in terms of separating non-local plans
in the enrollment files. Non-local plans are those purchased outside of the county in which the enrolled individual is
observed, and these plans are characterized by very low enrollment in the county of observation. While unimportant for
our main enrollment-weighted outcomes such as premiums, these may generate data artifacts in the pre-period trends of

18

that isolate different subsets of the identifying variation.
Panel A of Figure 7 shows the effect of a $50 increase in payments on the percentage of counties
with at least one plan. For this analysis, we use the entire balanced panel of county-years with
non-missing information on base rates and Medicare beneficiaries during 1997 to 2003. This sample
includes 21,504 of 22,001 county-years and more than 99.9% of all Medicare beneficiaries. The plot
shows no evidence of an effect on the percentage of counties with at least one plan. The parameter
estimates, shown in columns 1 to 3 of Table 6, are similar across alternative specifications.
One potential reason for this lack of an extensive margin effect is that BIPA had only a minor
effect on the total revenue that could be earned in marginal counties, mainly because of the small
number of Medicare beneficiaries in these areas. In particular, the average county with zero plans in
year 2001 had only 4,278 Medicare beneficiaries, compared to an average of 32,172 in counties with
at least one plan. This means that although BIPA raised payments by an average $33 per month in
these zero-plan counties, a plan capturing 5% of the Medicare beneficiaries would experience a total
revenue increase of only $84,704, which might not be enough to cause a detectable effect on entry or
exit.
While these results are interesting in their own right, the plan existence results also offer reassurance that the identifying variation is not systematically related to entry and exit from our sample.
The pattern of the coefficients in Panel A of Figure 7 indicates that changes to the number of counties
with an MA plan are unlikely to be a source of bias in our main estimates. However, as a robustness
test, we replicate all our analyses using a balanced sample of counties with an MA plan in each year
between 1997 and 2003. These estimates, shown in Appendix A.8, are very similar and confirm that
selection is not biasing the results.
The increase in payments may have also influenced market concentration within the set of counties that had at least one plan. Panel B of Figure 7 shows the effect of a $50 increase in payments on
the number of plans in each county conditional on there being at least one plan.41 Panel C shows
the effect on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for the number of plans in each county, again
conditional on there being at least one plan. The HHI is the standard measure of market power used
for antitrust analysis and is similar to our other dependent variables in weighting plans based on
plan counts.
41 Appendix Figure A7 includes additional plots examining the effect of the reform on the probability of ≥ 2 MA plans
among the sample of counties with ≥ 1 MA plan.

19

their enrollment shares. These plots show no evidence of an effect of the increased payments in 2001
on these different measures of the number of plans, though the pre-BIPA trends are not completely
flat. In contrast, the extensive margin of plan participation in a county (at least one plan) that defines
our premium analysis sample is a robust and precisely estimated zero, with flat pre-trends across all
specifications. Overall, these results indicate that BIPA did not have a meaningful impact on market concentration, consistent with Duggan, Starc and Vabson (2014) who show that their variation in
payments is unrelated to insurer HHI.42

5

Model of Pass-Through

In the previous section, we showed that Medicare Advantage (MA) plans pass through approximately half of the increased capitation payments in the form of lower premiums and more generous
benefits. In this section, we show that incomplete pass-through can possibly be explained by (i) advantageous selection into MA and (ii) market power among MA insurers and medical providers. To
build intuition, we start by presenting simplified graphs that illustrate these potential mechanisms.
We then present a model that, under assumptions on the nature of selection and competition, allows
us to generate quantitative predictions on the relationship between pass-through and these underlying mechanisms. The model provides a framework for interpreting the empirical evidence that
follows.

5.1

Graphical Analysis

Figure 8 presents this graphical analysis. We model demand for MA as linear, and we define the
marginal cost of providing an MA plan to an individual as the expected cost of providing medical
care net of the capitation payment from Medicare. Within this framework, we can depict the increase
in capitation payments under BIPA as a downward shift of the marginal cost curve. Our graphical
approach is closely related to that of Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), who examine selection
in a perfectly competitive environment, and Mahoney and Weyl (Forthcoming), who examine the
interaction of imperfect competition and selection.
42 Immediately

following the reform, it may have been easiest for firms to adjust premiums, with firm entry/exit decisions developing over a longer timeframe. Nonetheless, we see no meaningful effect on firm entry/exit in the medium-run,
three years after the implementation of BIPA.

20

Panel A of Figure 8 examines the impact of selection on pass-through in a perfectly competitive
market. In a perfectly competitive market, firms earn zero profits and the equilibrium is defined by
the intersection of the demand and the average cost curves. When there is no selection, firms face a
horizontal average cost curve, and a downward shift in the average cost curve translates one-for-one
into a reduction in premiums, depicted by the transition from point A to point B in the figure. When
there is advantageous selection, average costs are upward sloping as the marginal consumer is more
expensive than the average. Panel A illustrates that under advantageous selection an identically
sized downward shift in the average cost curve is not fully passed through as firms offset the higher
costs of the marginal consumers with higher prices to maintain zero profits in equilibrium, depicted
by the shift from point A to point C.
Panel B examines the impact of market power on pass-though in a market with no selection. To
simplify the exposition, we consider the extremes of perfect competition and monopoly. As described
above, when there is perfect competition and no selection, a downward shift in the marginal cost
curve is fully passed through to consumers, moving the equilibrium from point A to point B. The
monopolist sets the price such that marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost. With a linear demand
curve, this leads to 50% pass-through, shifting the equilibrium from point C to point D in the figure.
More generally, Bulow and Pfleiderer (1983) show that the pass-through of a small cost shock is
determined by the ratio of the slope of the demand curve to the slope of the marginal revenue curve.

5.2

Model

We build on and generalize this graphical analysis by constructing a model of pass-through in imperfectly competitive selection markets, drawing upon previous work by Weyl and Fabinger (2013)
and Mahoney and Weyl (Forthcoming). We direct the reader to these papers for technical details and
micro-foundations that support the modeling choices.
Suppose individuals differ in their cost to firms, ci , demographic risk score, ri , and willingness
to pay for insurance, vi . Assume that insurance firms provide symmetric, although possibly horizontally differentiated, insurance products. At a symmetric equilibrium, all firms charge the same
premium p. Aggregate demand at this price is given by Q( p) ∈ [0, 1] and represents the fraction of
the market with MA coverage. In addition to the premium, firms receive a risk-adjusted capitation
payment equal to b · ri , where b is the county base payment. At a symmetric equilibrium, all plans

21

receive enrollees with the same average risk adjustment factor so that average capitation payments
R
to firms are b · AR( Q), where AR( Q) = Q1 v ≥ p−1 (Q) ri = E[ri |vi ≥ p−1 ( Q)], where p−1 ( Q) is the
i

inverse demand function.
In practice, risk adjustment is normed by the regulator to average to one in the overall Medicare
population and is close to one in the MA segment. To avoid carrying extra notation in the derivation,
we temporarily consider the case of no risk adjustment (ri = 1, ∀ i) but fully incorporate this term
when presenting the final pass-through equation below.
Total costs for the industry are summarized by an aggregate cost function C ( Q) ≡

R

c,
v i ≥ p −1 ( Q ) i

which is equal to the aggregate medical costs paid by MA plans when the prevailing premium is
p( Q). This specification rules out firm-level economies or diseconomies of scale, including fixed costs
at the firm level.43 Average costs for the industry are given by AC ( Q) ≡

C ( Q)
Q ,

and marginal costs

are given by MC ( Q) ≡ C 0 ( Q). Adverse selection at the industry level is indicated by decreasing
marginal costs MC 0 ( Q) < 0, and advantageous selection is indicated by increasing marginal costs
MC 0 ( Q) > 0. For the purposes of our discussion, we limit our attention to cases where MC 0 ( Q) and
AC 0 ( Q) have the same sign.44
In a perfectly competitive equilibrium, firms earn zero profits and prices are equal to average
costs net of payments from Medicare: p = AC ( Q) − b. At the other extreme, a monopolist chooses
the price to maximize profits:
h
i
max p + b Q( p) − C ( Q( p)).
p

(6)

Setting the first-order condition to zero yields the price-setting equation p = µ( p) + MC ( Q) − b,
Q( p)
denotes the standard absolute markup term and MC ( p) − b is the marginal
where µ( p) ≡ − 0
Q ( p)
(net of capitation payment) cost.
To allow for intermediate levels of competition, Mahoney and Weyl (Forthcoming) introduce a
parameter θ ∈ [0, 1] that interpolates between the price-setting equations for perfect competition and
43 This assumption is widely used in the literature (e.g., Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen, 2010; Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney,

2011) and broadly consistent with the structure of the industry. The model does allow for individual-specific loads related
to the costs of administering the plan. In the next section, we calculate pass-through empirically restricting the cost of
insuring an individual, ci , to be an affine transformation of claim costs that we observe in the data.
44 This restriction simply eases the discussion of selection. The derived pass-through equations are equally applicable if
this restriction does not hold.

22

monopoly:
h
i
h
i
p = θ µ( p) + MC ( Q) + (1 − θ ) AC ( Q) − b.

(7)

The model nests the extremes of perfect competition (θ = 0) and monopoly (θ = 1) along with a
number of standard models of imperfect competition. Cournot competition is given by θ = 1/n,
where n is the number of firms. Mahoney and Weyl (Forthcoming) show that the model is a reducedform representation of differentiated product Bertrand competition when θ ≡ 1 − D, where D ≡
∑ j6=i ∂Qi /∂p j
is the aggregate diversion ratio, the share of consumers that firm i diverts from rivals
−
∂Qi /∂pi
j when it lowers its price.45

5.3

Pass-Through

We are interested in how much of an increase in payments is passed through into lower health insurance premiums. For a small change in payments, pass-through is defined as the negative of the
dp

total derivative of premiums with respect to the capitation payment: ρ ≡ − db . We will say there
is full pass-through when ρ = 1 and no pass-through when ρ = 0. The model can accommodate
pass-through greater than one under imperfect competition and some forms of demand, but as we
show in Section 7, ρ ≤ 1 is the empirically relevant case in our setting.46
First, consider the case of perfect competition. Setting θ = 0 and differentiating Equation 7 with
respect to b yields

ρ=

1
,
dAC
1−
dp

(8)

where we have suppressed arguments for notational simplicity. Under advantageous selection, aver

dAC
dQ
dAC
age costs are decreasing in price
> 0 and
<0⇒
< 0 and therefore pass-through
dQ
dp
dp
is less than one. Consistent with Panel A of Figure 8, even in a perfectly competitive market, part of
the increase in capitation payments must go to compensate insurers for costlier marginal enrollees,
45 The

differentiated product Bertrand representation also requires the symmetry assumption that all firms receive a
representative sample of all consumers purchasing the product in terms of their cost and that a firm cutting its price steals
consumers with a similarly representative distribution of costs from its competitors. See Mahoney and Weyl (Forthcoming)
for details.
46 Full pass-through (ρ = 1) is also the maximum in our benchmark case of perfect competition and advantageous
selection. This benchmark case is the focus of our empirical analysis in Section 6.

23

explaining the lack of full pass-through.
In practice, Medicare risk adjusts payments to partially compensate insurers for selection. Incorporating risk rating yields the pass-through equation

ρ=


1−

AR
,
dAC
dAR
−b
dp
dp

(9)


dAR
dAC
−b
term in the denominator measures
dp
dp
selection net of any change in average risk adjustment payments. The numerator is scaled by AR to reflect


which adds two terms to Equation 8 above. The

the fact that a dollar increase in base payments does not translate into a dollar increase in payments
if MA enrollees have non-representative demographic risk ( AR( Q) 6= 1). MA enrollees have lower
average demographic risk (AR( Q) < 1), which slightly lowers the predicted pass-through rate. See
Appendix A.10 for a derivation of this pass-through formula.
Our model also provides predictions for pass-through under the more realistic assumption of
imperfect competition (θ > 0). Guided by our empirical results that payments have no effect on
market structure, we assume that θ is constant.47 Fully differentiating the pass-through equation
yields

ρ=


1 − (1 − θ )

θ MR + (1 − θ ) AR


.
dAC
dAR
dµ dMC
dMR
−b
−θ
+
−b
dp
dp
dp
dp
dp

(10)

Increasing market power (higher θ) shifts optimal price-setting away from average cost pricing
and toward marginal cost pricing, where both costs are net of risk adjustment. As in Equation 9,


dAR dMC
dMR
the net cost terms in the denominator dAC
are negative under advantageous
dp − b dp , dp − b dp
selection, decreasing the pass-through rate. When there is no selection, the cost terms are zero and the
pass-through formula simplifies to ρ =

1
dµ
1−θ dp

and is decreasing in market power for many standard

parameterizations of demand. For instance, linear demand implies
through equation to ρ =

dµ
dp

= −1 and simplifies the pass-

1 48
1+ θ .

47 Because our estimates suggest that BIPA had little effect on product characteristics and no effect on market structure,
the model takes these factors as given. This allows for a richer treatment of premium pass-through without making the
model unnecessarily complex. It is important to emphasize that the aim of our model is to investigate mechanisms behind
pass-through in the context of capitation payment changes within the MA market. Broad counterfactuals, such as analyzing
the effect of alternative policies aimed at influencing plan entry/exit, are outside the scope of our analysis.
48 More specifically, pass-through is decreasing in market power when demand is log-concave since (log q )00 = µ0 /µ2 <

24

6

Selection

The objective of this section is to quantify the extent to which advantageous selection can explain
our estimates of pass-through. If Medicare Advantage (MA) is advantageously selected, net of risk
adjustment, then lower premiums draw in higher cost enrollees, and even a perfectly competitive
market cannot pass through the full increase in payments.

6.1

Conceptual Approach

We estimate the reduction in pass-through that could be explained by selection and risk adjustment
in a perfectly competitive market. Perfect competition is a natural benchmark because it implies a
pass-through rate of one if there were no selection and no risk adjustment. In Appendix A.11 we
show that under the assumptions of linear demand and cost curves, the main effects of selection and
market power are proportionally separable. Thus, to a first order approximation, we can think about
advantageous selection as scaling down the predicted pass-through for any given level of market
power.
As shown in Section 5, pass-through in a perfectly competitive MA market is given by
AR MA

ρ=


1−

dAC MA
dAR MA
−b
dp
dp

,

where AR MA is the average risk adjustment factor, b is the base payment, and

(11)

dAC MA
dp

MA

− b dAR
dp

is

the change in the average costs net of any change in average risk adjustment payments. The superscript MA is added to the risk adjustment and cost terms to clearly distinguish these from risk and
costs in the Traditional Medicare (TM) population, which we also discuss below. During our study
period, risk adjustment was based on demographics, but the same formula could accomodate risk
adjustment of any form, including the currently implemented diagnosis-based system or the type of
diagnosis and drug utilization-based system being considered by CMS for future implementation.49
0 ⇐⇒ µ0 < 0. When µ0 > 0, the pass-through rate can be greater than one and is increasing in market power. Fabinger
and Weyl (2013) prove that µ0 < 0 if demand is linear or if it is based on an underlying willingness-to-pay distribution
that is normal, logistic, Type I Extreme Value (logit), Laplace, Type III Extreme Value, or Weibull or Gamma with shape
parameter α > 1. They show that µ0 > 0 if demand is based on a willingness-to-pay distribution that is Pareto (constant
elasticity), Type II Extreme Value, or Weibull or Gamma with shape parameter α < 1. They show that µ switches from
µ0 < 0 to µ0 > 0 for a log-normal distribution of willingness-to-pay.
49 The formula in Equation (11) remains the same regardless of risk adjustment details because the term dAR MA measures
dp

25

We observe the average risk adjustment factor for MA plans in the data and can calculate AR MA
directly. Since we observe the risk adjustment factor, we can also estimate

dAR MA
dp .

To do so, we
MA

estimate the reduced form effect of base payments on the average risk adjustment factor ( dAR
db

)

using our main difference-in-differences strategy and then divide by the effect of base payments on
dp

premiums ( db ) from Section 4. This yields the effect of a change in premiums on the average risk


MA
dAR MA /db
=
.
adjustment factor dAR
dp
dp/db
Estimating

dAC MA
dp

is more complicated because we do not observe data on MA costs. To over-

come this issue, we follow the prior MA literature (e.g., Brown et al., 2011; Newhouse et al., 2012)
and use TM costs to proxy for counterfactual costs under MA. Previous studies show that beneficiaries who switch from TM to MA and vice versa have low costs while in TM relative to other TM
beneficiaries and interpret this fact as indicating that MA is advantageously selected. This “switcher"
approach identifies selection in a relatively small sample of switchers and relies on the assumption
that the choice of MA versus TM is exogenous to changes in health. In contrast, our strategy measures selection in a larger sample of beneficiaries that includes new enrollees, and our estimates are
identified using plausibly exogenous variation. Since our identifying variation in payments affects
premiums, we can use insights from Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), described below, to trace
out the cost curve facing insurers and directly quantify the degree selection into MA.
Let Q TM = 1 − Q MA denote the fraction of the market with TM coverage, and let AC TM denote
average TM costs. Assume (i) the costs of covering a given individual in MA and TM are proportionally constant so that

ciMA
ciTM

= φ, ∀i, and (ii) the market average cost curves for both TM and MA are

linear in quantity and therefore have a constant slope. These assumptions imply that the slopes of
MA and TM average cost curves are of opposite sign and proportional:50
dAC MA
dAC TM
=
−
φ
.
dQ TM
dQ MA

(12)

This result, combined with the fact that a change in premiums has an equal and opposite effect on
only how average risk adjustment payments vary with premiums. Thus the denominator term in parentheses captures the
slope of the insurer cost curve net of risk adjustment payments, whatever form those payments take. We also note that
because premiums are required to be uniform within a market, the appropriate unit of analysis for selection on premiums
would be the entire local market—even in a setting where risk adjustment is diagnosis-based. See Geruso and Layton
(2017) for a full discussion of this point in the context of selection and risk adjustment in the ACA Exchanges.
50 A proof is provided in Appendix A.12. Intuitively, the slopes of the MA and TM average cost curves are proportional
because linearity implies that the slope of the average cost curves are half the slope of the marginal cost curves, and
marginal costs are assumed to be proportional between MA and TM.

26

MA and TM quantity



dQ MA
dp

TM

= − dQdp



, implies that an increase in premiums has effects on TM and

MA average costs that are of the same sign and proportional:51
dAC MA
dAC MA dQ MA
=
=
dp
dp
dQ MA



−φ

dAC TM
dQ TM



−

dQ TM
dp



=φ

dAC TM
.
dp

(13)

Intuitively, advantageous selection into MA implies that marginal enrollees are high cost relative to
the MA average and low cost relative to the TM average. Therefore, if a decrease in MA premiums draws more individuals into MA and increases average MA costs, then the same decrease in
premiums must lower TM enrollment and raise average costs among those who remain in TM.
This result allows us estimate

dAC MA
dp

up to the scaling parameter, φ, using the TM cost data.

As before, we estimate the reduced form effect of base payments on average TM costs using our
difference-in-differences strategy and then divide by our estimate of the effect of base payments on
premiums from Section 4. The effect of a change in premiums on average MA costs is therefore
dAC MA
dp

TM

= φ dAC
dp

TM

/db 52
= φ dAC
dp/db .

For our baseline estimates, we make the conservative assumption that costs under MA and TM
are equal (φ = 1). This provides us an upper bound on the explanatory power of advantageous
selection. If instead we follow a large literature that finds that costs are proportionally lower in
managed care plans than in fee-for-service coverage (φ < 1), our estimates of the explanatory power
of selection would be reduced.53

6.2

Selection Estimates

Figure 9 presents the difference-in-differences estimates that allow us to recover the explanatory
power of selection. The plots are identical to those that examine the effects on premiums (Figure
4) except with different dependent variables. For ease of interpretation, we scale the coefficient on
the distance-to-floor variable by $50, which is approximately 10% of the $511 mean base payment
MA

TM

equality dQdp = − dQdp simply follows from the fact that Q MA = 1 − Q TM .
52 We observe only claims costs. Although we cannot rule out that increasing unobservable administrative costs could
be an additional mechanism contributing to incomplete pass-through, any such effects are likely small. Non-claims costs
(such as advertising, broker fees for customer acquisition, claims administration, and profits) combined typically account
for less than 15 percent of the full premiums paid in these markets.
53 We know from above that dAC MA = φ dAC TM . Since dAC MA < 0 and dAC TM < 0 under advantageous selection into MA,
dp
dp
dp
dp
51 The

MA

φ < 1 implies 0 > dAC
>
dp
advantageous selection.

dAC TM
dp

and therefore that our estimates provide an upper bound on the explanatory power of

27

in place prior to the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA), and normalize the coefficient
on year 2000 to zero so we can interpret the effects relative to the year before BIPA came into effect.
Panel A of Table 7 displays parameter estimates from the corresponding difference-in-differences regressions, and Appendix Table A3 shows alternative specifications that isolate different subsets of
the identifying variation.
Figure 9 Panel A shows the effect of a $50 increase in monthly payments on MA enrollment. In
terms of estimating the degree of selection, the effect on quantity can be thought of as a first stage. If
payments had no effect on MA enrollment, there would be no identifying variation that would allow
us to estimate the degree of selection. MA enrollment is slow to respond to the decline in premiums,
consistent with inertia or switching costs (Handel, 2012). However, by 2003 the first stage is large,
with a $50 increase in payments raising enrollment by 4.7 percentage points on a pre-BIPA mean of
30.2%, and is highly significant with a p-value < 0.01.54
In addition to allowing us to estimate selection, the quantity effect is independently informative
about the basic structure of the MA market. The 2003 estimate implies an enrollment elasticity with
 $50
4.7%
respect to payments of 1.6 = 30.2%
$511 . If we assume that base payments affect enrollment only
through premiums — so that base payments are a valid instrument for premiums — then the 2003
estimate implies a semi-elasticity of demand with respect to premiums of −0.007 =

(4.7%/30.2%)
−0.45×$50 ,

where the denominator is the change in premiums implied by a $50 increase in the base payments.
While this is a market-level elasticity, with individual firms facing more elastic residual demand
curves, our low aggregate price elasticity estimate is similar to the −0.009 semi-elasticity estimate
by Town and Liu (2003) and the −0.013 semi-elasticity estimate by Dunn (2010). The low elasticity is
also consistent with work on limited premium transparency (Stockley et al., 2014) and large switching
costs (Nosal, 2012) in the MA market.
Figure 9 Panel B shows the effect of a $50 increase in payments on TM costs. To interpret the
magnitude of the estimates, it is useful to divide by the effect on enrollment, which provides an
estimate of the slope of the average cost curve ( dAC/db
dq/db =

dAC
dq ).

The 2003 point estimate of $3.54,

shown in column 2 of Table 7, divided by the 4.7% enrollment effect implies a $75 slope of the average
cost curve. Since average costs are $483 per month, this indicates that individuals with the highest
54 As

discussed above, the enrollment effect can be viewed as a first-stage for the selection analysis. Because there is
geographic variation across markets in the base payment change (as discussed in Section 3) and there may be variation
across markets in the MA enrollment effect for a given base payment change, the selection estimates should be interpreted
as a LATE that is valid for the subset of counties exposed to the BIPA-induced capitation payment variation.

28

willingness-to-pay for MA only cost about 16% less than the population on average. We cannot
rule out the null hypothesis that the slope of the average cost curve is zero, with a 95% confidence
interval that runs from -$84 to $233.55 Appendix Section A.9 demonstrates that the selection estimates
are qualitatively similar in specifications with alternative controls and specifications with alternative
measures of utilization.
Figure 9 Panel C shows the effects on MA risk adjustment payments, which is the MA demographic risk score scaled by the year 2000 base payment. Since MA plan payments are scaled by an
individual’s risk score, increases in average demographic risk, holding costs fixed, result in greater
pass-through. The plot shows evidence that demographic risk declines with MA penetration. While
the magnitude is statistically significant, the estimate is small. Dividing the 2003 point estimate of
-$3.43, shown in column 3 of Table 7, by the enrollment effect indicates a slope of risk adjustment payments with respect to quantity of -$72. Combining this estimate with our 2003 cost estimate yields a
MA

slope for the average cost curve net of risk adjustment ( dAC
dq

MA

56 We cannot reject
− b dAR
dq ) of $147.

that there is no net selection on the margin as the 95% confidence interval on this estimate runs from
-$13 to $306.57
To calculate the explanatory power of selection, we combine these estimates with Equation 11,
where the numerator of Equation 11, the average risk adjustment factor among MA beneficiaries
AR MA , is equal to 0.955 in our sample.58 We calculate standard errors of the implied pass-through by
bootstrapping over counties.59 We estimate pass-through for each of the post-BIPA years. To increase
power, we also construct a pooled pass-through estimate, which is calculated using regressions that
specify a single post-BIPA coefficient for enrollment, demographic risk, costs, and premiums. These
pooled estimates are shown in Panel B of Table 7. Column 5 of Table 7 shows the reduction in pass55 This confidence interval is constructed by bootstrapping standard errors for the ratio dAC/db .
dq/db

relies on 200 random samples of counties drawn with replacement.
56 The slope of the average cost curve net of risk adjustment ( dAC MA − b
dq
MA
( dAC
dq )

dAR MA
dq )

This bootstrap calculation

is larger than the slope of the average

cost curve alone
because our point estimates suggest that, on the margin, demographic risk adjustment reinforces
rather than compensates for advantageous selection.
57 This confidence interval is constructed by bootstrapping standard errors for the term dAC MA − b dAR MA . This bootstrap
dq
dq
calculation relies on 200 random samples of counties drawn with replacement.
58 As discussed in Section 2, we conduct our risk adjustment analysis with demographic risk adjustment factors normalized to one over our sample population. These normalized risk adjustment factors reflect the relative demographic risk
scores across the MA and TM samples, where the average MA normalized risk adjustment factor is 0.955 and the average
TM normalized risk adjustment factor is 1.02.
59 We construct bootstrap standard errors by drawing a random sample of counties with replacement, estimating the
effect on enrollment and costs for this sample, and using these estimates to construct a sample-specific pass-through rate.
Our standard errors are based on calculating pass-through in this manner for 200 random samples.

29

through implied by our estimates of selection. The pooled estimates indicate that selection reduces
pass-through to 85%. A 95% confidence interval allows us to rule out estimates lower than 0.73 or
higher than 0.98. The yearly estimates similarly vary from 72% to 107%.60
Taken together, the results above indicate that selection is unable to explain our finding that
only half of the increase in payments is passed through to consumers. We estimate that a perfectly
competitive market would pass through 85 cents of each dollar in increased payments. Alternatively
put, of the combined 46 cents in payments that is not passed through to consumers, our estimates
indicate that selection can account for 15 cents or about one-third of the shortfall.61

7

Market Power

In this section, we examine the extent to which insurer market power is a mechanism that can explain
our estimates of incomplete pass-through. In Section 5, we discussed how a monopolist facing a
linear demand curve would pass through only half of an increase in payments (Panel B of Figure
8). More generally, we showed that for a range of functional form assumptions on the shape of the
demand curve, pass-through in an imperfectly competitive market is declining in market power.
In light of the evidence on limited selection, the model implies that much of the incomplete passthrough in our setting is due to market power.
We investigate the quantitative importance of insurer market power by splitting the sample by
measures of insurer market power prior to the 2000 Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA) and
estimating the pass-through rate separately in each sample.62 It is important to emphasize that we
view the following analysis as suggestive, since our research design isolates variation in payments to
plans, not variation in pre-reform market power.
Figure 10 shows estimates of pass-through into mean premiums for different levels of competition. Panel A splits the sample by the year 2000 county-level insurer Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI), with the highest HHI tercile corresponding to the most concentrated markets and the lowest
60 In

addition, we explore potential heterogeneity in the selection effect by pre-BIPA measures of insurer market power.
Based on this analysis (reported in Appendix Table A4), we cannot reject the hypothesis that the selection effect is identical
across markets with different pre-BIPA insurer market power.
61 Because we find advantageous selection has little role in explaining the incomplete pass-through we observe during
our period of study, it is unlikely that more recent refinements in risk adjustment have meaningfully affect the takeaways
from our paper.
62 While we do not find evidence that BIPA affected market structure, splitting the sample by pre-BIPA market power is
appropriate because the increase in payments could, at least in principle, affect the number of firms in each county.

30

HHI tercile corresponding to the markets with the least market power.63 Panel B splits the sample by
whether the county had one, two, or three or more separate Medicare Advantage (MA) insurers in
year 2000. The regression specifications used to construct these figures are identical to those used to
construct the baseline pass-through plot (Panel A of Figure 4), applied to each subsample. We show
coefficients for year 2003, which is the year with the largest pass-through of premiums, on average.
Estimates for 2001 and 2002 are shown in Appendix Figure A8. As before, the vertical axes measure
pass-through of payments, with the dashed horizontal line at zero indicating no pass-through and
the dashed horizontal line at −1 indicating full pass-through.
Panel A of Figure 10 shows that the pass-through rate is monotonically decreasing in pre-BIPA
insurer HHI. The pass-through rate is 13% in the most concentrated HHI tercile and 63% in the tercile
with the lowest market power. Panel B shows that the pass-through rate is similarly increasing in the
number of pre-BIPA insurers in the county. When there is a single insurer, pass-through is 13%. In
counties with three or more firms, pass-through increases to 74%. This is consistent with our model,
which predicts that pass-through is decreasing in market power for many standard parameterizations of demand.
Appendix Figure A8 shows the effects for each year in the post-BIPA period. The 2002 estimates
are almost identical to the 2003 estimates and show that pass-through is monotonically increasing
in both measures of competition. Consistent with the main results in Figure 4, pass-through rates
are lower in 2001 and the relationship between pass-through and market power is less precise. The
parameter estimates underlying these figures are shown in Appendix Table A5. The table also reports
coefficients from full-sample regressions that interact pre-BIPA market power with the distance-tofloor variable. These confirm the statistical significance of the pattern in which pass-through declines
with market power.64
The estimates of pass-through in the most competitive markets also provide us with an alternative approach to gauge the importance of selection as a mechanism for our findings. We estimate
premium pass-through of 74 percent in markets with at least 3 plans. If we add in 9 percent benefits
pass-through, then these results imply pass-through is at least 83 percent in the most competitive
63 When stratify counties by HHI terciles, we do not weight by population. The reason is that there are a small number
of urban counties (e.g., Miami-Dade) with very large populations and low HHI (because they have many plans). If we
weighted by population, the lowest HHI tercile would not have enough counties to generate precise estimates.
64 Because less populous counties have more concentrated MA markets on average, pass-through is also increasing in
county population size.

31

markets, and therefore advantageous selection can explain no more than 17 percent of the reduction in pass-through (the difference between 100 percent and 83 percent), which can be compared
to the directly estimated 15 percent selection parameter. While it is important to understand that
each of these parameters has an associated confidence interval, it is comforting that the two alternate
approaches yield consistent insights.
We conclude by noting that despite the growth in Medicare Advantage since our period of analysis, many MA markets remain highly concentrated today. As of 2014, 88 percent of Medicare Advantage markets had insurer HHI values in excess of 2,500, the Department of Justice standard for
highly concentrated markets. Further, because MA market structure varies across geographic markets within a time period much more than in aggregate across time, it is likely that pass-through
continues to be geographically heterogenous in the current MA program.

8

Conclusion

We examine the pass-through to consumers of payments in Medicare Advantage (MA) using differencein-differences variation brought about by the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA). We
show that approximately half of the marginal spending on the MA program is passed through to
beneficiaries in the form of lower premiums and more generous benefits. We find little evidence that
selection of more costly beneficiaries into MA can account for this incomplete pass-through, suggesting the result is driven by supply-side market power. Consistent with this intuition, we find
that the pass-through of payments varies greatly with insurer market concentration, with premium
pass-through rates of 13% in the least competitive markets and 74% in the markets with the most
competition.
Our estimates of pass-through are directly relevant for the $156 billion in MA payment reductions
scheduled to take effect under the Affordable Care Act. Counter to claims made by some commentators, our results predict that the incidence of such payment reductions would fall only partially on
Medicare beneficiaries, while a significant fraction of these cuts would be borne by the supply side of
the market. Our study does not address the division of surplus among inframarginal MA consumers
and therefore does not speak directly to the welfare effects of a more dramatic counterfactual, such
as completely abolishing (or significantly expanding) privatized Medicare.

32

References
Achman, Lori, and Marsha Gold. 2002. Medicare+ Choice 1999-2001: An Analysis of Managed Care Plan
Withdrawls and Trends in Benefits and Premiums. Commonwealth Fund.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. 2014. “A
Simple Framework for Estimating the Consumer Benefits from Regulating Hidden Fees.” Journal
of Legal Studies.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015. “Regulating Consumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Gui Woolston. 2011. “Can Risk Adjustment Reduce Selection in the Private Health Insurance Market? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program.” NBER Working Paper.
Bulow, Jeremy I, and Paul Pfleiderer. 1983. “A Note on the Effect of Cost Changes on Prices.” The
Journal of Political Economy, 91(1): 182–185.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2011. “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan
Choice.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214–48.
Carey, Colleen. 2014. “Sharing the Burden of Subsidization: Evidence from a Payment Update in
Medicare Part D.” Mimeo.
Cawley, John, Michael Chernew, and Catherine McLaughlin. 2005. “HMO Participation in Medicare+Choice.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 14(3): 543–574.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D Gottlieb. 2014. “Bargaining in the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s
Influence on Private Payment Systems.” NBER Working Paper.
Committee on Ways and Means. 2004. Green Book, 2004: Background Material and Data on Programs
Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Government Printing Office.
Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2015. “Can Health Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” Mimeo.
Dafny, Leemore, and David Dranove. 2008. “Do report cards tell consumers anything they don’t
already know? The case of Medicare HMOs.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3): 790–821.
Dafny, Leemore S. 2005. “How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?” American Economic Review,
95(5): 1525–1547.
Dague, Laura. 2014. “The effect of Medicaid premiums on enrollment: A regression discontinuity
approach.” Journal of Health Economics, 37: 1 – 12.
Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. 2014. “Who Benefits When the Government Pays
More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program.” NBER Working Paper.
Dunn, Abe. 2010. “The Value of Coverage in the Medicare Advantage Insurance Market.” Journal of
Health Economics, 29(6): 839–855.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets
Using Variation in Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 877–921.
33

Fabinger, Michal, and E. Glen Weyl. 2013. “Pass-Through and Demand Forms.” Mimeo, 121(3).
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2014. “Sources of Geographic Variation
in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration.” NBNBER Working Paper 20789.
Geruso, Michael, and Timothy J Layton. 2017. “Selection in Insurance Markets: Policy through the
Lenses of Fixed and Endogenous Contracts.” University of Texas Working Paper.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Robert Town, and Eric Barrette. 2011. “Managed Care, Drug Benefits and
Mortality: An Analysis of the Elderly.” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(2): 1–32.
Hackmann, Martin, Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2015. “Adverse Selection and
an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice.” American Economic Review, 105: 1030–66.
Handel, Benjamin. 2012. “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging Hurts.” American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643–2682.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2014. “Do IInsurer Risk-Select
Against Each Other? Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for Health Reform.” NBER Working
Paper 19198.
Lustig, Joshua. 2010. “Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect Competition
in Privatized Medi- care.” mimeo.
Mahoney, Neale, and E. Glen Weyl. Forthcoming. “Imperfect Competition in Selection Markets.”
Review of Economics and Statistics.
McWilliams, J Michael, John Hsu, and Joseph P Newhouse. 2012. “New risk-adjustment system was associated with reduced favorable selection in Medicare Advantage.” Health Affairs,
31(12): 2630–2640.
Millman, Jason. 2014. “Obama Administration Reverses Proposed Cut to Medicare Plans.” Washington Post, April 4.
Newhouse, Joseph P., Mary Price, Jie Huang, J. Michael McWilliams, and John Hsu. 2012. “Steps
to Reduce Favorable Risk Selection in Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded, Boding Well for
Health Insurance Exchanges.” Health Affairs, 31(12): 2618–2628.
Nosal, Kathleen. 2012. “Estimating Switching Costs for Medicare Advantage Plans.” mimeo.
Pope, Gregory C, Leslie M Greenwald, Deborah A Healy, John Kautter, Eric Olmsted, and Nathan
West. 2006. “Impact of Increased Financial Incentives to Medicare Advantage Plans.” RTI International.
Stockley, Karen, Thomas McGuire, Christopher Afendulis, and Michael E. Chernew. 2014. “Premium Transparency in the Medicare Advantage Market: Implications for Premiums, Benefits, and
Efficiency.” NBER Working Paper.
Town, Robert, and Su Liu. 2003. “The Welfare Impact of Medicare HMOs.” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4): 719–736.
Weyl, E. Glen, and Michal Fabinger. 2013. “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence under Imperfect Competition.” Journal of Political Economy, 121(3): 528–583.
Woolston, William Gui. 2012. “Selection and the Manipulation of Price Signals: Evidence from Private Medicare Plans.” Mimeo.
34

2001 Monthly Base Payment ($)
500
600

700

Figure 1: Payment Floors: Pre- and Post-BIPA Monthly Base Payments

Urban Floor
Rural Floor

400

Distances to Floors

400

500
600
2000 Monthly Base Payment ($)

700

Density

All Counties

400

500

600

700

Density

Counties with MA

400

500
600
2000 Monthly Base Payment ($)
Urban

700

Rural

Note: Figure illustrates the identifying variation arising from BIPA. The top panel shows county base payments
before (x-axis) and after (y-axis) the implementation of the BIPA urban and rural payment floors in 2001. Urban
counties are represented in light green and rural counties in blue. The dashed line in the top panel indicates the
uniform 3% increase that was applied to all counties between 2000 and 2001 and traces the counterfactual payment
rule in absence of the floors. The distance to the floor defines our identifying payment variation and is a function of
both the pre-BIPA base payment and a county’s urban/rural classification. The bottom two panels plot histograms
of the base payments in 2000, stacking rural and urban counties and weighting by county Medicare population, for
all counties (middle panel) and for counties with an MA plan in at least one year of the 1997-2003 study period
(bottom panel). All values are denominated in dollars per beneficiary per month. Base payments in this figure are
not adjusted for inflation and are not normalized for the sample average demographic risk adjustment factor. The
sample in the top two panels is 3,143 counties that include 100% of the Medicare population in 2000. The sample in
the bottom is 880 counties that include 73% of the Medicare population in 2000.

35

Figure 2: Effect of BIPA on County Base Payments
(A) Floor Distance, Rural Counties

Tercile 3, > $61
Tercile 2, $39 - $61
Tercile 1, < $39
Floor not binding
Not rural

Tercile 3, > $75
Tercile 2, $37 - $75
Tercile 1, < $37
Floor not binding
Not urban

(B) Floor Distance, Urban Counties

Tercile 3, > $61
Tercile 2, $39 - $61
Tercile 1, < $39
Floor not binding
Not rural

Tercile 3, > $75
Tercile 2, $37 - $75
Tercile 1, < $37
Floor not binding
Not urban

Note: Map shows the geography of the identifying variation across urban and rural counties. Counties are binned
according to their tercile of distance-to-floor, separately for rural counties (Panel A) and urban counties (Panel B).
Legends indicate the bin ranges, and counties for which the floors were not binding are shaded white. The distanceto-floor variable, which describes the payment shock between 2000 and 2001, is defined precisely in Equation (2) and
is graphically illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1. Base payments in this figure are not adjusted for inflation and
are not normalized for the sample average demographic risk adjustment factor. Alaska and Hawaii are excluded
from these maps but included in all of the other analysis. Inclusive of AK and HI, the sample is 3,143 counties that
include 100% of the Medicare population in 2000.

36

-.25

0

Base Payment ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

1.25

Figure 3: First Stage Effect on Base Payments: Impact of $1 Increase in Distance-to-Floor

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-the-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions with the monthly base payments as the dependent variable. The unit of observation is the county × year,
and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel
of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible
county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls include year and county fixed effects as well as flexible
controls for the 1998 payment floor introduction and the blended payment increase in 2000. The capped vertical bars
show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Year 2000, which is
the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category and denoted with a vertical dashed line. Horizontal
dashed lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and 1.

37

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

Figure 4: Premium Pass-Through: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change
in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a
dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variable is the mean monthly premiums weighted by enrollment in the plan.
The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the
county. The county-level measures are constructed using plan-level data weighted by plan enrollment. The sample is
the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262
of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The
capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.
Horizontal dashed lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and -1, where -1 corresponds to 100% pass-through.

38

Figure 5: Benefits Generosity: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments

2

(B) Specialist Copay

2

(A) Physician Copay

-6
-8

-8

-6

Specialist Copay ($)
-4
-2

Physician Copay ($)
-4
-2

0

Pre-BIPA Mean: $11.13

0

Pre-BIPA Mean: $7.29

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

2001

Year

2003

30

(D) Dental Coverage
Pre-BIPA Mean: 26%

0
-10

-10

0

Dental Coverage (%)
10
20

Pre-BIPA Mean: 74%

Drug Coverage (%)
10
20

30

(C) Drug Coverage

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

2001

Year

2002

2003

Year

(E) Vision Coverage

(F) Hearing Aid Coverage

Pre-BIPA Mean: 76%

Pre-BIPA Mean: 43%

-10

-10

0

0

Hearing Aid Coverage (%)
10
20

Vision Coverage (%)
10
20

30

30

2002
Year

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

Year

2001

2002
Year

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variables are physician copays in dollars (Panel A), specialist copays in
dollars (Panel B), and indicators for coverage of outpatient prescription drugs (Panel C), dental (Panel D), corrective lenses (Panel E), and hearing aids (Panel F). The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are
weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at
least one MA plan over years 2000 to 2003. This sample includes 2,250 of 12,572 possible county-years and 62% of all
Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. In Panels A and B, the vertical axes measure the
effect on copays in dollars of a $50 difference in monthly payments. In Panels C through F, the vertical axes measure
the effect on the probability that a plan offers each benefit, again for a $50 difference in monthly payments. The
capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.
Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. The horizontal dashed line is
plotted at 0.

39

2003

0

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

Figure 6: Actuarial Value of Benefits: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments

2000

2001

2002

2003

Year

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change
in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of a $1 increase in monthly payments. The
dependent variable is the actuarial value of benefits, which is constructed based on observed plan benefits in our
main analysis dataset and utilization and cost data from the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. See text for full
details. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries
in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 2000 to
2003. This sample includes 2,250 of 12,572 possible county-years and 62% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls
are identical to those in Figure 3. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard
errors clustered at the county level. Horizontal dashed lines are plotted at 0 and 1.

40

Figure 7: Plan Availability: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments
(B) Number of Plans
5

100

(A) At Least One Plan

0

0

1

20

Number of Plans
2
3

At Least One Plan (%)
40
60

4

80

County X years: 4262

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1

(C) Insurer HHI

0

.2

.4

HHI

.6

.8

County X years: 4262

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The
dependent variable in Panel A is an indicator for at least one plan, and the sample is the full sample of counties.
Panels B and C restrict the sample to county × years with at least one plan. The dependent variable in Panel B is
the number of plans conditional on at least one plan. The dependent variable in Panel C is a Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI) with a scale of 0 to 1. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted
by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample in Panel A is the balanced panel of county-years with
non-missing information on base rates and Medicare beneficiaries during 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 21,504
of 22,001 county-years and more than 99.9% of all Medicare beneficiaries. The sample in Panels B and C is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of
22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The
capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.
The horizontal dashed lines are plotted at the sample means, which are added to the coefficients.

41

Figure 8: Determinants of Incomplete Pass-Through
(A) Advantageous Selection
MC

Price and Cost

MC

AC
A
p

AC

C

p''

B

p'

P = MR

q'' q'

q

Quantity

(B) Market Power

C

p''

Price and Cost

D
p'''
A
p

B
p'

P
MR
q''

q'''

q'

q
Quantity

Note: Figure shows the pass-though of an increase in monthly payments depicted by a decrease in (net) marginal
costs. Panel (A) examines pass-through when there are perfectly competitive markets and either no selection or
advantageous selection. With no selection (horizontal AC curve), a downward shift in costs translates one-for-one
into a reduction in premiums, from point A to point B. With advantageous selection (upward slopping AC curve), a
downward shift in costs translates less than one-for-one into a reduction in premiums, from point A to point C. Panel
(B) examines pass-through where there is no selection and either perfectly competitive markets or a monopolist.
Points A and B are repeated from Panel A. With monopolist pricing, a downward shift in costs translates less than
one-for-one into a reduction in premiums, from point C to point D.

42

Figure 9: Selection: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments

40

(B) TM Costs
Pre-BIPA Mean: $483.32

Average TM Cost ($)
0
20

Pre-BIPA Mean: 30.19%

-5

-40

-20

MA Enrollement (%)
0
5

10

(A) MA Enrollment

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Pre-BIPA Mean: $484.25

-40

Average MA Demographic Risk Payment ($)
-20
0
20
40

(C) MA Risk Adjustment

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The
dependent variables are MA enrollment (Panel A), Traditional Medicare costs (Panel B), and mean demographic risk
payments for MA enrollees (Panel C). The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted
by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one
MA plan over years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible county-years and 63% of all Medicare
beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals
calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. The horizontal dashed lines indicate zero effects.

43

Figure 10: Pass-Through and Market Concentration

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(A) Insurer HHI

Highest

Middle
Pre-BIPA HHI Tercile

Lowest

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(B) Insurer Count

1

2
Pre-BIPA Insurer Count

3+

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year 2003 interactions from several difference-in-differences
regressions. The dependent variable is the mean premium defined as in Figure 4. Each point represents a coefficient
from a separate regression in which the estimation sample is stratified by market concentration in the pre-BIPA
period. In Panel A, counties are binned according to the tercile of insurer HHI in plan year 2000. In Panel B, counties
are binned according to the number of insurers operating in the county in plan year 2000. Competition increases to
the right of both panels. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number
of beneficiaries in the county. While the analysis is conducted on segments of the data, the underlying sample is the
unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of
22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The
capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.
Horizontal dashed lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and -1, where -1 corresponds to 100% pass-through.

44

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean
Std. Dev.
Panel A: All Counties, 1997 to 2003

Min.

Max.

Base Payment ($ per month)

490.58

83.96

222.99

777.91

At Least One Plan
Number of Plans

64.4%
1.46

47.9%
1.33

0%
0

100%
6

MA Enrollment
TM Costs ($ per month)

19.0%
486.53

18.3%
103.94

0%
136.87

67.6%
940.08

Panel B: County X Years With At Least One Plan, 1997 to 2003
County-Level Premium ($ per month)
Mean
Min
Median
Max

22.77
15.47
21.83
31.73

27.94
26.35
29.67
33.23

0
0
0
0

156.29
156.29
156.29
194.47

County-Level Benefits*
Physician Copay ($ per visit)
Specialist Copay ($ per visit)
Drug Coverage
Dental Coverage
Vision Coverage
Hearing Aid Coverage

8.02
15.62
68.7%
28.0%
68.1%
38.2%

5.31
7.10
42.5%
37.3%
41.3%
43.2%

0
0
0%
0%
0%
0%

21.62
95.72
100%
100%
100%
100%

Number of Plans
HHI

2.26
6,030

0.97
2,460

1
1,920

6
10,000

MA Enrollment
TM Costs ($ per month)

28.6%
521.56

16.2%
106.60

0.8%
254.96

67.6%
940.08

Note: Table shows county-level summary statistics for the pooled 1997 to 2003 sample. Panel A shows values for
the full set of county × years (N = 22, 001) that includes 100% of the Medicare population over this period. Panel B
restricts the sample to county × years with at least one MA plan, which includes 4,262 county-years and 64% of all
Medicare beneficiaries. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number
of beneficiaries in the county. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U.
? Benefits

data are only available for 2000 to 2003.

45

Table 2: Effect of BIPA on County Base Payments
Mean

Std. Dev.

25th

Percentiles
50th

Non-Floor County (N = 886)
Δ Base Payment
% Change in Base Payment

14.39
3.0%

1.58
0.0%

13.17
3.0%

14.03
3.0%

15.10
3.0%

Rural Floor County (N = 1,831)
Δ Base Payment
% Change in Base Payment

52.94
14.1%

17.16
4.9%

39.67
10.0%

62.59
16.8%

67.18
18.3%

Urban Floor County (N = 426)
Δ Base Payment
% Change in Base Payment

64.67
16.1%

29.56
8.4%

38.90
8.8%

62.33
14.9%

89.05
22.7%

75th

Note: Table shows the effect of BIPA on base payments for non-floor counties and counties that were
affected by the rural and urban floors. The “∆ Base Payment” rows show the difference between the
2001 base payment and the 2000 base payment in dollars per beneficiary per month. The “% Change in
Base Payment” rows show this difference as a percentage of the 2000 base payment. The sample is the full
set of counties in 2000 (N = 3, 143) that includes 100% of the Medicare population. All monetary values
are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. See text for additional information on data construction.

46

Table 3: First-Stage Effect on Base Payments: Impact of $1 increase in Distance-to-Floor
(1)

Dependent Variable: Base Payment ($)
(2)
(3)

Δb X 2001

0.992
(0.003)

0.992
(0.004)

0.992
(0.003)

Δb X 2002

0.990
(0.005)

0.999
(0.005)

0.987
(0.005)

Δb X 2003

0.994
(0.004)

1.002
(0.005)

0.990
(0.005)

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X
X
510.84
0.9998

510.84
0.9999

510.84
0.9999

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences
regressions with monthly base payments as the dependent variable. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform
years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are
weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of countyyears with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible
county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Additional controls in column 2 include quartiles of year 2000 county
base payments interacted with year indicators and in column 3 include an indicator for urban status interacted with year indicators. Flexible controls for the 1998 payment floor introduction and 2000 blended
payment increase are included in all specifications. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000
using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

47

Table 4: Premium Pass-Through: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments

(1)

Dependent Variable:
Mean Monthly Premium ($)
(2)

(3)

Δb X 2001

-0.297
(0.054)

-0.180
(0.093)

-0.308
(0.055)

Δb X 2002

-0.507
(0.059)

-0.369
(0.122)

-0.519
(0.059)

Δb X 2003

-0.448
(0.071)

-0.321
(0.126)

-0.451
(0.072)

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X
X
12.58
0.71

12.58
0.71

12.58
0.71

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in
Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so
we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries
in the county. The county-level measures are constructed using plan-level data weighted by plan enrollment.
The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This
sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which
is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table 3. All
monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county
level are reported in parentheses.

48

Table 5: Benefits Generosity: Impact of Increase in Monthly Payments
Dependent Variable:
Drug
Dental
Vision
Hearing Aid
Coverage (%) Coverage (%) Coverage (%) Coverage (%)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

49

Physician
Copay ($)
(1)

Specialist
Copay ($)
(2)

Δb X 2001*

-0.110
(0.613)

0.448
(0.710)

0.457
(4.258)

3.459
(3.653)

3.212
(4.514)

18.010
(4.357)

0.019
(0.047)

Δb X 2002*

-1.765
(0.691)

-2.749
(0.818)

0.230
(4.641)

5.445
(4.470)

3.301
(6.605)

22.838
(5.245)

0.056
(0.050)

Δb X 2003*

-2.630
(0.667)

-3.128
(0.956)

3.574
(4.398)

0.124
(3.717)

2.343
(6.598)

23.760
(5.071)

0.087
(0.045)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

7.29
0.67

11.13
0.70

73.62
0.83

25.77
0.67

75.68
0.74

42.58
0.83

n/a
0.82

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

Actuarial
Value ($)
(7)

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage
results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the
coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. In columns 1 to 6, the dependent variables are measures of
benefit generosity, and the coefficient on distance-to-floor is scaled by $50. In column 7, the dependent variable is the monthly actuarial value of benefits,
and the coefficient on distance-to-floor is not rescaled. See text for details on the construction of the monthly actuarial value of benefits. The unit of
observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of
county-years with at least one MA plan over years 2000 to 2003. This sample includes 2,250 of 12,572 possible county-years and 62% of all Medicare
beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table 3. All monetary
values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.
? Impact

of $50 increase in columns 1 to 6. Effect of $1 increase in column 7.

Table 6: Plan Availability: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments
At Least One Plan (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Dependent Variable:
Number of Plans
(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

HHI
(8)

(9)

Δb X 2001

-2.04
(1.79)

-3.35
(2.46)

-2.32
(1.78)

0.082
(0.079)

-0.104
(0.142)

0.103
(0.082)

0.001
(0.023)

0.038
(0.036)

-0.002
(0.023)

Δb X 2002

-0.62
(2.02)

-6.57
(3.13)

-0.24
(2.04)

0.079
(0.116)

-0.114
(0.191)

0.092
(0.119)

-0.019
(0.030)

0.015
(0.046)

-0.024
(0.031)

Δb X 2003

3.01
(2.21)

-2.60
(3.54)

3.39
(2.23)

0.124
(0.116)

-0.011
(0.202)

0.139
(0.119)

-0.041
(0.033)

-0.011
(0.051)

-0.048
(0.033)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

50

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

67.5
0.86

67.5
0.86

67.5
0.86

X
X

2.39
0.70

2.39
0.69

2.39
0.70

X
0.57
0.73

0.57
0.72

0.57
0.73

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage
results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the
coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase
in monthly payments. The dependent variables are indicator for at least one plan (columns 1 to 3), number of plans conditional on at least one plan
(columns 4 to 6), and Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) with a scale of 0 to 1 (columns 7 to 9). The sample in columns 1 to 3 is the balanced panel of
county-years with non-missing information on base rates and Medicare beneficiaries during 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 21,504 of 22,001 counties
and more than 99.9% of all Medicare beneficiaries. The sample in columns 4 to 9 is the unbalanced panel of county-years with with at least one MA plan
over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year
prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table 3. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using
the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

Table 7: Selection: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments

MA Enrollment (%)
(1)

Dependent Variable:
MA Risk
Adjustment ($)
TM Costs ($)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Yearly BIPA Effect

Mean Premiums*
($)
(4)

Implied Pass-Through
with Selection (ρ)
(5)

Δb X 2001

0.86
(0.60)

-3.05
(1.67)

-1.36
(0.48)

-0.32
(0.05)

1.07
(0.16)

Δb X 2002

3.32
(0.83)

-0.88
(3.41)

-2.42
(0.59)

-0.48
(0.06)

0.90
(0.14)

Δb X 2003

4.74
(0.90)

3.54
(3.73)

-3.43
(0.81)

-0.43
(0.07)

0.72
(0.11)

-2.83
(0.59)

-0.47
(0.05)

0.85
(0.09)

Panel B: Pooled Post-BIPA Effect
Δb X Post-BIPA

3.29
(0.71)

-0.05
(2.80)
Controls: All Panels

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

30.19

483.32

484.25

12.38

Note: Columns 1 through 4 show coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences
regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we
display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in Table
3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can
interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. In columns 1 to
3 the coefficient on distance-to-floor is scaled by $50. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations
are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with
at least one MA plan over years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible county-years and 63%
of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category.
Controls are identical to those in Table 3. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust
standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. Column 5 reports the implied pass-through
in a perfectly competitive market based on the estimates in the corresponding row (see Section 6 for more details).
Standard errors for this implied pass-through estimate are calculated by the bootstrap method using 200 iterations.
? Impact

of $1 increase in monthly payments shown in column 4.

51

Appendix

Not For Publication
APPENDIX
A.1

Background on MA Capitation Payments

Medicare Advantage (MA) insurance plans are given monthly capitated payments for each enrolled
Medicare beneficiary. These county-level payments are tied to historical Traditional Medicare (TM)
costs in the county, although the exact formula determining payments varied over time.65 Between
the start of the MA program (formerly Medicare+Choice) in 1985 and the end of our study period,
there were three distinct regimes determining capitation payments.
1. From 1985 to 1997, MA capitation payments were set at 95% of the Average Adjusted Per Capita
Cost (AAPCC). The AAPCC was an actuarial estimate intended to match expected TM expenditures in the county. TM costs were adjusted for local demographic factors so that payments
reflected local TM costs for the “national average beneficiary.”
2. From 1998 to 2000, county payments were updated via a complex formula created by the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997. Specifically, plans were paid the maximum of (i) a blended
rate, which was a weighted average of the county rate and the national rate, subject to a budget neutrality condition; (ii) a minimum payment floor implemented in the BBA and updated
annually, and (iii) a 2% “minimum update” over the prior year’s rate, applying in 1998 to the
1997 AAPCC rate. Because of a binding budget neutrality condition in 1998 and 1999, blended
payments in practice applied only to year 2000.
3. From 2001 to 2003, county payments were set as the maximum of a 2% minimum update and
a payment floor created by the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act (BIPA) of 2000. (For
updating the 2001 rate only, there was an additional 1% increase mid-year.) Unlike the BBA
1997 floor, BIPA floors varied with each county’s rural/urban status. The floors were indexed
to medical expenditure growth via the national per capita Medicare+Choice growth percentage. For 2002 only, these Medicare+Choice growth percentage adjustments exceeded the 2%
minimum update applied to the prior year’s floors. For 2003, the 2% minimum update applied
to the prior year’s floors exceeded the floor levels determined by the Medicare+Choice growth
percentage, and therefore the minimum update was the binding increase for floor counties.
After 1997, there was no explicit link between TM costs and MA payment updates. However, in
practice, MA payments continued to be linked to historical TM costs since the rate that formed the
basis to which all annual updates and floors were applied was the 1997 AAPCC.
The BBA payment floor referenced above was set at $387 in 1998. The floor impacted 1,098 mainly
rural counties, most of which never had an MA plan during our time period. Among counties with
an MA plan (which is the relevant sample for our analysis), the BBA floor impacted only 11.0% of
counties and 3.2% of Medicare beneficiaries.
In addition to the formulas, the Balanced Budget Refinement Act (BBRA) of 1999 created a temporary system of bonuses (5% in the first year and 3% in the second) for plans entering “underserved”
counties. Underserved counties were those in which an MA plan had not been offered since 1997 or
from which, as of October 13, 1999 (the day prior to BBRA’s introduction in Congress), all insurers
had declared exit. Thus, plans reversing their exit decisions could receive the bonus. These payments did not directly affect capitation rates but rather provided temporary bonuses in addition to
the capitation payments.
65 Pope

et al. (2006) provides a detailed description of the payment regimes.

52

Appendix

A.2

Detailed Timing of Response to BIPA

Congress passed BIPA in December of 2000. In a typical year, plan characteristics including premiums, cost sharing, and supplemental benefits would have been submitted to the Secretary of HHS for
approval by the middle of the year preceding the relevant plan year. Therefore, plan characteristics
for 2001 would have been fixed prior to BIPA’s passage in December 2000.
However, following the passage of BIPA in December 2000, the regulator required plans to submit
new premiums and benefits to HHS by January 18, 2001. Any changes became effective in February
2001. From Green Book, 2004: Background Material and Data on Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the
Committee on Ways and Means: "Because BIPA was enacted after the July deadline, there was a special
timeline for 2001... Any M+C organization that would receive higher capitation payments as a result
of BIPA was required to submit revised ACR information by January 18, 2001."
The annual data used in our main analysis are based on mid-year (July) premiums, and so it
is this July-to-July change we measure in Figure 4, which shows a premium response in 2001. To
demonstrate that the detailed timing of effects we measure is consistent with the policy, in Appendix
Figure A6 we display a monthly sequence of our coefficient estimates on premiums. Monthly data are
not available for all plan years that comprise our main analysis. Nonetheless, for 2000 to 2001, these
data show a sharp drop in premiums in February 2001, consistent with plans responding in premiumsetting at the first opportunity.66 In contrast to the 2001 premium effects, the annual benefits data
show no response in plan design until the 2002 plan year, suggesting that compressing a benefits
redesign process from the typical months-long process into the few weeks following BIPA’s passage
in December 2000 wasn’t feasible for most plans.

A.3

Robustness of Premium Pass-Through Estimates

A.3.1

Robustness Analysis: Tobit Estimation

In Section 4, we showed that the premium pass-through results are robust to specifications that isolate different subsets of the identifying variation and to specifications that examine effects on other
moments of the premium distribution (median, minimum, maximum). In this section, we show that
the premium pass-through results are robust to estimating Tobit specifications that explicitly account
for the fact that plans could not give rebates (charge negative MA premiums to be credited to beneficiaries’ Part B premiums) during our sample period.
Unlike the baseline specifications, which are estimated on data aggregated to the county × year
level, the Tobit specifications are estimated on disaggregated plan-level data. Estimating a Tobit
model on county-level means would be inappropriate because a county × year with at least one plan
with a non-zero premium would have a non-zero mean and therefore seem unconstrained even if
there were constrained plans in the county.
Table A6 shows the effect on premiums of dollar increase in payments using the plan-level data.
Columns 1 to 3 show estimates from OLS specifications and columns 4 to 6 show estimates from the
corresponding Tobit specifications. The OLS estimates are virtually identical to the baseline estimates
(shown in column 1 to 3 of Table 4), and the Tobit estimates are only slightly larger. For example, the
point estimate in column 4 indicates that three years after the reform, pass-through in a counterfactual
setting where plans could offer rebates would have been 58 cents on the dollar. This is close to the
OLS pass-through estimate of 45 cents on the dollar, and it is nearly equal to the combined passthrough point estimate of 54 cents on the dollar, which includes 9 cents in more generous benefits.
In the counterfactual setting where premiums were not constrained, it could be the case that plans
66 The

monthly coefficients plotted in Figure A6 match the estimates in the main analysis when the annual sample is
restricted to the same time period.

53

Appendix

would have not adjusted plan generosity in response to the payment changes. Thus, these results
suggest that the combined pass-through rate in this hypothetical unconstrained setting would lie
between our combined pass-through estimate of 58 cents on the dollar and 67 cents on the dollar (the
Tobit point estimate plus the change in benefit generosity we estimate).
The fact that the Tobit estimates are very similar to the non-Tobit estimates reveals that the nonnegative premium constraint does not have a big impact on the results. To gain further intuition
for why this is the case, Table A7 displays mean premiums by year for three subsets of counties:
counties with no BIPA-induced payment change, counties with a payment increase of $1-$50 , and
counties with a payment increase of greater than or equal to $51. There are two things to notice in
the raw data. First, premiums are rapidly increasing over time. This means that our difference-indifferences analysis identifies the extent to which premiums increased less among counties marginal
to the payment floors relative to other counties, rather than the extent to which premiums declined
in absolute terms in these counties. Second, premiums are substantially higher in the markets that
experienced the largest payment increases. Both of these facts imply that premiums for the "treated"
counties in the "post" period are much larger than the mean premium in the pooled sample. For
plans in counties with large payment increases, the mean premiums of $35 to $50 in the post period
implies there is ample "room" for firms to pass-though additional premium cuts if they had chosen
to do so. Thus, it is not surprising that the Tobit estimates are very similar to the non-Tobit estimates
of premium pass-through.
A.3.2

Robustness Analysis: Including Additional Controls

Next, we investigate the robustness of our analysis to the inclusion of more controls. Specifically,
we repeat our baseline pass-through estimation including contemporaneous per-capita TM costs as a
control variable. The results are reported in Appendix Table A8. One can see that the addition of TM
costs as a control has no meaningful impact on the pass-through estimate of interest. The fact that
this addition does not matter is not surprising for a few reasons. First, in our analysis of selection,
we find that the identifying variation is uncorrelated with contemporaneous TM costs when we look
at contemporaneous TM costs as the outcome variable (see Figure 9 and Table 7 in the main text).
Second, TM costs are quite persistent and all the cross-sectional variation in these costs is already
soaked up by the county fixed effects included in all the specifications.

A.4

Within-Insurer Variation in Plan Characteristics

Table A9 describes the within-insurer variation in premiums and benefits across geography for the
largest five insurers in the MA market in the year 2000. There is substantial within-insurer variation in
premiums and copayments for specialists and physicians, and there is a moderate amount of withininsurer variation in the propensity to provide drug, dental, vision, and hearing aid coverage. Overall,
the table indicates that it is common for insurers to vary premiums and benefits across geography in
a given year.

A.5

Plan Benefits: Alternative Specifications

Section 4 describes the effect of BIPA on the generosity of plan benefits. Table 5 and Figure 5 display
the results with only the baseline set of controls. Table A2 shows that these results are robust to
including controls that isolate different subsets of the identifying variation. Odd columns in the table
control for quartiles of the year 2000 base payment interacted with year fixed effects. Even columns
control for urban status of the county interacted with year fixed effects.

54

Appendix

A.6

Plan Benefits: Risk Smoothing

In Section 4, we showed that a $1 increase in payments raised the actuarial value of benefits by
8.7 cents. However, unlike pass-through into premiums, the change in plan generosity might vary
across states of the world. In particular, if the actuarial value of the increase in benefits is larger in
high OOP spending states of the world (where the marginal utility of consumption is higher) than
in low OOP spending states of the world (where the marginal utility of consumption is lower), then
the pass-through into benefits might have additional consumption-smoothing value to consumers
which is not captured by the baseline actuarial value estimate. To quantify the potential importance
of an additional consumption-smoothing value from the increase in plan generosity, we re-estimate
the pass-through into plan benefits separately for individuals with different levels of out-of-pocket
spending and re-weighting the plan benefits pass-through estimates by the marginal utility of consumption across these states of the world.
As discussed in Section 4, we construct our measure of actuarial value using utilization data
(e.g., number of office visits) on the elderly in the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS).
To allow the actuarial value to vary by the size of out-of-pocket (OOP) health shocks, we construct
utilization measures for each quintile of the OOP spending distribution (e.g., number of office visits
in the bottom quintile, second quintile, and so forth of overall OOP spending). We then re-estimate
our actuarial value regression using these different utilization measures. In the following, Figure
A9 shows plots of the effect by quintile; Table A10 shows the parameter estimates. At a three-year
horizon, the effect on actuarial value ranges from 2.0 cents for the bottom quintile of realized utilization to 18.1 cents for the top. The increasing actuarial values indicate that individuals with higher
out-of-pocket spending benefit more from, for example, a reduced copay or drug coverage.
The increasing actuarial values imply that the benefits expansion transfers resources from low
OOP spending states of the world (where the marginal utility of consumption is lower) to high OOP
spending states of the world (where the marginal utility of consumption is higher). This is valuable
to risk averse individuals. If we assume that individuals have CRRA preferences, then the marginal
utility of a benefits expansion at a given OOP spending quintile relative to that of receiving benefits
expansion when you have average OOP spending is given by:
−γ
c − OOPj
Relative marginal utility of consumption =
−γ ,
c − OOP
where c is consumption, OOPj is out-of-pocket spending in quintile j, and OOP is average OOP
spending.
Column 4 of Table A11 displays the relative marginal utility for each OOP spending quintile. We
assume that the coefficient of relative risk aversion is γ = 3 and individuals have consumption of
$26,533, the mean consumption for elderly individuals in the 2000 Consumer Expenditure Survey.
For individuals in the lowest out-of-pocket spending quintile, the marginal utility of consumption
is about 11% less than for those with average out-of-pocket spending; for individuals in the highest
quintile, the marginal utility of consumption is 30% more than for those with average out-of-pocket
spending.
Given these parameters, we can account for risk aversion by calculating the weighted average of
the actuarial value estimates across quintiles, where the weights are the relative marginal utilities of
consumption. Re-weighting in this manner increases the actuarial value by just over 1 cent on the
dollar, from 8.7 cents to 9.8 cents. While a one cent increase is a meaningful relative to the baseline
effect on the actuarial value of pass-through in benefits of 8.7 cents, this increase is small compared
to baseline total pass-through in premiums and plan benefits of 54 cents.
These effects are small because given the observed OOP sending dispersion and plausible as55

Appendix

sumptions about risk aversion, the marginal utility of money varies relatively little in the range of
OOP spending we observe. Generating a meaningful increase in the value of plan benefits passthrough would require an implausibly high level of risk aversion. For instance, increasing the value
by 4.5 cents (or 50% of the baseline actuarial value estimate) would require a risk aversion coefficient
of 10, which is well above the range of estimates in the literature. Thus, we conclude that adjusting
for risk aversion does not have a material effect on our results.

A.7

Plan Quality

In Section 4, we argue that focusing on premiums and benefits such as copays, drug, and dental
coverage captures most of the quantitatively important changes in plan characteristics. In this section,
we show that other observable measures of plan quality are not related to our identifying variation.
We begin by examining three measures of plan quality that were potentially the most salient
because they were reported in the Medicare & You booklet that was mailed to Medicare eligibles on an
annual basis during our time period (Dafny and Dranove, 2008). These are the percentage of enrollees
that rate the quality of care received as a 10 out of 10, the percentage of enrollees who reported
that the doctors in their plan always communicate well, and the mean mammography rate among
eligible female enrollees. The first two measures are taken from an annual independent survey of
Medicare beneficiaries known as the Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Survey (CAHPS). The
third measure is taken from the Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS), which
collects standardized performance measures that plans are required to report to CMS.
Following Dafny and Dranove (2008), we also create an "unreported quality composite" to capture plan quality not reported to Medicare beneficiaries. Specifically, this composite is the average
z-score of three additional HEDIS measures collected by CMS but not reported to beneficiaries: the
percentage of diabetic enrollees who had a retinal examination in the past year, the percentage of
enrollees receiving a beta blocker prescription upon discharge from the hospital after a heart attack,
and the percentage of enrollees who had an ambulatory visit or preventive care visit in the past year.
We are able to construct these plan quality measures for the years 1999 to 2003, with the exception
of the mean mammography rate for which we have data going back to 1997. We repeat our main
specification replacing the dependent variable with these measures of plan quality. The results are
reported in Table A12 and Figure A10. For each of these measures of plan quality, we find there is no
relationship with our identifying variation.

A.8

Baseline Estimation: Alternative Sample Definition

Our baseline estimates described in the text use the unbalanced sample of county-years with MA
plans, including county fixed effects in all of our specifications. Figure 7, described in Section 4, illustrates that there is little evidence of systematic entry or exit from the sample based on our identifying
variation. Still, as a robustness check, we repeat our analysis using the balanced sample of counties
that have an MA plan in every year in our sample, 1997-2003. The balanced panel has 343 counties
per year. Of the counties with MA at some point during our time period, 61% are in the balanced
panel. The balanced panel covers 54% of Medicare beneficiaries and 89% of MA enrollees over the
pooled sample period. The results of baseline regressions repeated on the balanced panel can be
found in Figures A11, A12, A13, A14, A15, A16 and Tables A13, A14, A15, A16 and A17.

A.9

Selection: Alternative Specifications

Section 6 investigates the role of selection in explaining our incomplete pass-through estimates. Table
7 and Figure 9 display the results with the baseline set of controls. Table A3 shows that these results
56

Appendix

are robust to including controls that isolate different subsets of the identifying variation. Columns
2, 5, and 8 in the table control for quartiles of the year 2000 base payment interacted with year fixed
effects. Columns 3, 6, and 9 control for urban status of the county interacted with year fixed effects.
Columns 1, 4, and 7 display the baseline specifications for comparison.
In addition to investigating the impact of alternative controls, we also investigate robustness
with respect to alternative measures of utilization. Figure A17 displays the difference-in-differences
results for three alternative utilization measures: Part A hospital stays, Part A hospital days, and Part
B physician line-item claims. The corresponding estimates are displayed in Table A18. The point
estimates confirm the main finding that there is little selection, and the standard errors allow us to
rule out meaningful degrees of selection in either direction. The effect of BIPA on Part A days and
Part B line-item claims is statistically indistinguishable from zero in each year. The point estimate for
Part A stays is statistically indistinguishable from zero in 2001 and statistically distinguishable from
zero in 2002 and 2003; however, in all years, the magnitude is economically very small. For example,
drawing on the estimates in columns 1, 4, and 7 of Table
 A18, the semi-elasticities of utilization
 with
0.003
respect to MA enrollment for 2003 were 0.39 (= 0.0006
4.74%
)
for
Part
A
stays,
0.28
(=
0.0321
0.2249 4.74%)

0.022
for Part A days, and 0.21 (= 2.187 4.74%) for Part B claims. Overall, these elasticities are similar to
the elasticity implied by our cost estimates discussed in the text.

A.10

Pass-Through Under Risk Adjustment

Equation 7 in Section 5 gives the first-order condition for price setting, ignoring risk adjustment.
To
R
incorporate risk adjustment, let us define the aggregate risk adjustment function R( Q) = v ≥ p−1 (Q) ri ,
i

R( Q)

average risk adjustment AR( Q) ≡ Q , and marginal risk adjustment MR( Q) ≡ R0 ( Q). The regulator sets the subsidy equal to b · AR( Q) so that total payments per capita are p + b · AR( Q). This
generates the following monopolist problem:
h
i
max p + b · AR( Q( p)) Q( p) − C ( Q( p)),
(14)
p

max pQ( p) + b · R( Q( p)) − C ( Q( p)),
p

(15)

where we have substituted AR( Q( p)) · Q( p) = R( Q( p)) between the first and second lines.
The competitive pricing problem simply equates price with average net costs ( AC ( Q) − b · AR( Q)).
As in the main text, we use the parameter θ ∈ [0, 1] to interpolate between the price-setting equations
for perfect competition and monopoly, yielding
h
i
h
i
p = θ µ( p) + MC ( Q) − b · MR( Q) + (1 − θ ) AC ( Q) − b · AR( Q) ,
(16)
Q( p)
denotes the standard absolute markup term and MC ( Q) − b · MR( Q) is
Q0 ( p)
marginal costs net of marginal risk adjustment. Totally differentiating and rearranging Equation 16
results in the pass-through formula in Equation 10.
where µ( p) ≡ −

57

Appendix

A.11

Pass-through in Linear Model

Suppose costs are linear, risk adjustment curves are linear, and demand is linear. In this case, our
main expression for pass-through in Equation 10 simplifies to



ρ = ( AR + θ ( MR − AR)) × 



1
× 1 .
dAC
dAR  1 + θ
1−(
−b
)
dp
dp

(17)

Putting aside the first term, which simply accounts for risk adjustment, the remaining two terms
capture the main mechanisms that determine pass-through: the second term captures the degree
of selection and the third term captures the degree of market power. Thus, in the linear case, we
can think about the the degree of advantageous selection proportionally scaling down the predicted
pass-through for any given level of market power.

A.12

Inferring MA Costs

In Section 6, we claim that the slopes
of MA and TM average cost curves are of opposite sign and pro
MA

TM

under the assumptions that (i) MA and TM costs are proportionally
= −φ dAC
portional dAC
dQ TM
dQ MA
 MA

c
constant ciTM = φ and (ii) average costs under both plans are linear in quantity.
i

The proof is as follows. The assumption that costs are proportional implies that the marginal
individual in MA and TM are proportionally costly: MC MA ( Q MA ) = φMC TM ( Q TM ). This implies
TM dQ TM
TM
dMC MA
= φ dMC
= −φ dMC
, with the last equality from the fact that Q TM = 1 − Q MA .
dQ TM dQ MA
dQ TM
dQ MA
Linearity means we can translate between the slopes of the average and marginal cost functions to
i
MA
TM
i
= 12 dMC
for i ∈ { MA, TM}. Combining this, we get dAC
= −φ dAC
.
get dAC
dQ TM
dQ MA
dQi
dQi

A.13

Pass-Through by Market Concentration: Alternative Specifications

Figure 10 in the main text displays heterogeneity in our pass-through estimates by pre-reform market
concentration for 2003 only. Figure A8 repeats the same analysis for all of the post-reform years. The
figure displays the pass-through point estimates as well as the 95% confidence intervals. Each point
represents a separate regression performed over sub-samples defined by levels of pre-reform market
concentration. Table A5 displays the corresponding regression results as well as results for fullsample regressions that interact the market concentration measures with our floor distance variables
(∆b jt ). Overall, the coefficients show a statistically significant pattern of declining pass-through with
market concentration.

58

Appendix

Counties with MA
Counties with MA &
Binding Floor

Unconditional on MA presence,
median US county contains 4,545
Medicare eligibles in 2000

0

25

50

Number of Counties
75
100
125

150

175

Figure A1: Distribution of Medicare Beneficiaries Across Counties

<1K

1-2K

2-4K

4-8K

8-16K

16-32K

32-64K

>64K

Number of Beneficiaries in County
Note: Figure shows the distribution of the number of beneficiaries for counties with MA, and those additionally with
binding BIPA floors. The sample is the 680 counties that include 67% of the Medicare population in 2000.

59

(A) Floor Distance, All Rural Counties

(B) Floor Distance, Rural Counties with MA

(C) Floor Distance, All Urban Counties

(D) Floor Distance, Urban Counties with MA

Tercile 3, > $61
Tercile 2, $39 - $61
Tercile 1, < $39
Floor not binding
Not rural

Tercile 3, > $75
Tercile 2, $37 - $75
Tercile 1, < $37
Floor not binding
Not urban

60
Tercile 3, > $61
Tercile 2, $39 - $61
Tercile 1, < $39
Floor not binding
Not rural

Tercile 3, > $75
Tercile 2, $37 - $75
Tercile 1, < $37
Floor not binding
Not urban

Note: Map shows the geography of the identifying variation across urban and rural counties. Counties are binned according to their tercile of distance-tofloor, separately for rural counties (Panels A and B) and urban counties (Panels C and D). Panels B and D condition on our main analysis sample, which
includes counties with an MA plan in at least one year of the 1997-2003 study period. Legends indicate the bin ranges, and counties for which the floors
were not binding are shaded white. The distance-to-floor variable, which describes the payment shock between 2000 and 2001, is defined precisely in
Equation (2) and is graphically illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1. Base payments in this figure are not adjusted for inflation and are not normalized
for the sample average demographic risk adjustment factor. Alaska and Hawaii are excluded from these maps but included in all of the other analysis.
Inclusive of AK and HI, the sample in the left two panels is 3,143 counties that include 100% of the Medicare population in 2000. The sample in the right
two panels is 880 counties that include 73% of the Medicare population in 2000.

Appendix

Figure A2: Effect of BIPA on County Base Payments

Appendix

Figure A3: Premium Pass-Through with Pre-BIPA Payment × Year Fixed Effects

0
Median Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
-1.25

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(B) Median

.25

(A) Mean

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

(D) Maximum

-1.25

-1.25

-1

-1

Max Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

Min Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

0

.25

.25

(C) Minimum

1999

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

Note: Figure is identical to Figure 4, except that all specifications include quartiles of year 2000 county base payments
interacted with year indicators as additional controls. See Figure 4 note for more details.

61

Appendix

Figure A4: Premium Pass-Through with Urban × Year Fixed Effects

0
Median Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
-1.25

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(B) Median

.25

(A) Mean

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

2002

2003

(D) Maximum

-1.25

-1.25

-1

-1

Max Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

Min Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

0

.25

.25

(C) Minimum

1999

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

Note: Figure is identical to Figure 4, except that all specifications include urban status interacted with year indicators
as additional controls. See Figure 4 note for more details.

62

Appendix

Figure A5: Premium Pass-Through (Other Measures): Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly
Payments

-1.25

-1

Median Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(A) Median

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

0
Max Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
-1.25

-1.25

-1

Min Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(C) Maximum

.25

(B) Minimum

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change
in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on
a dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variables are median monthly premiums (Panel A), minimum monthly
premiums (Panel B), and maximum monthly premiums (panel C). The unit of observation is the county × year,
and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel
of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible
county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The capped vertical
bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Horizontal dashed
lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and -1, where -1 corresponds to 100% pass-through.

63

Appendix

.05

.1

Figure A6: Premium Pass-Through: Detailed Timing of Effects

Mean Premium ($)
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

Jan 2001 premiums are locked-in
by regulator in mid 2000
and do not respond

Ja
n
Fe
b
M
ar
Ap
M r
ay
Ju
n
Ju
Au l
g
Se
p
O
ct
N
ov
D
ec
Ja
n
Fe
b
M
ar
Ap
M r
ay
Ju
n
Ju
Au l
g
Se
p
O
c
N t
ov
D
ec

-.25

-.2

Regulator allows a special
adjustment in response to BIPA;
plans can offer lower
premiums starting Feb 2001

2000

Year

2001

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × month interactions from difference-in-differences regressions
in which the dependent variable is mean premiums. The specification parallels that used in the county × year level
analysis in Figure 4. The figure highlights January 2001, for which premiums were locked-in prior to the passage of
BIPA in December 2000, and February 2001, for which the regulator permitted plans to revise premiums in response
to BIPA. See Appendix Section A.2 for full details. The unit of observation is the county × month, and observations
are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. Monthly data are not available for all plan years that
comprise our main analysis.

64

Appendix

Figure A7: Availability of At Least Two Plans: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments

1

(A) Unbalanced Sample

0

.2

Number of Plans>two
.4
.6

.8

County X years: 4262

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

(B) Balanced Sample

0

.2

Number of Plans>two
.4
.6
.8

1

County X years: 2548

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The
dependent variable in both panels is an indicator for at least two MA plans. The sample in Panel A is the unbalanced
panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible
county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. The sample in Panel B is the balanced panel of county-years with
at least one MA plan in each year between 1997 and 2003. This sample includes 2,548 of 22,001 possible county-years
and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The capped vertical bars show 95%
confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. The horizontal dashed lines are
plotted at the sample means, which are added to the coefficients.

65

Appendix

Figure A8: Pass-Through and Market Concentration, 2001 to 2003

Highest

0
Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
-1.25

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(B) By Insurer Count, 2001

.25

(A) By HHI, 2001

Middle
Pre-BIPA HHI Tercile

Lowest

1

.25
0
-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0
Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
-1.25

Highest

Middle
Pre-BIPA HHI Tercile

Lowest

1

2
Pre-BIPA Insurer Count

3+

0
Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
-1.25

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(F) By Insurer Count, 2003

.25

(E) By HHI, 2003

Highest

3+

(D) By Insurer Count, 2002

.25

(C) By HHI, 2002

2
Pre-BIPA Insurer Count

Middle
Pre-BIPA HHI Tercile

Lowest

1

2
Pre-BIPA Insurer Count

3+

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions for plan years 2001 through 2003 from several difference-in-differences regressions. The dependent variable is the mean premium defined as in Figure 4. Each
point represents a coefficient from a separate regression in which the estimation sample is stratified by market concentration in the pre-BIPA period. In Panel A, counties are binned according to the tercile of insurer HHI in plan
year 2000. In Panel B, counties are binned according to the number of insurers operating in the county in plan year
2000. Competition increases to the right of both panels. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. While the analysis is conducted on segments of the
data, the underlying sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to
2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are
identical to those in Figure A11. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard
errors clustered at the county level. Horizontal dashed lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and -1, where -1
corresponds to 100% pass-through.

66

Appendix

Figure A9: Actuarial Value of Benefits: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments, by
Quintile of Out-of-Pocket Spending

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75
0

0

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

(B) Second Quintile

1

(A) Bottom Quintile

2000

2001

2002

Year

2003

2000

Year

2002

2003

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75
0

0

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

(D) Fourth Quintile

1

(C) Third Quintile

2001

2000

2001

2002

Year

2003

2000

2001

Year

2002

2003

0

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

(E) Top Quintile

2000

2001

Year

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change
in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of a $1 increase in monthly payments.
The dependent variable is the actuarial value of benefits for a given quintile of out-of-pocket spending, which is
constructed based on observed plan benefits in our main analysis dataset and utilization and cost data from the
2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. See text for full details. The unit of observation is the county × year,
and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel
of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 2000 to 2003. This sample includes 2,250 of 12,572 possible
county-years and 62% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. The capped vertical
bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Horizontal dashed
lines are plotted at 0 and 1.

67

Appendix

Figure A10: Plan Quality: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments
(B) Doctor Communication

Pre-BIPA Mean: 49.1

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Percentage Bene Said Doctors Always Communicate Well
-10
-5
0
5
10

Percentage Bene Rated Care Provided as a 10 of 10
-10
-5
0
5
10

(A) Quality of Care

Pre-BIPA Mean: 67.9

1999

-10

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Percentage Bene Said Doctors Always Communicate Well
-10
-5
0
5
10

Pre-BIPA Mean: 73.59

1997

2001
Year

2002

2003

(D) Unreported Quality Composite

Mean Mammography Rate
-5
0
5

10

(C) Mammography Rate

2000

Pre-BIPA Mean: 67.9

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variables are the mean percentage of beneficiaries that rate the quality
of care received as a 10 out of 10 (Panel A), mean percentage of beneficiaries that report that the doctors in their
plan always communicate well (Panel B), mean mammography rate (Panel C), and an unreported quality composite
described in the text (Panel D). We have data on these measures from 1999 through 2003, with the exception of the
mean mammography rate for which we have data going back to 1997. The unit of observation is the county × year,
and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. In Panels A, B, and D, the sample is the
unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of
15,715 possible county-years and 63% of all Medicare beneficiaries. In Panel C, the sample is the unbalanced panel
of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible
county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure 3. In all the panels, the
vertical axes measures the effect on the dependent variable of a $50 difference in monthly payments. The capped
vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Year 2000,
which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. The horizontal dashed line is plotted at 0.

68

Appendix

-.25

0

Base Payment ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

1.25

Figure A11: First-Stage Effect on Base Payments: Impact of $1 Increase in Distance-to-Floor,
Balanced Sample of Counties

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows coefficients on the distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions
with the monthly base payments as the dependent variable. The unit of observation is the county × year, and
observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the balanced sample of
county-years with at least one MA plan in each year between 1997 and 2003. This sample includes 2,548 out of 22,001
possible county-years and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls include year and county fixed effects as well
as flexible controls for the 1998 payment floor introduction and the blended payment increase in 2000. The capped
vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Year 2000,
which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category and denoted with a vertical dashed line.
Horizontal dashed lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and 1.

69

Appendix

Figure A12: Premium Pass-Through: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced
Sample of Counties

0
Min Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25
-1
1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

-1.25

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(B) Minimum

.25

(A) Mean

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

-2

Zero Premium (%)
0
2

4

(C) Percent Zero

1997

1998

1999

2000
Year

2001

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
The first-stage results displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change
in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a
dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variables are mean monthly premiums weighted by enrollment in the plan
(Panel A), minimum monthly premiums (Panel B), and the percentage of plans in the county with zero premiums
(Panel C). The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries
in the county. The sample is the balanced sample of county-years with at least one MA plan in each year between
1997 and 2003. This sample includes 2,548 out of 22,001 possible county-years and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries.
Controls are identical to those in Figure A11. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated
using standard errors clustered at the county level. Horizontal dashed lines in Panels A and B are plotted at the
reference values of 0 and -1, where -1 corresponds to 100% pass-through.

70

Appendix

Figure A13: Benefits Generosity: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced
Sample of Counties

2

(B) Specialist Copay

2

(A) Physician Copay

-6
-8

-8

-6

Specialist Copay ($)
-4
-2

Physician Copay ($)
-4
-2

0

Pre-BIPA Mean: $10.98

0

Pre-BIPA Mean: $7.15

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

2001

Year

2003

30

(D) Dental Coverage
Pre-BIPA Mean: 28%

0
-10

-10

0

Dental Coverage (%)
10
20

Pre-BIPA Mean: 75%

Drug Coverage (%)
10
20

30

(C) Drug Coverage

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

2001

Year

2002

2003

Year

(F) Hearing Aid Coverage
40

(E) Vision Coverage

Pre-BIPA Mean: 47%

Hearing Aid Coverage (%)
10
20
30

Pre-BIPA Mean: 78%

-10

-10

0

Vision Coverage (%)
0
10
20

30

2002
Year

2000

2001

2002
Year

2003

2000

2001

2002
Year

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variables are physician copays in dollars (Panel A), specialist copays in
dollars (Panel B), and indicators for coverage of: outpatient prescription drugs (Panel C), dental (Panel D), corrective lenses (Panel E), and hearing aids (Panel F). The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are
weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the balanced sample of county-years with at
least one MA plan in each year between 2000 and 2003. This sample includes 1,772 out of 12,572 possible countyyears and 57% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure A11. In Panels A and B, the
vertical axes measure the effect on copays in dollars of a $50 difference in monthly payments. In Panels C through
F, the vertical axes measure the effect on the probability that a plan offers each benefit, again for a $50 difference in
monthly payments. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. The
horizontal dashed line is plotted at 0.
71

2003

Appendix

0

Actuarial Value of Benefits ($)
.25
.5
.75

1

Figure A14: Actuarial Value of Benefits: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced Sample of Counties

2000

2001

2002

2003

Year

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
The first-stage results displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change
in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on
a dollar-for-dollar basis. The dependent variable is the actuarial value of benefits, which is constructed based on
observed plan benefits in our main analysis dataset and utilization and cost data from the 2000 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey. See text for full details. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted
by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the balanced sample of county-years with at least one
MA plan in each year between 2000 and 2003. This sample includes 1,772 out of 12,572 possible county-years and
57% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure A11. The capped vertical bars show
95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Horizontal dashed lines are
plotted at 0 and 1.

72

Appendix

Figure A15: Selection: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced Sample of
Counties

40

(B) TM Costs
Pre-BIPA Mean: $493.53

Average TM Cost ($)
0
20

Pre-BIPA Mean: 33.39%

-5

-40

-20

MA Enrollement (%)
0
5

10

(A) MA Enrollment

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Pre-BIPA Mean: $495.16

-40

Average MA Demographic Risk Payment ($)
-20
0
20
40

(C) MA Risk Adjustment

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The
dependent variables are MA enrollment (Panel A), Traditional Medicare costs (Panel B), and mean demographic risk
payments for MA enrollees (Panel C). The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted
by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the balanced panel of county-years with at least one MA
plan in each year between 1999 and 2003. This sample includes 2,055 out of 15,715 possible county-years and 56%
of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those in Figure A11. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. The horizontal dashed lines indicate
zero effects.

73

Appendix

Figure A16: Pass-Through and Market Concentration, Balanced Sample of Counties

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(A) Insurer HHI

Highest

Middle
Pre-BIPA HHI Tercile

Lowest

-1.25

-1

Mean Premium ($)
-.75
-.5
-.25

0

.25

(B) Insurer Count

1

2
Pre-BIPA Insurer Count

3+

Note: Figure shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year 2003 interactions from several difference-in-differences
regressions. The dependent variable is the mean premium defined as in Figure 4. Each point represents a coefficient
from a separate regression in which the estimation sample is stratified by market concentration in the pre-BIPA
period. In Panel A, counties are binned according to the tercile of insurer HHI in plan year 2000. In Panel B, counties
are binned according to the number of insurers operating in the county in plan year 2000. Competition increases to
the right of both panels. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number
of beneficiaries in the county. While the analysis is conducted on segments of the data, the underlying sample is
the balanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan in each year between 1997 and 2003. This sample
includes 2,548 of 22,001 possible county-years and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Controls are identical to those
in Figure A11. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered
at the county level. Horizontal dashed lines are plotted at the reference values of 0 and -1, where -1 corresponds to
100% pass-through.

74

Appendix

Figure A17: Utilization: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments

.04

(B) Part A Days

Pre-BIPA Mean: 0.03

Pre-BIPA Mean: 0.23

-.04

-.004

-.02

Average Part A Days
0
.02

Average Part A Stays
-.002
0
.002

.004

(A) Part A Stays

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Pre-BIPA Mean: 2.22

-.4

Average Part B Line-Item Claims
-.2
0
.2

.4

(C) Part B Line-Item Claims

1999

2000

2001
Year

2002

2003

Note: Figure shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The
dependent variables are Part A hospital stays (Panel A), Part A hospital days (Panel B), and Part B physician lineitem claims (Panel C). The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number
of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over
years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible county-years and 63% of all Medicare beneficiaries.
Controls are identical to those in Figure A11. The capped vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals calculated
using standard errors clustered at the county level. The horizontal dashed lines indicate zero effects.

75

Median Monthly Premium ($)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Dependent Variable:
Minimum Monthly Premium ($)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Maximum Monthly Premium ($)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Δb X 2001

-0.281
(0.059)

-0.264
(0.115)

-0.287
(0.060)

-0.262
(0.057)

-0.152
(0.093)

-0.264
(0.058)

-0.361
(0.080)

-0.185
(0.129)

-0.385
(0.081)

Δb X 2002

-0.549
(0.074)

-0.449
(0.145)

-0.559
(0.076)

-0.452
(0.072)

-0.325
(0.131)

-0.463
(0.072)

-0.452
(0.068)

-0.335
(0.134)

-0.465
(0.068)

Δb X 2003

-0.492
(0.085)

-0.409
(0.149)

-0.495
(0.086)

-0.417
(0.084)

-0.284
(0.140)

-0.420
(0.086)

-0.365
(0.077)

-0.241
(0.132)

-0.364
(0.078)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

76

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

12.10
0.66

12.10
0.66

12.10
0.66

X
X

6.67
0.66

6.67
0.66

6.67
0.66

X
20.02
0.68

20.02
0.68

20.02
0.68

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage
results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the
coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations
are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The county-level measures are constructed using plan-level data weighted by plan enrollment.
The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible
county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are
identical to those in Table 3. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses.

Appendix

Table A1: Premium Pass-Through (Other Measures): Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments

Appendix

Table A2: Benefits Generosity: Impact of Increase in Monthly Payments, Alternative Specifications
Dependent Variable:
Dental Coverage
Drug Coverage (%)
(%)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Physician Copay
($)
(1)
(2)

Specialist Copay
($)
(3)
(4)

Δb X 2001*

0.11
(0.93)

-0.08
(0.62)

0.15
(0.98)

0.52
(0.72)

-4.30
(9.57)

0.67
(4.27)

-1.94
(5.28)

3.72
(3.79)

6.28
(8.33)

3.21
(4.59)

16.24
(5.75)

17.91
(4.46)

-0.04
(0.10)

0.02
(0.05)

Δb X 2002*

-3.20
(1.12)

-1.96
(0.70)

-3.80
(1.18)

-2.81
(0.83)

-0.74
(8.38)

0.61
(4.76)

2.97
(7.22)

6.79
(4.54)

-0.82
(11.09)

3.35
(6.65)

18.28
(6.85)

22.65
(5.40)

0.05
(0.09)

0.06
(0.05)

Δb X 2003*

-1.53
(1.27)

-2.82
(0.68)

-2.31
(1.47)

-3.35
(0.98)

-3.69
(7.66)

4.95
(4.46)

-2.64
(8.21)

1.70
(3.71)

0.28
(11.36)

2.43
(6.65)

22.18
(7.63)

23.68
(5.21)

-0.01
(0.08)

0.11
(0.05)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE

77

Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

7.29
0.68

7.29
0.68

X
X

11.13
0.70

11.13
0.70

X
X

73.62
0.83

73.62
0.83

Vision Coverage
(%)
(9)
(10)

X
X

25.77
0.68

25.77
0.67

Hearing Aid
Coverage (%)
(11)
(12)

X
X

75.68
0.75

75.68
0.74

Actuarial Value ($)
(13)
(14)

X
X

42.58
0.83

42.58
0.83

X
n/a
0.82

n/a
0.82

Note: Table shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation
includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity.
The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can
interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. In columns 1 to 12, the dependent variables are
measures of benefit generosity, and the coefficient on distance-to-floor is scaled by $50. In columns 13 and 14, the dependent variable is the monthly
actuarial value of benefits, and the coefficient on distance-to-floor is not rescaled. See text for details on the construction of the monthly actuarial value
of benefits. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the
unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 2000 to 2003. This sample includes 2,250 of 12,572 possible county-years and 62%
of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table
3. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.
? Impact

of $50 increase in columns 1 to 12. Impact of $1 increase in columns 13 and 14.

Appendix

Table A3: Selection: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments, Alternative Specifications
Dependent Variable:
MA Enrollment (%)
TM Costs ($)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Yearly BIPA Effect

MA Risk Adjustment ($)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Δb X 2001

0.86
(0.60)

1.74
(1.07)

0.86
(0.61)

-3.05
(1.67)

1.57
(2.00)

-3.36
(1.73)

-1.36
(0.48)

-0.58
(0.67)

-1.50
(0.51)

Δb X 2002

3.32
(0.83)

2.88
(1.27)

3.61
(0.84)

-0.88
(3.41)

3.79
(3.95)

-1.11
(3.52)

-2.42
(0.59)

-2.88
(0.93)

-2.53
(0.61)

Δb X 2003

4.74
(0.90)

3.72
(1.41)

5.12
(0.91)

3.54
(3.73)

4.71
(3.46)

3.56
(3.85)

-3.43
(0.81)

-4.60
(1.33)

-3.58
(0.84)

4.11
(2.60)

-0.14
(2.91)

-2.83
(0.59)

-2.87
(0.91)

-2.98
(0.62)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Panel B: Pooled Post-BIPA Effect
Δb X Post-BIPA

3.29
(0.71)

3.47
(1.22)

3.48
(0.72)

-0.05
(2.80)

Controls: All Panels
Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

30.19

30.19

X
X

30.19

483.32

483.32

483.32

X
484.25

484.25

484.25

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions.
Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients
for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1
change in distance-to-floor translates into a dollar-for-dollar change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret
the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled
to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The unit of observation is the county × year, and
observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of
county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible
county-years and 63% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is
the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table A13. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000
using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

78

Appendix

Table A4: Selection: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments, by Pre-Reform Insurer
Market Power

MA Enrollment (%)
(1)

Δb X 2003

Selection:
Slope of AC Curve
($)

Selection:
Slope of AC Curve
Net of Risk
Adjustment ($)

(4)

(5)

-3.43
(0.81)

75
(81.1)

147
(81.6)

-7.42
(3.93)

-4.24
(1.01)

-257
(306.3)

-110
(275.5)

16.50
(10.15)

-4.41
(1.42)

284
(214.3)

361
(218.1)

4.29
(5.13)

-1.94
(1.31)

89
(128.6)

129
(134.2)

TM Costs ($)

MA Risk
Adjustment ($)

(2)
(3)
Panel A: Baseline (Full Sample)

4.74
(0.90)

3.54
(3.73)
Panel B: By HHI Tercile

Highest Tercile (Most Concentrated)
Δb X 2003
2.89
(0.87)
Middle Tercile
Δb X 2003
5.80
(1.40)
Lowest Tercile
Δb X 2003
4.82
(1.68)

Panel C: By Number of Insurers
One Insurer
Δb X 2003
Two Insurers
Δb X 2003
Three or More Insurers
Δb X 2003

2.89
(0.87)

-7.42
(3.93)

-4.24
(1.01)

-257
(306.3)

-110
(275.5)

3.54
(1.42)

12.13
(6.77)

-2.55
(1.34)

342
(1640.0)

414
(1890.0)

7.20
(2.05)

0.90
(6.69)

-2.36
(1.68)

13
(109.5)

45
(108.2)

Note: Columns 1 through 3 show coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences
regressions, scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for 2003 above for brevity. The
first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a dollar-for-dollar
change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments
on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the
number of beneficiaries in the county. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible county-years and 63% of all
Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls
are identical to those in Table A13. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust
standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. Columns 4 reports the implied slope of
the average cost curve before considering risk adjustment: dAC/db
dq/db . Column 5 reports the slope of the average cost
MA

curve incorporating risk adjustment: dAC
dq
bootstrap method using 200 iterations.

−b

dAR MA
dq .

Standard errors for the last 2 columns are calculated by the

79

Appendix

Table A5: Pass-Through and Market Concentration, 2001 to 2003
Subsample, by 2000 HHI Tercile
Q3
Q2
Q1
(1)
(2)
(3)

Dependent Variable: Mean Premium
Subsample, by 2000 Insurer Count
1
2
3+
(4)
(5)
(6)

Full Sample
(7)

(8)

Δb X 2001

-0.148
(0.100)

-0.341
(0.111)

-0.375
(0.081)

-0.148
(0.100)

-0.359
(0.087)

-0.424
(0.103)

-0.104
(0.142)

-0.103
(0.144)

Δb X 2002

-0.152
(0.106)

-0.484
(0.128)

-0.723
(0.082)

-0.152
(0.106)

-0.513
(0.099)

-0.850
(0.109)

0.106
(0.150)

0.155
(0.158)

Δb X 2003

-0.132
(0.138)

-0.400
(0.141)

-0.626
(0.101)

-0.132
(0.138)

-0.448
(0.122)

-0.735
(0.128)

0.120
(0.191)

0.113
(0.201)

Δb X 2001 X HHI Tercile

-0.095
(0.062)

Δb X 2002 X HHI Tercile

-0.281
(0.065)

Δb X 2003 X HHI Tercile

-0.254
(0.082)

Δb X 2001 X Contract Count

-0.110
(0.069)

Δb X 2002 X Contract Count

-0.332
(0.075)

Δb X 2003 X Contract Count

-0.280
(0.093)

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

19.53
0.70

11.60
0.71

10.47
0.72

19.53
0.70

11.56
0.70

10.20
0.75

12.58
0.72

12.58
0.72

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. The
dependent variable throughout the table is mean premiums. In columns 1 through 6, each column represents the main
specification applied to a different subsample defined by pre-BIPA market concentration. In columns 7 and 8, the full sample is used and HHI terciles and contract counts are interacted with the distance-to-floor variables as continuous measures.
Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for
the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change
in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect
of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. While the analysis is conducted on segments of the
data, the underlying sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003.
This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the
year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table A13. All monetary
values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in
parentheses.

80

Appendix

Table A6: Premium Pass-Through: Plan-Level Analysis of Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly
Payments
Dependent Variable: Monthly Premium ($)
Linear Regression
Tobit Regression
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

Δb X 2001

-0.296
(0.054)

-0.292
(0.089)

-0.307
(0.055)

-0.417
(0.010)

-0.373
(0.015)

-0.445
(0.010)

Δb X 2002

-0.505
(0.059)

-0.538
(0.105)

-0.517
(0.059)

-0.644
(0.008)

-0.661
(0.011)

-0.664
(0.008)

Δb X 2003

-0.446
(0.070)

-0.450
(0.118)

-0.449
(0.071)

-0.575
(0.009)

-0.480
(0.009)

-0.585
(0.009)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

12.58
0.60

12.58
0.60

12.58
0.60

X
12.58
N/A

12.58
N/A

12.58
N/A

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in
Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so
we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
The unit of observation is the plan × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in
the plan. The sample is the unbalanced panel of 7,386 MA plan-years over years 1997 to 2003. This sample
includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. The final three columns
display results from a Tobit regression, which explicitly takes into account the fact that plans could not give
rebates (charge negative premiums) during our sample period. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA
implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table 3. All monetary values are
inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in
parentheses.

81

Appendix

Table A7: Mean Premiums by Size of Payment Increase and Year
Mean Premium ($)
Year
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

No Change in Payment
6.44
8.91
1.54
10.82
27.74
39.79
41.59

$1-$50 Payment Increase
10.18
10.84
6.04
23.34
35.14
36.57
41.39

≥ $51 Payment Increase
25.81
29.96
23.79
40.12
42.76
45.82
50.52

Note: Table shows mean premiums by year in three subsets of counties: counties with no BIPA-induced payment change,
counties with a payment increase of $1-$50 , and counties with a payment increase of greater than or equal to $51. While
the summary statistics is displayed by subsets of the data, the underlying sample is the unbalanced panel of 7,386 MA
plan-years over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare
beneficiaries.

82

Appendix

Table A8: Premium Pass-Through: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments, Including
FFS Costs Controls

(1)

Dependent Variable: Mean Monthly Premium ($)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

Δb X 2001

-0.305
(0.053)

-0.197
(0.092)

-0.316
(0.054)

-0.305
(0.053)

-0.196
(0.092)

-0.316
(0.054)

Δb X 2002

-0.495
(0.058)

-0.371
(0.119)

-0.507
(0.058)

-0.495
(0.058)

-0.370
(0.119)

-0.506
(0.058)

Δb X 2003

-0.436
(0.069)

-0.325
(0.122)

-0.438
(0.070)

-0.436
(0.069)

-0.325
(0.122)

-0.438
(0.070)

Per capita FFS costs

-0.035
(0.037)

-0.043
(0.036)

-0.036
(0.037)
-0.031
(0.038)

-0.040
(0.038)

-0.032
(0.038)

X
X

X
X

X
X

Per capita FFS costs excluding IME and DSH

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

12.58
0.73

12.58
0.73

12.58
0.73

X
12.58
0.73

12.58
0.73

12.58
0.73

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in
Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so
we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries
in the county. The county-level measures are constructed using plan-level data weighted by plan enrollment.
The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This
sample includes 4,262 of 22,001 possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which
is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table 3, in
addition to per capita FFS costs. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust
standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

83

Appendix

Table A9: Within-Insurer Variation in Plan Characteristics in Year 2000
Premiums	  ($)
Mean	  
SD
Physician	  Copay	  ($)
Mean	  
SD
Specialist	  Copay	  ($)
Mean	  
SD
Drug	  Coverage	  (%)
Mean
SD
Dental	  Coverage	  (%)
Mean	  
SD
Vision	  Coverage	  (%)
Mean	  
SD
Hearing	  Aid	  Coverage	  (%)
Mean	  
SD

AETNA

CIGNA

Kaiser

Pacificare

United

36.33
31.49

17.74
19.14

20.54
30.38

23.30
24.49

5.07
11.32

10.00
0.00

9.84
0.90

8.93
3.02

7.18
2.26

10.24
6.16

16.10
2.08

16.61
5.06

11.30
5.43

7.76
4.10

12.07
6.44

1.00
0.00

1.00
0.00

0.96
0.04

0.79
0.17

0.65
0.23

0.02
0.02

0.13
0.11

0.35
0.23

0.18
0.15

0.01
0.01

1.00
0.00

0.10
0.09

0.96
0.04

0.88
0.10

0.41
0.24

0.70
0.21

0.16
0.14

0.09
0.08

0.37
0.23

0.11
0.10

Note: Table shows the within-insurer variation in premiums and benefits for the largest five insurers in the MA market in
year 2000.

84

Appendix

Table A10: Actuarial Value of Benefits: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments, by
Quintile of Out-of-Pocket Spending
Dependent Variable: Actuarial Value ($), by Total OOP Expenditure
Bottom
Quintile
(1)

Second
Quintile
(2)

Third
Quintile
(3)

Fourth
Quintile
(4)

Top
Quintile
(5)

Δb X 2001*

0.002
(0.007)

0.008
(0.034)

0.010
(0.046)

0.022
(0.066)

0.063
(0.098)

Δb X 2002*

0.014
(0.007)

0.037
(0.036)

0.044
(0.049)

0.066
(0.070)

0.132
(0.105)

Δb X 2003*

0.020
(0.007)

0.065
(0.033)

0.077
(0.045)

0.106
(0.065)

0.181
(0.096)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

0.80

0.82

0.82

0.82

0.81

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
R-Squared

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in
Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so
we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
The dependent variable is the actuarial value of benefits for a given quintile of out-of-pocket spending, which
is constructed based on observed plan benefits in our main analysis dataset and utilization and cost data from
the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are
weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years
with at least one MA plan over years 2000 to 2003. This sample includes 2,250 of 12,572 possible county-years
and 62% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted
category. Controls are identical to those in Table 3. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the
CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

85

Appendix

Table A11: Re-weighted Actuarial Value of Benefits: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments
Actuarial Value of
Benefits
Expansions
(1)

Mean OOP
Spending
(2)

Relative MU of
Consumption
(3)

Bottom
Second
Third
Fourth
Top

0.020
0.065
0.077
0.106
0.181

$48
$282
$579
$1,135
$3,176

0.891
0.915
0.947
1.011
1.300

Average

0.090

$1,044

1.000

OOP
Spending
Quintile

Reweighted
Actuarial Value
(4)

0.098

Note: Table shows how the actuarial value of benefits changes when reweighted based on the marginal utility
of consumption. Rows correspond to quintiles of the OOP spending distribution among the elderly in the 2000
MEPS. Column 1 reproduces the estimates from Table A10 for the year 2003. Column 2 lists the mean OOP
spending in each quintile. Column 3 lists the marginal utility for each quintile, relative to marginal utility at
the mean of OOP spending, given the assumptions on risk aversion and consumption described in Section A.6.
Column 4 re-weights the overall actuarial value by applying the marginal utilities in column 3 to the actuarial
values in column 1. See Section A.6 for additional details.

86

Percentage beneficiaries report overall
quality of care is 10 out of 10
(1)
(2)
(3)

Dependent Variable:
Percentage beneficiaries report doctors
Mean mammography rate
always communicate well
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Unreported quality composite
(10)

(11)

(12)

Δb X 2001

0.053
(0.481)

1.272
(0.817)

0.023
(0.492)

-0.113
(0.339)

0.647
(0.615)

-0.133
(0.344)

0.033
(0.532)

0.004
(0.793)

-0.005
(0.560)

0.219
(0.090)

0.149
(0.138)

0.225
(0.091)

Δb X 2002

0.752
(0.519)

1.209
(0.893)

0.745
(0.525)

0.470
(0.445)

1.306
(0.730)

0.447
(0.450)

-0.707
(0.609)

-0.009
(1.058)

-0.651
(0.614)

0.042
(0.072)

0.054
(0.119)

0.034
(0.073)

Δb X 2003

0.887
(0.506)

1.365
(0.886)

0.879
(0.512)

0.482
(0.448)

1.316
(0.757)

0.461
(0.453)

0.148
(0.618)

0.813
(1.136)

0.245
(0.628)

0.083
(0.071)

0.169
(0.125)

0.073
(0.071)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

50.25
0.92

50.25
0.92

50.25
0.92

X
X

69.20
0.90

69.20
0.90

69.20
0.90

X
X

72.90
0.69

72.90
0.69

72.90
0.69

X
-0.34
0.84

-0.34
0.85

-0.34
0.84

87
Note: Table shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation
includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity.
The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can
interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50
increase in monthly payments. In columns 1 to 12, the dependent variables are measures of mean plan quality, and the coefficient on distance-to-floor is
scaled by $50. See text for details on the construction of the unreported quality composite. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations
are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. In columns 1 to 6 and 10 to 12, the sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at
least one MA plan over years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible county-years and 63% of all Medicare beneficiaries. In columns
7 to 9, the sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan over years 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 4,262 of 22,001
possible county-years and 64% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls
are identical to those in Table 3. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level
(N = 662) are reported in parentheses.

Appendix

Table A12: Plan Quality: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments

Appendix

Table A13: Base Payments: Impact of $1 Increase in Distance-to-the-Floor, Balanced Sample
of Counties
(1)

Dependent Variable: Base Payment ($)
(2)

(3)

Δb X 2001

0.996
(0.001)

0.999
(0.001)

0.997
(0.001)

Δb X 2002

0.995
(0.003)

1.000
(0.003)

0.992
(0.003)

Δb X 2003

0.999
(0.003)

1.000
(0.002)

0.997
(0.003)

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X
X
526.56
0.9999

526.56
0.9999

526.56
0.9999

Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions with the monthly base payments as the dependent variable. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform
years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are
weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the balanced panel of county-years
with at least one MA plan in each year between 1997 and 2003. This sample includes 2,548 out of 22,001
possible county-years and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA
implementation, is the omitted category. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is
the omitted category. Additional controls in column 2 include quartiles of year 2000 county base payments interacted with year indicators and in column 3 include an indicator for urban status interacted
with year indicators. Flexible controls for the 1998 payment floor introduction and 2000 blended payment increase are included in all specifications. These controls are identical to those in Table 3. All
monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the
county level (N = 343) are reported in parentheses.

88

Mean Monthly Premium ($)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Dependent Variable:
Median Monthly Premium ($)
Minimum Monthly Premium ($)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Maximum Monthly Premium ($)
(10)
(11)
(12)

Δb X 2001

-0.392
(0.054)

-0.314
(0.084)

-0.412
(0.055)

-0.383
(0.062)

-0.256
(0.105)

-0.395
(0.063)

-0.332
(0.057)

-0.302
(0.082)

-0.342
(0.059)

-0.488
(0.095)

-0.374
(0.141)

-0.524
(0.098)

Δb X 2002

-0.580
(0.066)

-0.402
(0.109)

-0.607
(0.066)

-0.647
(0.087)

-0.400
(0.126)

-0.672
(0.089)

-0.485
(0.076)

-0.353
(0.119)

-0.508
(0.077)

-0.523
(0.081)

-0.428
(0.138)

-0.550
(0.082)

Δb X 2003

-0.485
(0.076)

-0.363
(0.118)

-0.497
(0.077)

-0.558
(0.097)

-0.333
(0.134)

-0.572
(0.099)

-0.418
(0.090)

-0.353
(0.135)

-0.428
(0.092)

-0.405
(0.087)

-0.405
(0.125)

-0.411
(0.089)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

11.15
0.72

11.15
0.73

11.15
0.73

X
X

10.65
0.67

10.65
0.67

10.65
0.67

X
X

4.54
0.66

4.54
0.66

4.54
0.66

X
19.50
0.69

19.50
0.69

19.50
0.69

89
Note: Table shows coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation
includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above
for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the
monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The unit
of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the balanced
panel of county-years with at least one MA plan in each year between 1997 and 2003. This sample includes 2,548 out of 22,001 possible countyyears and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are
identical to those in Table A13. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the
county level (N = 343) are reported in parentheses.

Appendix

Table A14: Premium Pass-Through: Impact of $1 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced Sample of Counties

Appendix

Table A15: Benefits Generosity: Impact of Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced Sample
of Counties
Dependent Variable:
Drug
Dental
Vision
Hearing Aid
Coverage (%) Coverage (%) Coverage (%) Coverage (%)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Physician
Copay ($)
(1)

Specialist
Copay ($)
(2)

Δb X 2001*

-1.112
(0.434)

-0.318
(0.611)

5.382
(4.267)

5.471
(3.896)

-0.744
(4.509)

18.757
(4.784)

0.084
(0.044)

Δb X 2002*

-2.764
(0.648)

-2.881
(0.823)

2.867
(4.844)

5.841
(4.489)

1.118
(6.839)

23.822
(5.551)

0.091
(0.051)

Δb X 2003*

-3.552
(0.594)

-3.395
(0.980)

6.822
(4.561)

-0.081
(3.680)

-0.100
(6.850)

24.724
(5.377)

0.127
(0.046)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

7.15
0.69

10.98
0.71

74.71
0.82

27.58
0.66

77.81
0.74

46.65
0.83

n/a
0.81

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

Actuarial
Value ($)
(7)

Note: Table shows the scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences
regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we
display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in
Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so
we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. In
columns 1 to 6, the dependent variables are measures of benefit generosity, and the coefficient on distance-to-floor
is scaled by $50. In column 7, the dependent variable is the monthly actuarial value of benefits, and the coefficient
on distance-to-floor is not rescaled. See text for details on the construction of the monthly actuarial value of benefits.
The unit of observation is the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the
county. The sample is the balanced sample of county-years with at least one MA plan in each year between 2000
and 2003. This sample includes 1,772 out of 12,572 possible county-years and 57% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year
2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table
A13. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the
county level (N = 343) are reported in parentheses.
? Impact

of $50 increase in columns 1 to 6. Effect of $1 increase in column 7.

90

At Least One Plan (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Dependent Variable:
Number of Plans
(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

HHI
(8)

(9)

Δb X 2001

-2.044
(1.794)

-3.352
(2.457)

-2.325
(1.777)

0.019
(0.102)

-0.217
(0.192)

0.038
(0.105)

0.022
(0.028)

0.082
(0.050)

0.021
(0.029)

Δb X 2002

-0.621
(2.022)

-6.569
(3.130)

-0.240
(2.041)

0.063
(0.135)

-0.186
(0.199)

0.078
(0.140)

-0.023
(0.034)

0.062
(0.049)

-0.029
(0.035)

Δb X 2003

3.013
(2.209)

-2.601
(3.538)

3.388
(2.226)

0.122
(0.136)

-0.143
(0.205)

0.145
(0.140)

-0.053
(0.037)

0.031
(0.053)

-0.062
(0.038)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

91

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

67.49
0.86

67.49
0.86

67.49
0.86

X
X

2.60
0.66

2.60
0.66

2.60
0.66

X
0.51
0.68

0.51
0.68

0.51
0.68

Note: Table shows scaled coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes
distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage
results displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the
coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase
in monthly payments. The dependent variables are indicator for at least one plan (columns 1 to 3), number of plans conditional on at least one plan
(columns 4 to 6), and Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) with a scale of 0 to 1 (columns 7 to 9). The sample in columns 1 to 3 is the balanced panel of
county-years with non-missing information on base rates and Medicare beneficiaries during 1997 to 2003. This sample includes 21,504 of 22,001 counties
and more than 99.9% of all Medicare beneficiaries. The sample in columns 4 to 9 is the balanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan in each
year between 1997 and 2003. This sample includes 2,548 out of 22,001 possible county-years and 54% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is
the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table A13. All monetary values are inflation adjusted to
2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

Appendix

Table A16: Plan Availability: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced Sample of Counties

Appendix

Table A17: Selection: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments, Balanced Sample of
Counties

MA Enrollment (%)
(1)

Dependent Variable:
MA Risk
TM Costs ($)
Adjustment ($)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Yearly BIPA Effect

Mean Premiums*
($)
(4)

Implied Pass-Through
with Selection (ρ)
(5)

Δb X 2001

0.63
(0.69)

-4.02
(1.84)

-1.04
(0.46)

-0.38
(0.05)

1.13
(0.22)

Δb X 2002

3.64
(0.92)

-0.45
(3.73)

-2.02
(0.62)

-0.52
(0.06)

0.90
(0.15)

Δb X 2003

5.39
(0.99)

4.29
(4.06)

-3.57
(0.79)

-0.44
(0.07)

0.70
(0.12)

-2.82
(0.57)

-0.48
(0.06)

0.86
(0.11)

Panel B: Pooled Post-BIPA Effect
Δb X Post-BIPA

3.49
(0.78)

-0.20
(3.08)
Controls: All Panels

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

33.39

493.53

495.16

10.52

Note: Columns 1 through 4 of this table show coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from differencein-differences regressions. Although the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our
sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (2001-2003) above for brevity. The first-stage results
displayed in Table A13 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a $1 change in the monthly
payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-for-dollar
basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The unit of observation is
the county × year, and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the
balanced panel of county-years with at least one MA plan in each year between 1999 and 2003. This sample includes
2,055 out of 15,715 possible county-years and 56% of all Medicare beneficiaries. Year 2000, which is the year prior
to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table A13. All monetary values
are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in
parentheses. Column 5 reports the implied pass-through in a perfectly competitive market based on the estimates
in the corresponding row (see Section 6 for more details). Standard errors for this implied pass-through estimate are
calculated by the bootstrap method using 200 iterations.
? Impact

of $1 increase in monthly payments shown in column 4.

92

Appendix

Table A18: Utilization: Impact of $50 Increase in Monthly Payments
Dependent Variable:
Part A Days
(4)
(5)
(6)

(1)

Part A Stays
(2)

(3)

Δb X 2001

0.0002
(0.0001)

0.0001
(0.0002)

0.0002
(0.0001)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.001)

0.003
(0.006)

0.001
(0.007)

0.003
(0.007)

Δb X 2002

0.0005
(0.0002)

0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0005
(0.0002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.0010
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.018
(0.012)

0.007
(0.012)

0.018
(0.013)

Δb X 2003

0.0006
(0.0002)

0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0006
(0.0002)

0.003
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

0.003
(0.002)

0.022
(0.014)

0.011
(0.013)

0.022
(0.015)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

93

Main Effects
County FE
Year FE
Additional Controls
Pre-BIPA Payment X Year FE
Urban X Year FE
Pre-BIPA Mean of Dep. Var.
R-Squared

X

X
X

0.032
0.98

0.032
0.98

Part B Line-Item Claims
(7)
(8)
(9)

0.032
0.98

X
X

0.22
0.97

0.22
0.97

0.22
0.97

X
2.19
0.99

2.19
0.99

2.19
0.99

Note: Table shows coefficients on the coefficients on distance-to-floor × year interactions from difference-in-difference regressions. Although
the estimation includes distance-to-floor interactions for all the years in our sample, we display coefficients for the post-reform years (20012003) above for brevity. The first-stage results displayed in Table 3 indicate that a $1 change in distance-to-floor translates into a dollar-fordollar change in the monthly payments, so we can interpret the coefficients as the effect of an increase in monthly payments on a dollar-fordollar basis. Coefficients are scaled to reflect the impact of a $50 increase in monthly payments. The unit of observation is the county × year,
and observations are weighted by the number of beneficiaries in the county. The sample is the unbalanced panel of county-years with at
least one MA plan over years 1999 to 2003. This sample includes 2,892 of 15,715 possible county-years and 63% of all Medicare beneficiaries.
Year 2000, which is the year prior to BIPA implementation, is the omitted category. Controls are identical to those in Table A13. All monetary
values are inflation adjusted to 2000 using the CPI-U. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses.

