NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW MUCH DO EXISTING BORROWERS VALUE MICROFINANCE? EVIDENCE FROM
AN EXPERIMENT ON BUNDLING MICROCREDIT AND INSURANCE
Abhijit Banerjee
Esther Duflo
Richard Hornbeck
Working Paper 20477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20477

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014, Revised September 2017

Previously circulated as "(Measured) Profit is Not Welfare: Evidence from an Experiment on
Bundling Microcredit and Insurance." This project received funding from the National Institutes
of Health (grant PO1 HD061315-04), and received IRB approval from MIT (#0609001924) and
Harvard (#F18180-104). We thank Aparna Krishnan and Prathap Kasina for outstanding
management of this difficult project, and Mahvish Shaukat and Madeline Duhon for tireless
research assistance. For comments and suggestions, we thank David Cutler, Jishnu Das, Pascaline
Dupas, Andrew Foster, Rachel Glennerster, Jon Gruber, Dilip Mookherjee, and Ben Olken. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, and Richard Hornbeck. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Much do Existing Borrowers Value Microfinance? Evidence from an Experiment on
Bundling Microcredit and Insurance
Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, and Richard Hornbeck
NBER Working Paper No. 20477
September 2014, Revised September 2017
JEL No. O12,O16,O19
ABSTRACT
Several recent randomized controlled trials have found only modest effects of microfinance on
consumption and income. However, these studies by design estimate impacts on new clients, so
these modest effects may only have been lower bounds on the gains for more-experienced
borrowers and the longer-run potential for microfinance. We examine the causal impacts of
microfinance on experienced borrowers, and these clients' valuation of their ongoing
microfinance relationship. Our research design uses an episode during which a microfinance
institution modestly increased their clients' fees in randomly selected villages in exchange for a
mandatory health insurance policy (which turned out to be entirely useless due to administrative
failures). Our first result is that this modest increase in fees led to a 22 percentage point (or 30%)
decline in loan renewal in treatment villages, compared to control villages where the policy was
not introduced. Using this randomly generated variation in microfinance participation among
established microfinance borrowers, we find impacts of microfinance that are strikingly similar to
the previous literature: neither business outcomes nor household consumption outcomes were
affected, on average, for the most part. Consistent with some previous studies, there were some
declines in an index of business outcomes and declines in durable goods purchases, but only for
those clients who had a business before microfinance entered the village. By contrast, businesses
that started after microfinance had entered the villages were unaffected in terms of business
outcomes but enjoyed an increase in non-durable goods consumption. This heterogeneity in
effects is consistent with a simple model in which durable goods are lumpy purchases. The high
drop-out from microfinance further suggests that the net gains from microfinance are small for a
substantial share of borrowers. Strikingly, those who had a business before microfinance are as
likely to exit as other borrowers, despite suffering large losses in business earnings as a result,
which raises the possibility of substantial unmeasured costs from running microfinance-funded
businesses.
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E52-540
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu

Richard Hornbeck
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
richard.hornbeck@chicagobooth.edu

Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-544
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/330/history/1766

I

Introduction

Several randomized evaluations of microfinance, from various settings and countries, find no
evidence of a strong positive impact on household consumption, incomes, or social outcomes,
such as female empowerment, health, and education (Crepon et al., 2015; Augsburg et al.,
2015; Tarozzi, Desai and Johnson, 2015; Angelucci, Karlan and Zinman, 2015; Attanasio
et al., 2015; Banerjee et al., 2015b).1 Some have argued, however, that this could be because
these studies generally focus on new clients. This focus on new clients is a consequence of
these studies’ general research design, which takes advantage of the randomized expansion
phase of microfinance. Microfinance institutions (MFIs) usually resist the idea of denying
credit to anyone who wants it once they are officially open for business in the area, and
of course these institutions would be hesitant to randomly stop providing credit to existing
clients. If established clients are systematically better at using microfinance than new clients,
perhaps because it takes time to determine how best to use the credit, then the previous
results could be misleadingly pessimistic about the potential long-run positive impacts from
microfinance once it becomes established.2
This paper describes a randomized evaluation of the impact of microfinance on established
microfinance borrowers. The paper takes advantage of an episode in which established
microfinance clients, in randomly chosen villages in India, became obliged to purchase a
health insurance policy upon renewal of their microfinance loans. As a consequence, many
long-established clients left the microfinance institution and stopped borrowing. This episode
therefore provides an unusual opportunity to examine whether the existing literature on new
clients applies to a very different population of experienced microfinance borrowers. Further,
this focus on established clients allows us to test a conjecture of the existing microfinance
literature: that among those who joined microfinance to finance a business, the treatment
effect of microfinance is very different for clients who joined to finance an existing selfemployment activity as compared to the treatment effect for those who were induced to
start a new activity.
In 2007, in rural Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, one of India’s leading microfinance organizations at the time, SKS Microfinance, began requiring all new and renewing clients to
1

Meager (2016a,b) provides meta-analysis across microfinance studies, and Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman
(2015) summarizes the key findings.
2
Breza and Kinnan (2016) estimate the impact of the loss of microfinance, at the district level, using the
sudden retrenchment of microfinance in Andhra Pradesh, India. In contrast to the relatively modest impact
on borrowers implied by the RCT literature, they find large negative impacts on district level outcomes. They
note that there are two possible explanations for these difference. First, there could be general equilibrium
effects affecting both borrowers and non-borrowers (see also Buera, Kaboski and Shin, 2014). Second, most
of the RCT studies estimate impacts on new borrowers (and on borrowers who may be marginal in other
senses as well).

1

purchase a health insurance policy that provided coverage for catastrophic events, hospitalization, and maternal care. At the beginning of this initiative, for two districts in Northern
Karnataka,3 we coordinated with SKS to leave out randomly some villages from the health
insurance expansion to enable the evaluation of this health insurance product. SKS had
been operating in those districts for over two years, and microfinance was a known product
in the area. We collected data at baseline (before the introduction of the health insurance
requirement), endline, and at regular intervals on a randomly selected sample of existing SKS
clients in 101 “treatment” villages (in which clients became required to purchase insurance)
and 100 “control” villages (in which clients were not required to purchase insurance).4
To the surprise of SKS, the insurance product turned out to be extremely unpopular.
There were anecdotal accounts of client complaints from the beginning. In the course of
events, the insurance scheme was never properly implemented, the relationship between
SKS and the third-party insurer (ICICI-Lombard) soured, and eventually the purchase of
the insurance policy was made voluntary and then later discontinued.
Our first result is that the insurance requirement, and the associated fee, led to a large
decline in loan renewal rates. Administrative data show that loan renewal rates declined
by 22 percentage points (30 percent) in treatment villages compared to control villages
where 75 percent renewed. Self-reported data from clients suggests that few of those who
left SKS obtained microfinance loans from other organizations, even in villages where they
were available, so this led to a net decline of participation in microfinance. The effect is
large: the policy was inexpensive (Rs. 525, compared to a renewal loan size of around Rs.
9,600) and could be rolled into the loan so that it essentially represented a 5.5 percentage
point increase in the interest rate on a base APR of 24%. Even if the clients assigned
zero value to the insurance product, probably rightly, this was not a very large increase
in borrowing costs. Historically in India, before interest rates were capped by the Reserve
Bank, MFIs often charged rates in excess of 30%. The implied price elasticity of microfinance
participation (1.4), however, is comparable to the participation elasticity estimates from
Karlan and Zinman (2016) using experimental variation in the interest rate in Mexico.
Given the failures in the implementation of the insurance scheme mentioned above, and
detailed below, we find unsurprisingly a very precisely estimated but very small impact of
the provision of health insurance on utilization of health care, health care spending, or the
financing of health care. We therefore treat this as a pure microfinance experiment, where
the increased cost of the loan in some villages generated random variation in the continued
3

This region abuts Andhra Pradesh, the location of one of the previous RCTs and the location of the
Breza and Kinnan study.
4
We use the traditional nomenclature of “treatment” and “control” to indicate the new product, even
though in a sense our intervention was to keep a group of villages untouched by the new product.

2

use of MFI loans.
Consistent with the previous literature on microfinance, we find little impact on income,
consumption, social outcomes, or on whether SKS clients continued to own a business or
started a new business. These results are not simply the mechanical consequence of the
fact that these borrowers chose to drop out and so, by revealed preference, did not have
much to gain from microfinance. While the net utility gain from a microfinance loan may
well be small for those who drop out (more on this later), we might still expect changes in
the observed outcomes. After all, those who are borrowing money are either investing the
funds or consuming them and then repaying the loan, and so the loss of that loan should be
reflected in the nature and timing of consumption and/or investment. For business owners,
specifically, the loss of the loan should imply less investment, lower revenues, and less profits
(gross of interest).5
Consistent with this prediction for business owners, we do see a decline in the scale of
businesses and a significant decline in an index of business outcomes (that includes profit,
sales, and employment). Interestingly, these results come entirely from the 80% or so of
business owners at baseline who had a business before SKS started lending and for this
group there is strong evidence for a negative effect on business outcomes. On the other hand,
we find no effect of losing microfinance on those businesses that started after SKS started
lending. Indeed, for this latter group of entrepreneurs, dropping out from microfinance
had a substantial positive effect on consumption and particularly non-durable consumption
(e.g., food). This is similar to the finding in several of the previous studies of microfinance,
which also find positive impacts of microfinance on those whose businesses started before
microfinance was available to them (Banerjee et al., 2015b; Crepon et al., 2015; Augsburg
et al., 2015) even though they, like us, find little or no effect on the general population.
Banerjee et al. (2015a) also compare the businesses that were started after microfinance
was launched in treatment and control areas in Hyderabad and, like us, find no impact on
business outcomes for them. However, this difference combines a possible negative selection
effect (firms started with microfinance money may be less productive) with the potentially
positive effect of getting an extra loan, so the net difference may be zero even if the loan
by itself has a positive effect. By contrast, our estimate compares businesses started after
microfinance both in treatment and control areas, so the selection is exactly the same.
The absence of a treatment effect confirms that getting an extra loan does not make these
households more productive.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In section II, we lay out a simple model
5

Something similar should also be true if they sought out other more expensive sources of borrowing after
the loss of microfinance.

3

that highlights why the impact of losing access to microfinance may vary systematically
across different kinds of households. In section III, we describe the empirical setting. In
section IV, we describe the experimental research design and data collection. Section V
lays out the empirical methodology. We report the results in section VI, which we interpret
further in section VII. Section VIII concludes.
II

Potential Impacts of Exit from Microfinance

In this section we sketch a simple model of consumption and investment choice for households
that are credit constrained. The purpose is to highlight the different responses to the tightening of the credit constraint among households who have been in business for some time, as
compared to those households who are relatively new to business. An important advantage
to our empirical application is our ability to differentiate between these two groups.
II.A

Basic Model

Each consumer “lives” for 2 periods. At the beginning of each period, the consumer can spend
money on two goods that we will call consumption goods and capital goods. Consumption,
denoted by c, is fully divisible and purchases are consumed during the period in which they
are bought. The per-period utility function is given by u(c). We assume that it is defined
only on the positive orthant and that u0 (c) → ∞ as c → 0. There is no discounting.
The capital good comes embodied in two available technologies. Technology 1 is purely
linear: the consumer can invest an amount k in technology 1 in any period and get a return
ak at the end of that period. Technology 2 involves a one-time fixed cost f to be paid in
period 1. If the consumer pays that fixed cost in period 1, and then invests an amount k in
technology 2 in any subsequent period (including the period where in which the fixed cost
is paid) then the consumer receives a return Ak > ak at the end of that period.
Given the increasing returns technology, the model is only well-defined if there is a credit
constraint. Assume that the consumer starts period 1 with wealth zero but can borrow up
to a limit b at the beginning of each period at interest rate r < a which is repaid at the end
of the period. At the end of the first period, the consumer can also save and therefore begins
the next period with wealth w ≥ 0.
II.B

Analysis of the Model

Given the above model setup, the consumer has to decide whether to invest in technology 1
or technology 2. In the former case, the utility will be v(b) = maxw u(b(1 − ar ) − wa ) + u(b(1 −
r
w
)+w). In the latter case, the utility will be V (b) = maxw u(b(1− Ar )− A
−f )+u(b(1− Ar )+w).
a
We can verify that:
Lemma 1: Regardless of the choice of technology (technology 1 or technology 2), it is

4

optimal to set w = 0
Using this lemma, it follows that: for f large enough, i.e., for b(1 − Ar ) − f close enough
to zero, V 0 (b) > v 0 (b). This gives us our first result:
Result 1: as long as f is large enough, given a reduction in b, consumers that are in
the first period of their life will tend to switch from technology 2 to technology 1. When this
happens the consumer’s first period consumption will jump up and second period consumption
will go down.
However, not all consumers will make this switch. Those consumers that have high
enough b to start with will continue to invest in technology 2 and just cut back their first
period consumption. Likewise, consumers that had a low b to start with, and therefore were
never going to choose technology 2, will cut back period 1 consumption.
Result 2: when b drops, consumers in the first period of their life with either very low or
very high initial values b will see a drop in their period 1 consumption.
This result tells us what to expect for the consumers who started their businesses after
SKS started lending in their village. Period 1 consumption may go up or down on average
for these consumers depending on the initial distribution of b (or, if we allowed their initial
wealth to vary, the average impact would also depend on the initial distribution of wealth).
For the households that already had a business before SKS started lending, we assume
that the cut in borrowing happens in the second period of their life. For these households the
only effect is a reduction in k and a resulting fall in second period revenues and consumption.
The reduction will be larger for those households that had adopted technology 2.
Result 3: a reduction in b leads to reduction in investment, business earnings, and consumption for consumers that are in the second period of their lives.
II.C

Discussion

This model is, of course, a vast oversimplification. By ending the story in period 2, the model
rules out the possibility that consumers in the second period of their lives may cut back their
consumption to rebuild their capital stock. This effect would depress their consumption even
further. On the other hand, consumers may borrow to buy indivisible consumption goods.
In this case, dropping microfinance might lead them to substitute divisible consumption for
non-divisible consumption. While our data do not directly distinguish between these two
categories, it is reasonable to assume that most durable goods are more indivisible and most
non-durable goods are more divisible. There is one important exception, however, which is
weddings and other celebrations and which tend to be somewhat indivisible without being
durable.
The model also rules out all selection effects. It is plausible that those who started their

5

business before SKS arrived, when relatively inexpensive credit became available, are on
average self-selected on being more productive and/or more committed to being in business.
If this is the case, then the effect of dropping microfinance may be stronger among the preSKS businesses even if there is no indivisibility in production because the marginal product
of capital is higher for those people. However, if there is no indivisibility then we should
not see a jump up in consumption in either period in treatment villages that experience
decreased microfinance borrowing.
III

The Context: Bundling of Credit and Insurance

In 2006, SKS Microfinance decided that it should offer health insurance to its clients. At that
time, SKS was the largest MFI in India and sought to leverage its administrative advantage
in dealing with low-income clients spread across rural areas of India. While ICICI-Lombard
would provide the back-end insurance, SKS would administer enrollment and the initial
processing of claims.
In June 2007, SKS began requiring loan clients to purchase health insurance across most
of their area of operation. We persuaded them to use the expansion for a randomized
evaluation of the insurance product in 201 candidate villages with SKS presence in two
districts of Northern Karnataka.6 In 100 randomly selected villages (the control group),
they continued with business as usual. In the remaining 101 villages (the treatment group)
insurance subscription would become mandatory for clients at the time of loan renewal. The
typical health insurance policy cost Rs. 525 (approximately $13 at 2007 exchange rates),
which was loaded into the amount of the loan and paid in weekly installments along with
the loan payments. By way of comparison, the average renewal loan size was Rs. 9,600.7
The insurance premium thus represented a 5.5 percentage point increase in the interest rate,
which was roughly 24% APR at the time. The health insurance policy was intended to be
actuarially fair, though SKS was prepared to lose money initially on administrative costs.
The launch of the insurance product did not go smoothly. SKS initially planned to make
the purchase of insurance mandatory for all existing clients. Faced with rebellion by its
clients, SKS decided to make it mandatory only for new clients and for existing clients when
renewing their loans. Still, discontent with the policy and resulting client drop-out led SKS
to make the insurance voluntary starting in October 2008. This unilateral change to the
insurance product, and anecdotal accounts of adverse selection and outright fraud, led to
a breakdown of relations between SKS and ICICI-Lombard, and insurance enrollment was
6

The two districts are Bidar and Gulbarga, which are a few hours’ drive from Hyderabad, the capital of
Andhra Pradesh and the location of SKS’s headquarters.
7
This number reflects the average loan size upon renewal in control villages following the roll-out in
treatment villages.

6

discontinued in March 2009. Thus, by the time of our endline survey, clients had become
free to rejoin SKS without purchasing the insurance policy.
As it turned out, SKS clients were correct in not wanting to purchase this particular
health insurance policy. In principle, the policy covered hospitalization and maternity expenses, and clients had the option of going to approved health facilities to get cashless
treatment or paying out of pocket for treatment at other facilities and submitting a claim
for reimbursement. In practice, however, the implementation was badly managed by the
partnership of SKS and ICICI-Lombard. Reimbursements were difficult for clients to file,
and often went unprocessed. In an attempt to deal with this problem, the focus of the
program was shifted to upfront cashless treatment, but the number of hospitals that were
networked for this service was inadequate, and in any case many SKS clients did not receive
the required insurance cards. As a result, the cashless approach was also ineffective. Below,
we show that obtaining insurance had no impact on the way SKS clients handled major
health events or on their health status and expenditures.
IV

Randomization and Data Collection

SKS Microfinance originally identified 201 villages where it was currently running its microfinance program and was interested in evaluating its health insurance program. SKS
operations were organized by center, with multiple centers in a village. To minimize the
risk of spillovers between treatment areas and control areas, however, centers were grouped
by village such that all centers in close proximity would receive the same treatment/control
status.
In December 2006, using SKS’s list of villages, our research team randomly selected 101
villages for SKS to pilot the health insurance product. The remaining 100 villages formed the
control group, in which health insurance was not offered through SKS (although some clients
had insurance through other sources). The randomization was performed by the Principal
Investigators using the Stata random number generator after stratification by branch and
number of microfinance clients.8 The stratification ensured an even geographic distribution
of treatment villages and control villages, as well as a similar number of clients in treatment
and control.
SKS introduced the insurance requirement on a rolling basis, whereby the first village
was reached in June 2007 and the last in November 2007. Once insurance was introduced
in a village, its purchase became mandatory upon loan renewal for all microfinance clients
within the village.
We draw on four sources of data for the analysis:
8

SKS operation across villages is grouped within branches, of which there are seven in our sample. Within
each branch, we also stratified by whether a village had more or fewer clients than the branch median.

7

First, we collected detailed baseline data from a random sample of SKS client households:
29 households per village, on average, in all treatment and control villages. We collected
data from December 2006 through March 2007, and the survey instruments and data are
available for download.9 A household survey module was administered to the household head
in sampled households, and an adult module was administered to each adult found in the
household.10 The household survey identifies a number of household characteristics, including: household composition, economic status and assets, means of livelihood, and household
expenses. The adult survey covered the adult’s means of livelihood, income, educational
background, expenses, health status, and medical treatment patterns. For rarer health
events, the household survey covered the household’s experience with major health events in
the previous year: all events in which a household member died, gave birth, experienced an
injury or illness that prevented them from performing their normal daily activities for more
than a week, had any other health problem that required hospitalization, or otherwise spent
more than Rs. 300 ($7) to treat a health event. For each of these health events, the survey
records basic information on its type, the way it was handled, and how the household paid
for it.
In the baseline data, we see similar client characteristics in treatment and control villages
(Table 1). For the subsample of clients who report owning a business at the time of the
baseline survey, Panel A reports average business outcomes over the previous year. Following
Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007), we also pool these four outcomes into a single index of
business performance.11
Second, we collected similar survey data at endline, which came after insurance enrollment had been discontinued and clients had the opportunity to rejoin SKS without purchasing insurance. From 2009 through 2010, approximately two years after clients had faced
enrollment decisions, we collected detailed data on the same households. Of the baseline
households surveyed, only 1.3% were not found for the endline survey and this attrition was
not differential by treatment status.12
Third, we draw on administrative data provided by SKS, which can be merged to our
detailed surveys through SKS’s client identification numbers. The SKS administrative data
9

The surveys can be downloaded at http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/25890
Surveyors visited households multiple times to interview each adult (over the age of 14), though in some
cases they did not find all adults reported to be in the household.
11
Following Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007), we create each index in the paper by calculating an equally
weighted average across the component characteristics’ z-scores. The z-score itself is calculated by subtracting
that characteristic’s mean in the control group and dividing by the standard deviation in the control group,
orienting the sign of each z-score to be in the same conceptual direction (e.g., a larger business). Differences
in the index then reflect an average difference in the standard deviation across each component characteristic.
12
We attribute this low attrition rate to the relative stability of these households, and our ability to find
households with the help of prominent village members.
10

8

comes in two main forms. First, SKS provided loan histories for its entire client base in
our research areas, including when clients took out past loans and the amounts received.
This gives us detailed information on clients’ previous loan activities, as well as the ability
to calculate the effect of the requirement to purchase health insurance on loan renewal.
In a previous paper (Banerjee, Duflo and Hornbeck, 2014), we combined this data with
our baseline sample to show that there was no adverse selection in client sign-up: less
healthy households were not disproportionately likely to renew their loan in treatment areas
compared to control. Second, SKS maintained a database of everyone who was enrolled
in insurance and all requested and processed insurance claims. This database provides
information on who used the cashless facility and who received reimbursement for health
expenses at other facilities.
Finally, to identify the effects of relatively uncommon major health shocks, we collected
detailed data on health events and the way households handled them through the “Major
Health Events Survey.” A “major” health event is defined to be any health event that
substantially disrupted a person’s ability to perform normal daily activities for more than
one week.13 This survey was conducted on a continuous basis, from April 2008 to December
2009, and covers 25,000 major events that happened to 7,000 unique households. The survey
was conducted in two stages.
At the first stage, a survey monitor accompanied the SKS loan officer to multiple meetings
and asked the clients about any major health events in their household. At the center
meeting, the surveyor recorded the name of the person who was affected, the category of
health problem (sickness, accident, birth, other), the relationship between the affected person
and the head of household, and whether the person went to a hospital.14
At the second stage, the full survey was conducted with the SKS client who had been
identified at the first stage, generally in the presence of the person affected by the health
event. The full survey began with verification of the information collected at the microfinance
center meeting, and included a brief description of the event, when it began, and the timing
of treatment received. The person categorized the seriousness of the event, along with the
length of time for which it caused an inability to perform normal daily activities. The person
also provided a list of symptoms, which allows us to further characterize the seriousness of the
problem. The surveyor then collected information on all health providers the person visited,
13

We experimented with several definitions, but found this one to be most successful at identifying the
major health events that we were most interested in and that might be underrepresented in the baseline and
endline surveys.
14
Though at the beginning we asked about all major health events since January 2008, in July we switched
to asking about all major health events in the last 30 days, in order to improve recall ability of clients and
to allow us to visit villages more frequently.

9

along with basic information about the provider, what treatment was received and at what
cost, and the amount of lost income for this person and family caregivers resulting from this
episode. For expenses incurred, the person was asked about how they were covered, including
by saving, borrowing, or the sale of assets. Information was also collected on whether and
how this person used insurance and other finances to pay for the treatment expenses as well
as the person’s expectations for receiving reimbursement.
V

Methodology

The empirical analysis compares client outcomes in treatment villages to client outcomes in
control villages. We focus on existing clients who had loans by June 2007, the date of the
roll-out of the health insurance requirement in the first village in the sample. The roll-out
took place progressively at different villages (from June to November).
For each client i in village v and randomization strata s, we regress each outcome (Y ) on
an indicator variable for treatment village (T ) and randomization strata fixed effects (α):
(1)

Yivs = βTv + αs + ivs .

The coefficient of interest β indicates the average impact from the requirement to purchase
health insurance. For all regressions, the standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity
and clustered by village to adjust for local geographic correlation.
We begin by considering impacts on clients’ SKS loan take-up decisions using administrative data from SKS. Given the troubled implementation of the health insurance program,
we then verify the expected absence of impacts on healthcare utilization and expenses on
healthcare using both the major health event survey and the endline survey. Whatever impact we find on other outcomes is therefore presumably unrelated to the provision of health
insurance.
In looking at household and business outcomes, to avoid the potential for specification
search, we simply follow the template for analysis that the randomized evaluations of microfinance adopted in the 2015 Microfinance Issue of the American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics. Following this template we classify the outcomes into consumption effects, business effects, and social effects.15 To avoid misleading inference due to multiple inference, we
compute an index of outcomes for each category and regress that index on treatment (Kling,
Liebman and Katz, 2007). Further, we verify the estimated p-value on the business outcome
index using a Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing across total consumption
15

Unfortunately, we do not have data on labor supplied to the household business, though in the interpretation section we draw on estimates from Banerjee et al. (2015b).

10

and an index of social effects (Hochberg, 1988).16
We also separately report estimated impacts on business outcomes for the entire sample
and for households that had a business at the time of our baseline, following previous literature. Further, we split the sample of businesses that existed at the time of the baseline survey
into two subgroups: those businesses that were started before SKS started operating in the
village, and those businesses that were started after SKS began operating in the village (but
before our baseline survey). The idea is to look for heterogeneous treatment effects based
on the theory that the availability of cheaper credit changes the nature of self-selection into
entrepreneurship: the post-microfinance entrepreneurs that are the focus of most existing
research may be less gifted or less committed. Previous studies of microfinance (Banerjee
et al., 2015a,b; Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman, 2015) have attempted to get at this distinction
by separately estimating treatment effects for those households that started their businesses
before the introduction of microfinance and for those households that started their businesses
after the introduction of microfinance. This separation is imperfect, however, as those households that start businesses after microfinance are necessarily not the same in treatment and
control because of differential self-selection and therefore the estimated effect of microfinance
on these businesses is potentially biased downwards. A nice feature of our experiment is that
it allows us to separate the treatment effect from the selection effect because the businesses
we compare are the same pool of post-microfinance firms both in treatment and control
areas, unlike in previous work where the control firms are necessarily pre-microfinance.
VI

Results

VI.A

Impacts on Loan Renewal

The requirement to purchase health insurance substantially lowered SKS clients’ loan renewal
rates. Table 2, column 1, reports that clients in treatment villages were 22 percentage
points (or 30%) less likely to take out an annual loan within one year after the pilot began.
Specifically, clients were less likely to take out a new loan between June 7, 2007 and July
3, 2008.17 Since the roll-out took place between June and November, these estimates are
intent-to-treat estimates because not all of those who were renewing were facing the health
insurance requirement. We estimate that 73% of clients in treatment villages renewing during
the experimental period actually faced the health insurance requirement in order to renew,
so these intent-to-treat estimates might be scaled up by a factor of 1.37 to get a sense of the
16

Effectively, this correction multiplies the business outcome index p-value by a factor of 3, given that its
p-value is the lowest among the three outcome indices.
17
Clients’ annual loans are repaid over 50 weeks, so our clients would have been eligible to review between
June 7 2007 and June 2008, since they all had a loan as of June 21, 2007. Since renewal can take place
within a short grace period, we have included a six-week period for clients to renew their loan.

11

magnitude of the impact on those facing the requirement to buy insurance.18
Interestingly, this difference in loan renewal persisted after the health insurance requirement had been eliminated. At the time of the endline survey, SKS clients in treatment
villages remained substantially less likely to have an SKS loan. Based on administrative
data, clients in treatment village were 16 percentage points (30%) less likely to have an
outstanding SKS loan (column 2). This difference is smaller based on self-reported data
(column 3), which may reflect measurement error because many clients report having an
SKS loan when these do not appear in the administrative data. While both our survey
data and the administrative data may contain errors, we suspect the administrative data is
more accurate than the self-reports. Average loan renewal rates should decline over time,
as previous clients naturally drop out from SKS, and the self-reported mean renewal rate in
control villages is higher than would be expected. Table 2, Panel B, reports corresponding
estimates when restricting the sample to clients who report owning a business in the baseline survey. Of particular use later, Panels C and D split this sample into those baseline
business owners who report their business starting before SKS entered the village (Panel C)
and those baseline business owners who report their business starting after SKS entered the
village (Panel D). Panel E reports estimates for households that did not include a surveyed
business at baseline. Table 3 reports the accompanying declines in SKS loan sizes, where
non-renewing clients’ loan size is set to zero. Outstanding loan sizes decline, mostly due to
changes on the extensive margin (i.e. whether or not someone has a loan).
Some of the villages where the experiment took place had another microfinance organization, so part of the flight from SKS may have been compensated for by borrowing from
another provider. Column 4, of Tables 2 and 3, reports the estimated impact of treatment
on whether the household reports having a loan from another MFI. With the caveat that
these data are self-reported and may underestimate actual borrowing, we find little impact
of the treatment on borrowing from these alternative sources. In general, there is very little
reported borrowing from other MFIs at endline by current SKS clients (1.0%) or former SKS
clients (1.5%).
The characteristics of those clients who leave SKS are discussed in a previous paper
(Banerjee, Duflo and Hornbeck, 2014). In general, we found that clients who drop out
are similar to those who remain. In particular, we found no evidence of adverse selection
18

Based on clients’ previous loan expiration dates and the dates of pilot roll-out, we calculate the fraction
of clients who would have faced the health insurance requirement when their previous loan expired. If clients’
renewal decisions are only affected when the health insurance requirement is binding at the time of their
first opportunity for renewal, then the implicit first-stage impact of the treatment is 0.73. We do not observe
roll-out dates for 20 villages, but make the conservative assumption that roll-out was immediate in these
villages. Clients whose previous loan expired prior to June 2007 are assumed not to face the health insurance
requirement.

12

based on health characteristics and that extends to health events that are fairly predictable
(e.g., propensity to have a child). We found little difference in the households’ economic
characteristics, including the propensity to own a business.
VI.B

Impacts on Health Status and Health Expenditures

For the surveyed “major health events,” Table 4 reports impacts on insurance usage. People
in treatment villages are 51 percentage points more likely to report having health insurance
at the time of the health event (Panel A, column 1). However, they are only 0.3 percentage
points more likely to receive insurance benefits (column 2). This number includes both the
use of a cashless facility and reimbursements, either of which taken separately show very
small increases (columns 3 and 4). The major health event survey was generally conducted
shortly after the event, however, and in 4.5 percent of the cases of responders say that
they expect to receive reimbursement (column 5). While these differences are statistically
significant due to the large sample size and near absence of insurance in control villages, the
magnitudes are all very small.
We see the same pattern when we group the health event survey data by client (Panel
B). People in treatment villages were 68 percentage points more likely to report ever having
insurance for a major health event and more likely to report ever having received insurance
benefits (1 percent), or expecting reimbursement (9 percent), but the magnitudes remain
small.
For this sample of clients who report a major health event, we can also use administrative
claims data to see whether they appear to have ever used insurance. Column 1 reports that
84% appear in administrative data as being enrolled in the insurance program at any point.19
In terms of these clients receiving insurance benefits at any time: 7.4% receive some benefit,
of which 2.6% used a cashless facility and 5.2% received some reimbursement. This number
lie between the rate or reimbursement observed in panel B (1%), and those that were expected
(9%). Since this is conditional on an eligible event occurring, these are very low numbers.
Given that insurance benefits were rarely availed of, it is unsurprising that we see no
meaningful difference in how households responded to a major health event (Table 5). Following one of these events, there is no significant impact on whether the person stayed
overnight in a hospital, the total cost of health care (including lost income), or the financing
of associated costs. The point estimates and standard errors are small, suggesting that the
lack of a significant finding is not driven by noise.
In the endline survey, there is also no meaningful impact on clients’ health and their
health care usage in the previous year (Table 6). Specifically, we find no impact on health
19
Across all control villages, only one client is reported to be enrolled in the insurance program (and is
not reported to receive any insurance benefit).

13

care expenditures (column 1), whether clients borrowed for health care expenses (column
2), how much they borrowed for health care expenses (column 3), the number of serious
health events (column 4), or the probability of staying overnight in a hospital (column 5).
The absence of impacts on health-care utilization parallels recent estimates from Nicaragua
(Thornton et al., 2010). There is also no impact on the ability of individuals to perform
basic activities in daily life (column 6).20 Curiously, households have significantly worse selfreported health (column 7), which may reflect the insurance information campaign leading
clients to focus more on catastrophic health events or their health more generally.21 Overall
life satisfaction, however, is not substantially affected (column 8).
The health insurance product had no direct effect on the impacts it sought to achieve:
health status, health care usage, and the financing of health care expenditures. While
many people in these areas did pay the health insurance premium and enroll, very few
received insurance benefits following major health events. For whatever reason (failure to
communicate to households, failure of SKS field officers to effectively intermediate between
the clients and ICICI-Lombard, clients’ lack of understanding, etc.), the product turned
out to be mostly useless, and anecdotal evidence suggests that clients found this out fairly
quickly. The requirement to purchase insurance did inadvertently lead to a significant decline
in microfinance borrowing, however, and the following sections explore how this impacted
households.
VI.C

Impacts on Client Businesses

Table 7 reports the impact on clients’ businesses resulting from the requirement to purchase
health insurance. For the full sample of clients (Panel A) or the sample of clients who owned
a business at baseline (Panel B), there was no substantial or statistically significant impact
on whether they owned a business at endline (column 1). Columns 2 through 5 report
impacts on endline business outcomes for those with businesses at baseline, including zeros
for those who do not report owning a business at endline.22 All the point estimates suggest
they invested less in their businesses and generated less profit, though only expenditures on
20

We ask each adult about their difficulty in performing 15 daily activities, rated on a 5-point scale. We
create an index for each adult, averaging across the responses by activity (each normalized to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of one), and assign an index for each household by averaging across the
adult member indices.
21
Dow et al. (1997) find a similar effect, in reverse, in Indonesia: an increase in health facility fees led to an
increase in self-reported health status, as people were less likely to visit the hospital. In Zwane et al. (2011),
we found that asking people a long series of baseline survey questions on health tended to make them more
likely to buy health insurance, perhaps because it made them aware of the risks. The information campaign
could have had the same effect.
22
Note that we asked businesses owners about profits directly, rather than calculating the difference between reported revenues and reported costs, so the outcome in column 5 contains additional information
compared to the previous columns.

14

workers is individually statistically significant. Column 6 reports the estimated impact on an
index of business outcomes, drawing on the outcomes in columns 2 to 5, which is negative and
statistically significant at the 10% level, though not with a Hochberg correction for multiple
hypothesis testing across all three categories of household outcomes (business, consumption,
and social outcomes).
The point estimates of the scaling down of businesses are large, despite the churn in the
number of businesses. Only 32% of all self-reported business owners at baseline continue
to own a business at endline, so we have many zeros in the data.23 For example, the
point estimates in panel B imply a reduction of 55% in expenditures on workers for existing
businesses, a 61% in reduction in asset expenditure, and 12% reduction in sales.
In panels C and D, we separate the existing businesses according to whether they are
reported to have been started before SKS entered the village (Panel C) or started after SKS
entered the village (Panel D).
The negative impact of losing microfinance access is entirely focused on the older businesses (Panel C), which tend to be about twice as large in terms of sales and profit as those
businesses that were started after SKS entered the village. For these older businesses, the
effects are even larger: we find a reduction of 82% in asset expenditure, 58% in expenditure
on workers (significant at the 10% and 5% level respectively), and a 0.063 standard deviation
decline in the index of business outcomes that is significant at the 5% level (and 13% with
the Hochberg correction).
In panel D, we find no impact on businesses that were started more recently, after SKS
had entered the village. This is a smaller sample of clients, and the standard errors are
correspondingly larger, but the point estimates are also small and often have the opposite
sign. Thus, it appears that either the microfinance funds were not invested in the business
(consistent with the absence of a decline in asset expenditure), or that the marginal product
of capital for these businesses is close to zero.
Panel E reports estimated impacts on business outcomes for clients that did not own a
business at baseline. We see negative impacts on these clients’ business outcomes, smaller
in magnitude than the effect for business stared before SKS started. About 9 percent of
them do have a business at endline, so in terms of magnitude, the impact per active business
is comparable to the impact for the pre-SKS business owner. This makes sense: those
businesses started after SKS became less attractive, so they would be selected to be motivated
23

If the impacts on business outcomes were driven solely by impacts on clients that owned a business at
endline, then the estimates might be scaled up by a factor of 5.6 (for Panel A) and 3.2 (for Panel B). In
fact, this is what we find when we restrict the sample to businesses that are still in existence at endline
(a potentially endogenous outcome), in which case the estimated impacts on business outcomes are also all
statistically significant.

15

businesses.
VI.D

Impacts on Other Household Outcomes

Recent randomized evaluations of microfinance have also found some impacts on household
businesses, but little impact of access to microfinance on overall consumption and social
outcomes. We analyze data for these other outcomes, following the same template as those
papers, and find very similar baseline non-results from our “reverse” experiment (the loss of
microfinance). We then extend this analysis to consider differential impacts for households
with businesses started prior to SKS and households with businesses started after SKS.
Table 8 reports estimated impacts on household consumption at endline.24 For the sample as a whole (Panel A) or the sample of baseline business owners (Panel B), we see little
impact on households’ consumption, either total annualized consumption or within particular categories. There is some decline in durable goods consumption, which aligns with other
estimates on the impacts of gaining access to microfinance (with the opposite sign, as expected).25 There is also some evidence of increased non-durable goods consumption, which
we explore further below.
Focusing on business owners at baseline, a very interesting pattern emerges when we separate the older businesses and those who started after SKS started its operation. Households
that own older businesses spend significantly less on durable goods when they lose access to
microfinance (we also saw that they reduced business durable expenses). Households that
own newer businesses increase their total consumption substantially, and this estimate is
statistically significant at the 1% level even after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing.
This consumption increase is focused on non-durables (food, in particular). This same pattern emerges in per capita terms, adjusting for the number of adult equivalent household
members (Table 9).
Finally, focusing on the household who did not have a business at baseline (the vast
majority of them still don’t have one), we find significant increases in food and temptation
good consumption, and insignificant decline in durable consumption and celebrations.
Column 9 reports no increase in the household’s adult labor income from salaried jobs or
day labor, which was reported in the adult modules of the household survey. Households do
not appear to have compensated for declining business by working harder. Indeed, all the
point estimates are negative and statistically insignificant. Thus we do not see an increase
24

Table 9 reports corresponding estimates that are expressed in per capita terms that reflect the number of
adult equivalent household members based on conversion factors used by Townsend (1994) for rural Andhra
Pradesh and Maharashtra.
25
We do not estimate greater impacts on consumption after a longer period of time, comparing households
surveyed further after being exposed to the treatment (after 27 months) to those households surveyed more
recently after the treatment rollout (within 27 months).

16

in another source of revenue that compensate the loss of business income for older business
owners. For more recent businesses, that then raises the question of how the consumption
increase could have been financed. We return to this question below.
Table 10 shows no systematic impacts on social outcomes, consistent with findings across
other studies of microfinance. There is little change in the share of younger or older children in school and, while there is some impact on adolescent girls’ reported “progressive”
attitudes,26 an index across all outcomes in this category is statistically insignificant.
VII

Interpretation

Most of the baseline results are in line with the existing experimental literature on the impacts
of microfinance. For non-business-owning households, there is little systematic impact on
overall consumption. This is perhaps not surprising, as with microfinance they may be
borrowing more to finance some form of consumption and then cut back other forms of
consumption to pay for the loan. However, we find an increase in food consumption and
temptation goods consumption that suggests that the loan may have played a disciplining
device. The remaining question is why their consumption does not actually decline, as
they pay interest on the microfinance loan, though perhaps they are substituting away from
more-expensive loans (e.g., from a moneylender) or working a little more in a manner that
we do not detect in the data. Notably, the effect on durable goods consumption is negative,
but insignificant and not very large in magnitude (compared to the size of the loan), which
suggests they are not using the money to finance additional durable goods purchases that
might be lumpier.
For business owners, we find results that are broadly consistent with the simple model
described in section II, and with much of the previous literature on microfinance. As predicted for those in period 2 of their “life” in the model, older business owners invest less
in working capital (payments to workers) as well as fixed capital (business assets). We also
see a reduction in profits that is large (the implied treatment on treated effect is nearly
10,000 rupees per business per year) but imprecisely estimated (because of the substantial
churn in business ownership and the large number of zeros) and this is perhaps reflected in
lower durable consumption (although we do not see a decline in non-durable consumption).
For newer business owners, who correspond to those who are in period 1 of their “life” in
the model, we see the jump up in consumption predicted for those who switch away from
making a lumpy investment. The increase in consumption is over 9,500 rupees per house26

We define “progressive attitudes” by creating an index across girls’ responses to five questions concerning:
whether men should be more educated than women, whether men should eat before women, the ideal age of
marriage for women, whether women should have children immediately after marriage, and the ideal number
of children.

17

hold. Assuming this increase is only due to the 22% of them who stopped borrowing due to
the treatment, this is an increase in consumption of more than 43,000 rupees per year for
those households that stopped borrowing. This is much larger than the 11,900 rupees that a
borrowing household repays in a year (Rs 9,600 in principal and Rs 2,300 in interest). This
suggests that the indivisible item that these households were buying costs much more than
the amount of the loan and they were paying for it by cutting consumption as well as by
borrowing.
However, we do not see in the data the predicted corresponding decline in the acquisition
of business assets among treatment households (which is why the control households were
borrowing in the first place). One way to square this with the model is to think of the first
period of the model as consisting of multiple years. At the beginning of this period the
household takes the microfinance loan but also borrows from other sources, some of which
are more expensive, to finance a single investment (say it builds a room for a shop). In
each subsequent year (all part of the first period of our model) the household then both
saves and takes additional microfinance loans to repay the expensive loans it is carrying
until its obligations are discharged. When that is done they use the microfinance loan to
pay for additional working capital for their business (this is what business owners in the
second period of their lives do in our model). What happens in our model is that a certain
fraction of households who were at the cusp of making this investment decide to not make
the investment after all, due to the imposition of this new requirement. Therefore, they do
not make the large financial commitment and do not buy the asset. This means that their
consumption can be higher since they are not servicing these loans.
A similar story can be told about these households borrowing from a moneylender to
finance an expensive wedding and then using microfinance money and savings to finance
the moneylender loan over multiple years. The loss of microfinance makes people unwilling
to have such expensive weddings, which is why they are richer now. This would also help
explain why we see no impact on their business earnings from the fact that they gave up
their loans, though it might also reflect borrowers paying down their loans before they build
up enough working capital to make proper use of their assets.
VIII

Conclusion

SKS’s attempt to bundle health insurance with microfinance was clearly a failure. The
requirement to purchase insurance led to substantial drop-out from the organization, which
led to abrupt changes in the program rules that further undermined the insurance product
and led to its rapid demise.
However, this failure tells us something very interesting about the nature of microfinance:

18

the resistance that the proposed introduction of insurance generated suggests that many
microfinance clients receive little surplus from their borrowing relationship. SKS certainly
did not anticipate this. While they did worry that clients may not understand the value of
what they are getting, at least initially, they were convinced that the benefits their clients
derive from microfinance were sufficiently large that it would not lead to any significant loss
of demand for their product. This is in fact while they took on the risk to introduce a new
product.
One reason for this misperception might be the fact, suggested by casual observation and
supported by more rigorous research, that what we have called “old” businesses do benefit
substantially from the availability of microfinance. That these impacts do not necessarily
imply a large gain in welfare would explain SKS’s mistaken expectations, and indeed the
mistaken expectations of many microfinance organizations worldwide and their supporters.
Many remain convinced that microfinance has the potential to cause improvements in business outcomes, and hence in welfare. Our results show that the first part is right: as with
other microfinance institutions that have been evaluated, SKS loans do contribute to better
reported business outcomes. The second part is potentially wrong: many households that
gain in terms of business outcomes behave as if they receive very little in terms of welfare.
These results are discouraging to the view of microfinance businesses as an engine for clients
to escape poverty and, more generally, to the many hopes pinned on microenterprises as a
way for large numbers of people to improve their lives. There are other indicators that point
in this same direction: the absence of impacts on household outcomes generally from microfinance, the failure of microfinance businesses to grow, and the frequent closure of these
businesses. It appears that we must look elsewhere to find opportunities for supporting
economic growth in developing contexts.

19

References
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos Banco.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 151–182.
Attanasio, Orazio, Britta Augsburg, Ralph De Haas, Emla Fitzsimons, and Heike
Harmgart. 2015. “The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending
in Mongolia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 90–122.
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph De Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2015.
“The Impacts of Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 183–203.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Six Randomized
Evaluations of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 1–21.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Emily Breza, Esther Duflo, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015a. “Do
Credit Constraints Limit Entrepreneurship? Heterogeneity in the Returns to Microfinance.” Mimeo.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Richard Hornbeck. 2014. “Bundling Health
Insurance and Microfinance in India: There Cannot be Adverse Selection if There Is No
Demand.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 104(5): 291–297.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015b.
“The miracle of microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 22–53.
Breza, Emily, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2016. “Measuring the Equilibrium Impacts of
Credit: Evidence from the Indian Microfinance Crisis.” Mimeo.
Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. 2014. “The Macroeconomics of Microfinance.” Mimeo.
Crepon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. 2015. “Estimating the impact of microcredit on those who take it up: Evidence from a randomized
experiment in Morocco.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 123–150.

20

Dow, William H., Paul Gertler, Robert F. Schoeni, John Strauss, and Duncan Thomas. 1997. “Health Care Prices, Health and Labor Outcomes: Experimental
Evidence.” RAND Working Paper Series 97-01.
Hochberg, Y. 1988. “A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance.”
Biometrika, 75(4): 800–802.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2016. “Long-Run Price Elasticities of Demand
for Credit: Evidence from a Countrywide Field Experiment in Mexico.” Mimeo.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental
Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83–119.
Meager, Rachael. 2016a. “Aggregating Distributional Treatment Effects: A Bayesian Hierarchical Analysis of the Microcredit Literature.” Mimeo.
Meager, Rachael. 2016b. “Understanding the Average Impact of Microcredit Expansions:
A Bayesian Hierarchical Analysis of 7 Randomized Experiments.” Mimeo.
Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson. 2015. “The Impacts of
Microcredit: Evidence from Ethiopia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
7(1): 54–89.
Thornton, Rebecca L., Laurel E. Hatt, Erica M. Field, Mursaleena Islam,
Freddy Solis Diaz, and Martha Azucena Gonzalez. 2010. “Social Security Health
Insurance for the Informal Sector in Nicaragua: A Randomized Evaluation.” Health Economics, 19: 181–206.
Townsend, Robert M. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India.” Econometrica,
62(3): 539–591.
Zwane, Alix Peterson, Jonathan Zinman, Eric Van Dusen, William Pariente,
Clair Null, Edward Miguel, Michael Kremer, Dean S. Karlan, Richard Hornbeck, Xavier Gine, Esther Duflo, Florencia Devoto, Bruno Crepon, and Abhijit
Banerjee. 2011. “Being surveyed can change later behavior and related parameter estimates.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Arts and Sciences, 108(5): 1821–1826.

21

Table 1. Baseline Client Characteristics, by Treatment and Control Villages

Panel A. SKS Client Businesses
Expenditures on assets,
previous year
Expenditures on workers,
previous year
Total sales,
previous year
Total profits,
previous year
Index of business outcomes

All
Villages
(1)

Treatment
Villages
(2)

Control
Villages
(3)

Difference:
(2) - (3)
(4)

Number of
Clients
(5)

4568
[22929]
1560
[8118]
36339
[65433]
14558
[23351]
-0.005
[0.656]

4707
[16951]
1700
[9266]
35386
[56969]
13536
[22683]
-0.01
[0.633]

4410
[28211]
1401
[6579]
37411
[73823]
15761
[24074]
0.001
[0.681]

347
(1095)
313
(382)
-1270
(3558)
-2404
(1587)
-0.007
(0.034)

2118
2112
1968
1581
2136

Panel B. SKS loan activity
SKS loan,
0.893
0.895
0.892
-0.002
5366
at time of baseline survey
[0.309]
[0.307]
[0.31]
(0.024)
SKS loan amount,
7619
7604
7635
-43
4794
at time of baseline survey
[2625]
[2634]
[2615]
(160)
Notes: Column 1 reports average household characteristics from the baseline survey, with standard deviations
reported in brackets. Columns 2 and 3 report average characteristics for households in randomly-assigned
treatment villages and control villages, respectively. Column 4 reports the estimated difference between
treatment and control households, controlling for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and
above/below median number of clients within branch). Robust standard errors clustered by village are reported
in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

22

Table 2. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Loan Renewal (Extensive Margin)
First Year
After Treatment:

At Time of Endline Survey:
Self-Reported
Other MFI Loan

Administrative Data
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.220***

-0.162***

-0.076***

0.006

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.024)

(0.004)

Control Group Mean

0.724

0.541

0.717

0.011

Number of Clients

5353

5353

5219

5353

-0.255***

-0.220***

-0.054**

0.005

(0.034)

(0.033)

(0.027)

(0.006)

Control Group Mean

0.778

0.596

0.722

0.014

Number of Clients

2149

2149

2102

2149

Panel A. Loan Renewal, Full Sample
Treatment

Panel B. Loan Renewal, Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment

Panel C. Loan Renewal, Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started Before SKS Entry
Treatment

-0.257***

-0.219***

-0.051*

-0.001

(0.037)

(0.035)

(0.030)

(0.006)

Control Group Mean

0.787

0.609

0.721

0.016

Number of Clients

1715

1715

1676

1715

Panel D. Loan Renewal, Business Owners at Baseline and Endline, Business Started after SKS Entry
Treatment

Control Group Mean
Number of Clients

-0.217***

-0.187***

-0.057

0.026*

(0.055)

(0.057)

(0.048)

(0.014)

0.731

0.527

0.717

0.006

392

392

384

392

-0.201***

-0.133***

-0.091***

0.005

(0.033)

(0.032)

(0.028)

(0.005)

Panel E. Loan Renewal, Non Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment

Control Group Mean
0.687
0.510
0.713
0.009
Number of Clients
3071
3071
2984
3071
Notes: Column 1 reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on whether clients took
out a new SKS loan in the first year after treatment (by the end of June 2008, for the SKS clients in our baseline and
endline surveys who had an annual loan prior to June 2007). Column 2 reports the impact on whether baseline SKS
clients had a loan at the time of the endline survey, continuing to use SKS administrative data, whereas Column 3 uses
clients' self-reported loan data. Column 4 reports the impact on whether clients self-report having a microfinance loan
from a non-SKS MFI, at the time of the endline survey. Panel B restricts the sample to business owners at baseline, panel
C to restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose businesses started before the entry of SKS in the business
owner's village (using the date of the first loan as reported in the administrative data), and panel D restricts the sample to
business owners at baseline whose business started after the entry of SKS. Panel E restricts the sample to non-business
owners at baseline. All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and above/below
median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

23

Table 3. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Loan Renewal (Extensive and Intensive Margins)
First Year
After Treatment:

At Time of Endline Survey:
Self-Reported
Other MFI Loan

Administrative Data
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-2075***

-1995***

-

72

(340)

(438)

(45)

Control Group Mean

7485

7195

63

Number of Clients

5352

5353

5353

Panel F. Loan Amount, Full Sample
Treatment

Panel G. Loan Amount, Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment

-2713***

-2869***

-

110

(418)

(516)

(75)

Control Group Mean

8505

8343

64

Number of Clients

2148

2149

2149

Panel H. Loan Amount, Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started Before SKS Entry
Treatment

-2843***

-2724***

-

97

(445)

(562)

Control Group Mean

8669

8505

78

Number of Clients

1714

1715

1715

(96)

Panel I. Loan Amount, Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started After SKS Entry
Treatment

-1902***

-2868***

-

191*

(664)

(837)

(113)

Control Group Mean

7725

7461

0

Number of Clients

392

392

392

Panel J. Loan Amount, Non Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment

-1728***

-1552***

(361)

(464)

-

29
(44)

Control Group Mean
6802
6513
65
Number of Clients
3071
3071
3071
Notes: The reported estimates correspond to those reported in Table 2, but report impacts on the amount of the loan
(including zeros for non-renewal). All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and
above/below median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered by village are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

24

Table 4. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Insurance Usage

Have Insurance

Received
Insurance
Benefits

Used Cashless
Facility

Received
Reimbursement

Expect To
Receive
Reimbursement

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Panel A: For Each Major Health Event (Self-Reported)
Treatment

0.510***

0.0030***

0.0016***

0.0018***

0.045***

(0.035)

(0.0006)

(0.0004)

(0.0005)

(0.012)

Control Group Mean

0.057

0.0003

0.0001

0.0002

0.012

Number of Events

25072

25072

25072

25072

25072

0.683***

0.0106***

0.0055***

0.0062***

0.091***

(0.0402)

(0.0019)

(0.0014)

(0.0016)

(0.0231)

0.0573

0.0003

0.0001

0.0002

0.0119

6941

6941

6941

6941

6941

0.842***

0.074***

0.026***

0.052***

(0.018)

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.007)

Panel B: For Each Client (Self-Reported)
Treatment

Control Group Mean
Number of Clients

Panel C: For Each Client (Administrative Data)
Treatment

Control Group Mean
0
0
0
0
Number of Clients
6941
6941
6941
6941
Notes: For each "major health event" surveyed, panel A reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the
insurance requirement) on clients' self-reported insurance usage for that event: whether clients self-report the affected
person having insurance at the time of the event (Column 1); whether clients self-report having received any insurance
benefits from that event, either through the affected person using a cashless facility or receiving reimbursement
(Column 2); whether clients self-report the affected person used a cashless facility (Column 3) or they received
reimbursement (Column 4); or whether clients self-report expecting to receive reimbursement from the insurance policy
(Column 5). Panel B aggregates the "major health events" by client, indicating the impact of treatment on whether
clients self-report any affected person in their household having: had insurance for any surveyed event (Column 1);
received insurance benefits for any surveyed event (Column 2); used a cashless facility for any surveyed event
(Column 3); received reimbursement for any surveyed event (Column 4); or expect to receive reimbursement for any
surveyed event (Column 5). Panel C uses administrative claims data, merged to clients ever surveyed on a major health
event, to report the impact of treatment on whether the client or persons covered under the client's insurance policy:
were ever enrolled in insurance (Column 1); ever received insurance benefits (Column 2); ever used a cashless facility
(Column 3); or ever received reimbursement (Column 4). All regressions control for the randomization stratification
groups (SKS branch and above/below median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered by
village are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
10% level.

25

Table 5. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Major Health Events

Treatment

Overnight
Hospitalization

Health Event
Expenses

Borrowed from
any MFI

Borrowed from
family/friends

Borrowed from
moneylender

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.014

-80

0.002

0.021

0.009

(0.011)

(151)

(0.005)

(0.029)

(0.031)

Control Group Mean
0.067
1662
0.022
0.437
0.288
Number of Clients
25072
25072
25072
25072
25072
Notes: Each column reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on the indicated
outcome variable from the "major health events" survey. The outcome variables are: whether the affected person
stayed overnight in a hospital for that health event (Column 1); total health expenses for that event, including lost
income (Column 2); and whether these expenses were partly paid by borrowing from a microfinance organization
(Column 3), family or friends (Column 4), or a moneylender (Column 5). All regressions control for the randomization
stratification groups (SKS branch and above/below median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors
clustered by village are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
and * at the 10% level.

26

Table 6. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Health Outcomes at Endline

Treatment

Health
Expenses

Borrowed for
Health
Expenses

Amount
Borrowed

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-18
(277)

0.009
(0.018)

-234
(236)

0.020
(0.034)

Number of
Overnight
Health Events Hospitalization

ADL index

Self-Reported
Health

Overall Life
Satisfaction

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.011
(0.015)

-0.010
(0.013)

-0.208***
(0.065)

-0.005
(0.020)

Control Group Mean
2747
0.337
1462
1.691
0.271
0.004
6.865
3.556
Number of Clients
5353
5353
5353
5353
5353
5353
5353
5353
Notes: Each column reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on the indicated outcome variable from the endline
survey. The outcome variables are: expenses on health care for major events over the previous year (Column 1); whether the household reports having
borrowed money to pay some of those health expenses (Column 2); the amount borrowed to pay health expenses (Column 3); the number of major
health events experienced by the household over the previous year (Column 4); whether a household member was hospitalized overnight in the previous
year (Column 5); an index reflecting adults' self-reported ability to perform 15 typical daily activities, averaged across adults in the household (Column
6); a self-reported index of health, averaged across adults in the household (Column 7); and a self-reported index of overall life satisfaction, averaged
across adults in the household (Column 8). All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and above/below median
number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the
1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

27

Table 7. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Business Outcomes at Endline
Owns
Business
(1)
Panel A: Full Sample
Treatment

0.008
(0.014)
0.177
5353

Business Outcomes, Summing Over the Previous Year (in Rs.):
Spent on
Spent on
Total
Total
Assets
Workers
Sales
Profits
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-278
(171)
437
5353

-333**
(159)
507
5353

-1359
(1258)
12142
5353

Control Group Mean
Number of Clients
Hochberg p-value
Panel B: Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
0.006
-308
-537*
-2554
(0.025)
(192)
(311)
(2335)
Control Group Mean
0.316
503
973
21681
Number of Clients
2149
2149
2149
2149
Hochberg p-value
Panel C: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started Before SKS Entry
Treatment
-0.008
-408**
-658*
-3706
(0.028)
(204)
(373)
(2777)
Control Group Mean
0.335
532
1141
23599
Number of Clients
1715
1715
1715
1715
Hochberg p-value
Panel D: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started After SKS Entry
Treatment
0.065
191
-66
1707
(0.041)
(399)
(197)
(3038)
Control Group Mean
0.222
410
234
12860
Number of Clients
392
392
392
392
Hochberg p-value
Panel E: Non Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
-0.003
-231
-187*
-1111
(0.012)
(249)
(102)
(892)
Control Group Mean
0.094
410
217
5788
Number of Clients
3071
3071
3071
3071
Hochberg p-value

Index of
(2) to (5)
(6)

-783
(701)
6120
5353

-0.038*
(0.020)
0
5353
0.191

-1470
(1269)
11030
2149

-0.050*
(0.028)
0
2149
0.213

-1963
(1528)
11709
1715

-0.063**
(0.031)
0
1715
0.134

-282
(1721)
7951
392

0.018
(0.060)
0
392
0.760

-677
(435)
2981
3071

-0.045*
(0.024)
0
3071
0.174

Notes: Each column reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on the indicated outcome
variable from the endline survey. Panel B limits the sample to business owners at baseline, panel C to restricts the sample to
business owners at baseline whose businesses started before the entry of SKS in the business owner's village (using the date of the
first loan as reported in the administrative data), panel D restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose business started
after the entry of SKS, and panel E restricts the sample to non-business owners at baseline. The outcome variables are: whether the
household earns money from owning a business at endline (Column 1); total amount spent on business assets, over the previous year
(Column 2); total amount spent on hiring labor for the business, over the previous year (Column 3); total sales over the previous year
(Column 4); and a direct measure of self-reported total profits over the previous year (Column 5). When there is no business
reported at endline (in Panels A and B), zero values are assigned for the outcome variables in Columns 2 to 5. In Column 6, the
outcome variable is an index reflecting the equal-weighted average of the component variables in Columns 2 to 5 (each normalized
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one). All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS
branch and above/below median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered by village are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. The Hochberg p-value
reflects the statistical significance of the treatment effect on the index, adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing across the three
summary outcomes (business, consumption, social impacts) in Tables 7, 8, and 10.

28

Table 8. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Annual Consumption and Household Labor Income
Consumption Catgories
Total
(1)
Panel A: Full Sample
Treatment

Durables
(2)

Non-Durables
(3)

1957
-202
2159*
(1206)
(127)
(1170)
Control Group Mean
50728
1175
49552
Number of Clients
5353
5353
5353
Hochberg p-value
0.212
Panel B: Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
2458
-313
2771*
(1671)
(218)
(1614)
Control Group Mean
51624
1329
50295
Number of Clients
2149
2149
2149
Hochberg p-value
0.286
Panel C: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started Before SKS Entry
Treatment
478
-555**
1033
(1650)
(241)
(1588)
Control Group Mean
51935
1369
50566
Number of Clients
1715
1715
1715
Hochberg p-value
0.772
Panel D: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started After SKS Entry
Treatment
9516***
605
8911***
(3071)
(463)
(3011)
Control Group Mean
49822
1188
48634
Number of Clients
392
392
392
Hochberg p-value
0.007
Panel E: Non Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
955
-220
1174
(1341)
(155)
(1305)
Control Group Mean
50473
1097
49376
Number of Clients
3071
3071
3071
Hochberg p-value
0.693

Food
(4)

Health
(5)

Education
(6)

Temptation
Goods
(7)

Festivals and
Celebrations
(8)

Other Labor
Income
(9)

1667*
(851)
28969
5353

-13
(46)
1092
5353

-91
(102)
1241
5353

152**
(73)
1345
5353

-312
(561)
9694
5353

-344
(1035)
28253
5353

1340
(1084)
29729
2149

-17
(51)
1093
2149

-101
(155)
1262
2149

170*
(92)
1321
2149

-33
(701)
9608
2149

-1138
(1523)
26386
2149

-65
(1007)
30033
1715

20
(54)
1070
1715

-59
(121)
1188
1715

160
(100)
1339
1715

67
(775)
9381
1715

-687
(1670)
25836
1715

5718***
(2085)
28350
392

-52
(110)
1130
392

-190
(623)
1691
392

331*
(169)
1089
392

-21
(1968)
10913
392

-3397
(3664)
29463
392

1594*
(958)
28572
3071

-30
(61)
1091
3071

-122
(129)
1250
3071

171*
(102)
1349
3071

-823
(759)
9792
3071

514
(1251)
29734
3071

Notes: Each column reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on the indicated outcome variable from the endline survey. Panel B limits the sample to business owners
at baseline, panel C to restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose businesses started before the entry of SKS in the business owner's village (using the date of the first loan as reported in the
administrative data), panel D restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose business started after the entry of SKS, and panel E restricts the sample to non-business owners at baseline. The
outcome variables reflect total household consumption over the previous year, where Columns 4 to 7 are monthly measures multiplied by 12. Other labor income in Column 9 sums earnings from salaried
jobs and daily labor. All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and above/below median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered by village
are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. The Hochberg p-value reflects the statistical significance of the treatment effect on
total consumption, adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing across the three summary outcomes (business, consumption, social impacts) in Tables 7, 8, and 10.

29

Table 9. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Annual Consumption (per capita, adult equivalent) and Household Labor Income
Consumption Catgories
Total
(1)
Panel A: Full Sample
Treatment

Durables
(2)

Non-Durables
(3)

3
-58*
61
(268)
(33)
(256)
Control Group Mean
11365
261
11105
Number of Clients
5353
5353
5353
Hochberg p-value
0.991
Panel B: Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
177
-105
282
(338)
(68)
(317)
Control Group Mean
11345
309
11037
Number of Clients
2149
2149
2149
Hochberg p-value
0.601
Panel C: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started Before SKS Entry
Treatment
-164
-159**
-5
(330)
(79)
(306)
Control Group Mean
11383
327
11056
Number of Clients
1715
1715
1715
Hochberg p-value
0.620
Panel D: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started After SKS Entry
Treatment
1260**
102
1158*
(590)
(85)
(587)
Control Group Mean
11257
233
11024
Number of Clients
392
392
392
Hochberg p-value
0.103
Panel E: Non Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
-219
-48
-171
(304)
(34)
(295)
Control Group Mean
11395
233
11162
Number of Clients
3071
3071
3071
Hochberg p-value
0.693

Food
(4)

Health
(5)

Education
(6)

Temptation
Goods
(7)

Festivals and
Celebrations
(8)

Other Labor
Income
(9)

111
(181)
6508
5353

-14
(12)
249
5353

-24
(22)
258
5353

23
(18)
299
5353

-152
(106)
2105
5353

-344
(1035)
28253
5353

127
(217)
6526
2149

-14
(12)
244
2149

-17
(36)
248
2149

14
(21)
296
2149

-113
(130)
2062
2149

-1138
(1523)
26386
2149

-142
(193)
6573
1715

-5
(12)
239
1715

-2
(19)
228
1715

14
(24)
297
1715

-65
(148)
2008
1715

-687
(1670)
25836
1715

854*
(448)
6417
392

-33
(23)
257
392

-54
(160)
364
392

49
(38)
264
392

-290
(334)
2385
392

-3397
(3664)
29463
392

59
(207)
6488
3071

-19
(15)
252
3071

-38
(26)
268
3071

36
(26)
297
3071

-253*
(152)
2140
3071

514
(1251)
29734
3071

Notes: Each column reports the estimated impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on the indicated outcome variable from the endline survey. Panel B limits the sample to business owners
at baseline, panel C to restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose businesses started before the entry of SKS in the business owner's village (using the date of the first loan as reported in the
administrative data), panel D restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose business started after the entry of SKS, and panel E restricts the sample to non-business owners at baseline. The
outcome variables reflect per capita household consumption over the previous year, where Columns 4 to 7 are monthly measures multiplied by 12. Per capita consumption is calculated per adult equivalent,
following the conversion to adult equivalents used by Townsend (1994) for rural Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra (the weights are: 1.0 for adult males, 0.9 for adult females, 0.94 for males and 0.83 for
females aged 13 to 18, 0.67 for all children aged 7 to 12, 0.52 for all children aged 4 to 6, 0.32 for all toddlers aged 1 to 3, and 0.05 for all infants). Other labor income in Column 9 sums earnings from
salaried jobs and daily labor. All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and above/below median number of clients within branch), and robust standard errors clustered
by village are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. The Hochberg p-value reflects the statistical significance of the treatment
effect on total consumption, adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing across the three summary outcomes (business, consumption, social impacts) in Tables 7, 9, and 10.

30

Table 10. Estimated Impacts of Treatment on Social Outcomes
Share of children
in school, aged 5-15
Girls
Boys
(1)
0.009
(0.019)
0.68
3001

(2)
-0.028*
(0.015)
0.732
3155

Share of teenagers
in school, aged 16-20
Girls
Boys
(3)
0.002
(0.020)
0.166
1677

Panel A: Full Sample
Treatment
Control Group Mean
Number of Clients
Hochberg p-value
Panel B: Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
-0.039
-0.002
0.001
(0.029)
(0.023)
(0.030)
Control Group Mean
0.705
0.715
0.168
Number of Clients
1201
1222
657
Hochberg p-value
Panel C: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started Before SKS Entry
Treatment
-0.040
-0.019
-0.009
(0.030)
(0.025)
(0.035)
Control Group Mean
0.700
0.720
0.174
Number of Clients
963
972
505
Hochberg p-value
Panel D: Business Owners at Baseline, Business Started After SKS Entry
Treatment
-0.035
0.091*
0.064
(0.064)
(0.055)
(0.062)
Control Group Mean
0.716
0.672
0.115
Number of Clients
216
226
134
Hochberg p-value
Panel E: Non Business Owners at Baseline
Treatment
0.043*
-0.047**
-0.006
(0.022)
(0.019)
(0.026)
Control Group Mean
0.664
0.740
0.171
Number of Clients
1719
1857
980
Hochberg p-value

(4)
-0.02
(0.024)
0.279
1627

Index of
Women's
Attitudes
(5)
-0.075**
(0.037)
0.034
1444

-0.029
(0.037)
0.312
630

-0.088
(0.054)
0.026
561

-0.031
(0.042)
-0.035
1906
0.601

-0.001
(0.040)
0.308
507

-0.081
(0.064)
0.022
444

-0.042
(0.047)
-0.032
1517
0.620

-0.107
(0.099)
0.380
107

-0.095
(0.108)
-0.014
101

0.052
(0.086)
-0.076
349
0.760

-0.025
(0.028)
0.263
970

-0.056
(0.048)
0.035
857

-0.015
(0.039)
-0.047
2739
0.693

Index of
(1) to (5)
(6)
-0.021
(0.030)
-0.042
4761
0.986

Notes: Each column reports the impact of treatment (imposing the insurance requirement) on the indicated outcome variable from the
endline survey. Panel B limits the sample to business owners at baseline, panel C to restricts the sample to business owners at baseline
whose businesses started before the entry of SKS in the business owner's village (using the date of the first loan as reported in the
administrative data), panel D restricts the sample to business owners at baseline whose business started after the entry of SKS, and panel E
restricts the sample to non-business owners at baseline. In Columns 1 to 4, the outcome variables are the share of household children that are
in school (by age and gender). In Column 5, the outcome variable is an index of adolescent girls' self-reported attitudes concerning:
whether men should be more educated than women, whether men should eat before women, the ideal age of marriage for women, whether
women should have children immediately after marriage, and the ideal number of children. The index in Column 5 reflects an equalweighted average across responses to each question, after the responses are normalized to have a mean of zero, standard deviation of one,
and the sign of the response oriented toward a more positive number reflecting more "progressive attitudes" (e.g., for the questions above:
"No", "No", older ages, "No", fewer children). In Column 6, the outcome variable is an index reflecting the equal-weighted average of the
component variables in Columns 1 to 5 (each normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one). In Columns 1 and 2, the
sample is restricted to households with children between the ages of 5 and 15. In Columns 3 and 4, the sample is restricted to households
with children between the ages of 16 and 20. In Column 5, the sample is restricted to households with girls between the ages of 14 and 19.
All regressions control for the randomization stratification groups (SKS branch and above/below median number of clients within branch),
and robust standard errors clustered by village are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%
level, and * at the 10% level. The Hochberg p-value reflects the statistical significance of the treatment effect on the index in Column 6,
adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing across the three summary outcomes (business, consumption, social impacts) in Tables 7, 8, and 10.

31

