                Research. Economic of Bureau National the of those
not and author the of those are expressed opinions Any Economics.
  Monetary and Markets Financial in program research NBER's the of
 part is here reported research The comments. and discussions ful
help- extremely for Varian Hal and Summers, Larry Shleifer, Andrei
 Shapiro, Matt Poterba, Jim Modigliani, Franco Miron, Jeff Mankiw,
   Greg Hall, Robert Gordon, Roger Fischer, Stanley Campbell, John
   Blanchard, Olivier Almansi, Aquiles Abel, Andy to grateful am I
                         1986 October
                     02138 MA Cambridge,
                  Avenue Massachusetts 1050
             RESEARCH ECONOMIC OF BUREAU NATIONAL
                     2047 No. Paper Working
                        Barsky   B.   Robert
                    TOGETHER? MOVE BONDS AND
                 STOCKS OF PRICES THE DON'T WHY
                    SERIES PAPER WORKING NBER
         48109 MI Arbor, Ann
       Michigan of University
      Economics of Department
             Barsky B. Robert
                            1970's. the in seen pattern —the asset
tangible second the of price the in rise a and rates, interest
real in drop a prices, stock in fall a to lead would sector
corporate the in growth productivity lower and risk increased
both that likely is it wealth, total of quarter a than more
been rarely has capital corporate that fact the of account takes
which model, two—real--asset richer a In growth. productivity
in fall a to response in occurs pattern same This unity. exceeds
consumption in substitution of elasticity intertemporal the if
only risk equity increasing with fall values equity market, stock
the in traded is economy the of wealth the of all When bonds.
riskiess on return the depresses risk in increase an consumption,
of   function convex a is utility marginal as long As
                                      bonds. on rates interest real
in and values equity in drop simultaneous a rationalize might
which of each - growth productivity of slowing a and risk, in
increase an - disturbances two of effects the analyzes paper This
directions. opposite in move often and closely, covary not do
claims equity and debt of prices real the that demonstrated have
authors of number a generally, More      earnings. and dividends to
relative stocks common of value the in drop large a by accompanied
were 1970's the in bonds on rates interest real low very The
                                 ABSTRACT
          Together? Move Bonds and Stocks of Prices the Dontt Why
                1986 October
    #2047 Paper Working NBER
                                                  1
consider to papers those beyond considerably go I analysis, current the of nature equilibrium
general the to addition In others. and (1971), Stiglitz and Rothschild (1970), Sandmo by studied
asset risky single a in saver individual an for statics comparative the of analogues equilibrium
general are out carry   I experiments   the form, simplest their In Fisher. Irving with associated
interest of theory neoclassical the of version stochastic modern the are studied models The
           dividends. current, to relative future, expected in reduction a through yields and prices
equity on effect diect additional an has but symmetrically, assets two the on returns equilibrium
affects This growth. productivity of rate the in decline a. is second The rate. riskfree the to ative
rel- equity on return required the raises which holding, equity with associated risk nondiversifiable
real, the in increase an is first The markets. stock and bond the of behavior puzzling the nalize
ratio- might that disturbancesof sorts two of implications the thoroughly explores paper This
                                                                                              p.231).
1982, (Shiller, discouraging." is prices stock with move to prices bond or housing, land, of failure
"the short, In bonds. on returns real subsequent with uncorrelated are ratios price dividend that
8how (1986) Shiller and Campbell rents. and dividends, coupons, real in movements for correct
to attempts after even land, and bonds of prices the and equity corporate of value the between
comovementlittle is there that contrary, the to reports, (1982) Shiller rate"). "riskiess the (perhaps
factor discount underlying common a by driven being assets these of all of prices the prices, stock
with closely covary should streams) payments real their to (relative assets other and land, bonds,
of prices the that imply to tend rates discount time-varying of xiodels simplest the however, (1982),
Shiller by emphasized As rate. discount equilibrium the in changesof result the are prices stock in
movements major that suspect economists many valuation, rational of notion the drop to Reluctant
1985). Shapiro, and Romer, Mankiw, and 1981; Porter, and Leroy 1981; Shiler, particular, in (see,
time over constant is return expected the which in model expectations rational a by explained be
can prices stock of fluctuations observed that view the on doubt strong cast has work Recent
                                                      2
surprising not is it standards, U.S. postwar by inflation high of one was period post-1973 the As
                                                          p.231). 1983, (Summers, puzzling. is spread
this in increase The 1978. in percent 9.8 to 1965 in percent          3.1   from substantially, widened
has income corporate on claims of types two the of valuation relative the between spread The
   unchanged. generates it income the to relative sector corporate the of valuation the leaving
rates, interest lower with associated prices bond in rise the offset has prices stock real in
decline The equity. and debt on return expected the between spread the widened substantially
rate interest real declining the with coupled ratio earnings-price the of value increasing The
                                                                                       related": are market
stock the and rate interest the of behavior puzzling the "whether questions (1983) Summers
                                                                     1978. in .23 to 1965 in .16 from went
housing occupied owner of share corresponding The 1978. in .11 to 1965 in .27 from went economy)
U.S. the for Sheets Balance Fed the (from wealth household total in equity corporateof share The
well. as reallignment major a underwent assets real alternative of prices relative The decade. the of
rest the for   13   below remained and 1974, in 9 to 1972 in 19 from fell earnings after-tax to relative
index price stock 500 S&P the of value the hand, other the On 1983). Mehra, 1984; Summers,
and (Blanchard period this of much over bills on returns negative forecast consistently have could
Agents bonds. on rates interest real ante ex low very of period a as out stand 1980 to 1973 years
The directions. opposite in streams, earnings real associated their of estimates plausible to relative
values, equity and debt of movement of example dramatic a provides 1970's the of decade The
                                                               puzzle. pricing asset macroeconomic our of
rationalization potential a as promise some shows consider, we disturbances two the by perturbed
when "housing", and equity" "corporate assets, tangible two with model The consequence. major
of be to out turns these of last The asset. risky one than more of case the and substitution,
intertemporal to aversion and aversion risk between distinction the accumulation, capital of issues
                                                   3
se, per aversion risk of not consequence a is rate riskless the in drop The   it. for suppport theoretical
find and safety" to "flight a such of notion the rigorously develop I assets. risky less into stocks
risky from away substitute agents as risk increased of consequence likely intuitively an be to seem
would rate riskless the in drop a Yet simultaneously. rates interest real low the and values equity
depressed the explain could risk increased that possibility the considered have authors other nor
they Neither capital. of product marginal the of volatility increased to due premium risk the in
increase an to v.lues equity in fall large the attribute both (1984) Pindyck and (1979) Malkiel
                                                        p.559). 1981, Gordon, (see nations European
for held pattern similar A 1978. to 1973 from percent 0.38 only averaged rate growth that 1973, to
1950 period   the for percent 2.1 averaged States United the in person employed per growth output
real while that, noteworthy is it productivity, to regard With 1979). (Malkiel, bonds" "junk on
premium the did as 1985), Summers, and Poterba 1984; Pindyck, 1976, (Black, markedly rose
volatility price stock that fact the by provided is risk in increase an for evidence Some growth.
productivity of rate slow relatively a and uncertainty, great relatively of one as of thought typically
is decade That 1970's. the of feature distinguishing only the means no by was inflation high But
                                                bonds. and stocks both misvalue to investors caused
illusion inflation that suggest and evaluation rational on based explanation an of despair puzzle,
market stock the and anomaly rate interest the between link a suggesting first for credit deserve
who (1979), Cohn and Modigliani interest. nominal of deductibility the from borrowing to subsidy
large the of because values, market raise to was interactions inflatio-tax of effect net the that
argue all (1979) Cohn and Modigliani and (1984), Pindyck (1979), Hendershott and sharply, fell
earnings after-tax to prices share of ratio the However, market. stock the in fall the of some least
at for account can gains capital nominal of taxation and accounting, inventory FIFO depreciation,
cost historic to due taxes extra of effect the that argues (1980) Feldstein inflation. of effect some to
values equity and rates interest real both of depression the attribute to tried have authors many    that
                                                      4
 capital fixed a with model basic the out lays I Section follows. as is paper the of plan
                                                                                          The
                                        data. the in seen behavior the rationalize to able be well might
 we sector, corporate the of
                             share the for and      - for values reasonable with and portfolio, wealth
 total the in equity of share the to related negatively is perversely move prices stock
                                                                                        which beyond
 parameter curvature the of value critical The problem. this remedies
                                                                      largely output, on claims all
 represents longer no equity corporate which in assets, tangible two with model
                                                                                The disturbance.
 either of analysis   y market stock the in fall the on light shed to ability our lose but rates, interest
 real in drop the of explanation an gain we so, If growth. productivity decreased to response
                                                                                                  in
 way" wrong "the go also can values equity and rate, growth expected the in reductiona
                                                                                          and tainty
 uncer- rate-of-retuin in increase an between isomorphisrn
                                                           striking a is there that out turns It
                                              result. his of derivation formal a provides utility log and
asset tangibleone with model my logic, Hendershott's endorsing Without
                                                                       unchanged. largely prices
stock with rate, interest the on primarily fall would risk increased of effects the that
                                                                                         conclusion
the at arrived (1979) Hendershott model, simulation hoc ad an In invariant. remain values stock
that so magnitude, same the of are premium equity the in rise the and rate interest the
                                                                                         in fall
the utility, log With values. market raises and effect, saving precautionary the through return
of rate required the lowers risk increased utility, log with agents than substitution
                                                                                      intertemporal
to averse more are agents likely, is as If, direction. that in presumption a fact in is there asset,
tangible only the are stocks where model, first the In rise. nonetheless prices stock that much
so falls rate riskiess the rises, premium equity
                                                 the although      that, happei well may It argument.
Pindyck the in arises ambiguity fundamental a however, endogenized, is rate riskless the Once
                                                          aversion. risk absolute decreasing of that than
weaker is derivative third the on condition the and effect, important arid plausible a as economists
by accepted generally is risk increased to response in saving Precautionary function. utility the of
second) the than (rather derivative third the involves which effect an saving, precautionary of but
                                                   5
                                            remarks. concluding brief some contains III Section
                           shocks. to response in vary capital of quantity and price the both which
in case, intermediatethe for intuition some get to us helps This capital. of productivity marginal
expected the in decrease a and risk in increase an to capital of product marginal equilibrium the
and rate riskiess tle of response the study can we However, prices. stock of fluctuation discuss
cannot we cost, reproduction by determined is model that in capital of price relative the Because
accumulation. capital long-run of case the model, the of version "q=1" a treats H-c Section
                                         1970's. puzzling the in seen pattern the exactly rise, prices
house and fall, prices stock fall, rates interest real that plausible is it consider, we shocks two the
to response In facts. stylized appropriate the rationalize to analysis our of ability the strengthens
considerably section This assets. tangible two to extension all-important the treats lI-b Section
                                                                             aversion. risk relative of
coefficient the than rather substitutionof elasticity intertemporal the be to perhaps, surprisingly
out, turns prices stock on effect the of direction the of terms in parameter pivotal the role, a play
both Although (1985). Hall by advocated and (1978) Selden by pioneered approach Equivalence
Certainty Ordinal the using this address I substitution.intertemporal to aversion and aversion risk
between distinction important the with begins It extensions. subtle more the treats II Section
                        available. are results clearcut no that way .,a such in process supply money
the on depends assets risky as bonds nominal of character the Unfortunately, theory. formal the
of bonds riskless the with contrast in bonds, nominal of discussion a with closes I Section clearly.
through comes (1972) Modigliani and Dreze and (1971) Stiglitz and Rothschild (1970), Sandmo of
statics comparative the to model equilibrium general our of relation The proportions. misleading
somewhat in perhaps but here, seen are effects principal The asset. tangible one only and stock,
                                                  6
                                     are: conditions first—order the Thus fiE[U(C2)}.+ U(C1) form
the of functions utility expected concave time—additive, constraints) budget intertemporal their to
(subject maximize Agents consumption. of terms in riskiess are that bonds issue) (or buy to also
and price, market the at equity in trade freely to able as himself perceives individual Each
                                                                                      Model Basic A.
                                                                   fl-b. Section in treatment realistic
more the for
             prepacation in effects, principal the illustrating as regarded be should section This
issues. the of understanding complete a for crucial is particular, in latter, The market. stock the
in traded those than other output on claims allow to and accumulation capital long—run treat to
assumptions these of some relax I sections, later In economy. the of output aggregate the on claim
unit a to amounts stock of share a others, among (1986), Campbell and (1978) Lucas of models the
in as Thus, capital. this by produced is output all that and supply, fixed in is which capital of kind
one is there that assumption the with begin I assumption, one—consumer the to addition In
                                                      analysis. this of scope the beyond considered be
must which questions of multitude a raises markets incomplete of world a hand, other the On risk.
aggregate undiversifable, of price equilibrium the reflects value market stock the accomplished, This
consumers. the among risks of sharrng optimal in result markets claims contingent The markets.
complete of set a with consumers many of model a in derived be aiso could results The returns.
asset equilibrium on risk aggregate of effect the studying in interested are we as purposes, our for
appropriate be to appears This model. consumer representative a witi work I simplicity, For
                                                                                 economy. the of rate
growth expected the in decline a b) and capital; of payoff the in dispersion a)increased by: affected
are bonds riskless to and capital to both returns required the how show to on go then       I   pricing.
asset equilibrium general of model two—asset two—period, simplest the develop I section, this In
                    EquilibriumGeneral Lu Returns Required and Rates, Growth Risk, I.
                                                  7
 The substitution. of rate marginal stochastic the by weighted "dividend") (or payoff sumption
con- random the of expectation the is claim equity an of price the that implies
                                                                                (5) Equation
                                                         rate. interest equilibrium the determine to
relationship production a with combined be must derived is (4) which from condition first—order
the generally, More level. aggregate the at exogenous consumption makes technology the since
rate, interest the of theory complete a is (4) context present the in that Note rate. interest the of
theory cffagramrnatic two—period Fisher's Irving of world stochastic a to generalization the storage,
without economy endowment the for is, (4) Thus substitution.of rate marginal expected an of
inverse the just is bonds riskiess on rate interest equilibrium the that us tells (4) Equation
(5)                               fiE[U'(Y2)i']       peq. =
                                                             E[ñJ
                                   U'(Y1)E[J          E[]
 (4                                             —
                                                —   pbond
                                      U'(Y1)          1
(3)                                     â2=c        C1=Y1
                            equilibrium: general the characterize to immediately us allows "trees"
the by produced is ouput all that assumption the to addition in Nonstorability, supply. net zero
in is asset riskless the and supply, positive fixed in and homogeneous are trees The "equity". with
identify we which "trees," tradeable by produced and nonstorable is output (1978), Lucas in As
rate. risk—free real the plus one is R1 and equity, on return of rate random the plus one is where
                                                                                            ñ
(2),                                 U'(C1) = R8E[U'(O2)}
(1)                                  U'(C1) = PE[U'(ô2).k]
                                                  8
marginal expected raises   Y on spread    mean—preserving     a utility, marginal convex of presence
the in Intuitively, 1971). (Arrow, aversion risk absolute decreasing of condition accepted widely
the than weaker is and 1968), (Leland, saving for demand precautionary a of existence the for
condition the exactly is utility marginal Convex alone. aversion risk of implication an not is rate
riskless the and risk between relationship negative our Thus C. in convex be utility marginal that
or positive, be U"(.) that is rate riskJess the depress to risk aggregate increasing for condtion
sufficient and nece'sary a that us tells (6) U"(.), of that is E[U"(2)e} of sign the Since
                           E[U'(22)1]        —        E[U'(2)22]      —
                                                                      —    dh
7'
                      E[]?2E[U"(f)e]             —E[k]?2E[U'(2)e]         dE[ñ]
                                         E[U'(Y2)]        —
                                                          —   dh
(6)
                                     -Rf2E[U"(Y2)€J           dR1
                                                   obtain: we h, to respect with Differentiating
                                                                                                byh.1
parametrizedvariance with unity, of mean a having all distributions, log—normal of family a scribe
de- could he + 1 instance, For non—negative. is he + 1 that such is e of support the and parameter,
scale a is h variable, random zero—meana is e where he, + 1 form the of multiplicative as risk the
parametrize us let risk, increased the to respect with returns required the of derivatives for sions
expres- explicit get to order In sense. (1970) Rothschild—Stiglitz the in risk" "increasing is spread
mean—preserving a Such constant. held E[Y2} with Y2, of dispersion the in increase an Consider
                                                                                Risk in Increase An B.
                                                                    martingale. a is Y for process the
if only Y1/P ratio dividend—price conventional the with coincides and price, the to dividend future
expected the of ratio the is return expected equilibrium the that Note (1982). Shiller and (1982)
Shiller and Grossman in appears price stock the for expression this of generalization multi—period
                                                   9
opposing two the of interpretation alternative an allow they as illuminating, are These returns.
equity and rates interest riskless for solutions explicit derive (1984), Campbell following can, we
2, for distribution   lognormal a with combined aversion relative constant of case the For
                             one. than less is if7 only and if uncertainty increased with rises capital
on return expected equilibrium the Thus well. as negative is E[U'(.)e] negative, is U" Since
                                         E[U'(Y2)Y2]            —
                                                                —    dh
(8)                                                    —
                                  1)E[]?2E[U'(12)cJ        (y       dE[f]
        becomes: (7) aversion, risk relative constant of case the For equity. to return required the
in fall or rise a. either in result can uncertainty rate—of—returnin increase an thus and dominate,
can effect either general In returns. required the on pressure downward exerts this supply, fixed
in assets both With demands. asset increasing period, second the in consumption low very of
prospect the raises risk increased The effect. saving precautionary a reflects This aversion. risk
absolute decreasing under negative is term second the that shows 35) p. (1970, Sandmo in results
the of application straightforward A returns. required raise to tends this capital, of stock fixed
the of share his hold equilibrium in must consumer representative the since However, equities.
for demand notional the in fall corresponding a and risk, the sidestep to order in consumption
period first greater involves utility of level original the achieve to way cost—minimizing the asset,
capital the of riskiness increased With (1970). Sandmo in effect substitution the to corresponds
This alone. aversion risk by positive is (7) in term first The arbiguous. is values) equity hence (and
returns stock required on risk equity increased of effect the that demonstrates (7) Equation
                 quadratic. be utility that is finance, applied in work much in presumption the be
to appears as variability, consumption to unrelated be to rate riskiess equilibrium the for condition
sufficient and necessary a   that implies (6) that Note time. that at maturing bond consumption) of
terms (in riskiess a hold to desire consumer's the increases thus and period, second the in utility
                                                     10
utility CRRA the since expected, as is This rate.          risk—free     the depresses unambiguously   Y2   on
spread mean—preserving a aversion, risk relative constant under that, confirms (12) Equation
(14)
                                                       dZ
                                                              tj,.2
(13)                                      =-t(1—-i).
                                                1         dlogE[R]
                   1'
                                                        dor2
(12)                                      =—-i(i+-i).
                                                1     d1og(R-')
                                                                               are: expressions resulting The
—.do2.   = dE[log(Y2)] constraint the to subject o2, to respect with differentiate to need we Y2, to
spread mean—preserving a applying of effect the study To              Y. of variance and mean the both raises
risk increasing that note log(Y2), variable randomdistributed normally the of variance the denote .2
Letting (11). and (10), (9), in returns required the on risk increasing of effects the consider Now
(11)                                         ''Var[log(Y2)]   =Z
                                 —
(10)          )12)Var[log(Y2)]       (i' + log(Yj)] — 'E[log(2) + log(fl) —        = log(E[])
                                      —
(9)                                       log(Y1)] — 'yE[log(22)+ —log(fi)       = log(R)
                   !t2Var[log(Y2)]
                                                 Then: R1. log — log(E[RJ) = Z as premium equity the
define to example this in useful is It effects. substitution and income into decomposition a than
rather premium, equity the on effect an and rate riskless the on effect an into E[F?] on impact the
of decomposition a on based is interpretation This capital. on return required the affecting forces
                                                    11
riskless the on effect comparable a have also setting) current the in least (at must it premium,
equity the on effect important an has risk aggregate increased if Further, prices. stock in drop a
is than risk increased of implication robust more a be to appears rate riskless the in fail A
                                                           remains. ambiguity theoretical the although
plausibility, in gains presumption Pindyck the There unity. than greater considerably becomes         y
of value critical the sector, corporate the of share the of values representative For economy. the
in "trees" output-yielding the of one only is equity corporate which in problem complex more
a treats tI-b Section   'y. on evidence the with incompatible necessarily is story Pindyck's       that
point this at infer to premature is it However, unity. than greater probably is it        that suggest
evidence available that conclude arid   ,   parameter the of interpretationempirical the discuss I Il-a,
Section In economy.5 the in risk of amount the to related endogenously price equilibrium an than
rather parameter, exogenous an as rate riskless the of treatment his on critically depend results
unambiguous Pindyck's capital.of product marginal the of volatility increased to due premium risk
the in increase an to attributed be should 1970's the in values equity in fall the that (1984) Pindyck
of argument the behind presumption theoretical the undermine (13) and (10), (7), Equations
                                      assets. both on returns required depress to as large sufficiently
is effect saving precautionary the however, unity, exceeds i' When equilibrium. in premium equity
the raising bonds, riskiess to relative attractive less stocks makes dispersion increased case, either
In prices. stock in rise   a and return stock required the in fall a causing premium, equity the in
                                                                                  ''
increase the than more by rate riskiess the lowers risk increased inity, exceeds If rate. riskless the
in drop the by offset exactly is premium equity the in increase the because is This Y2. of dispersion
the of independent are values equity utility, log of case benchmark the For one.2 than less is -'
parameter the if only returns stock required raises risk increased that confirms (13) Finally,
                                                                                       premium. equity
the raises risk increasing that shows (14) Equation derivative. third positive a exhibits function
                                                       12
    would price stock current The unchanged. return of rate required the and dividend current the
    with dividends real future expected in reduction a imagine example, simple a take To dividends.
    current to relative dividends future expected in changes rather but stocks, on returns expected
    the in changes of not indicative are yields dividend in movements some least at that possible is it
    However, assets. two the on return of rate required the in changes differential of reflection a as
    directions opposite in values equity and prices bond of movement interpreted we A Section In
                                                                   Growth of Rate the in Reduction A C.
                                                         analysis.5 rigorous by supported not implication
    an se, per aversion risk of implication an is effect this that suggest to appear however, cussions,
    dis- non—academic Such risk. increasing of presence the in assets risky less towards substitution
    of process the from resulting rate riskiess the of depression the describes press financial popular
    the in safety" to "flight a of notion the note, different a quite On function. utility marginal the
    of convexity the of terms in interpretation an gave and processes), consumption log—normal and
    utility aversion risk relative constant on (based rate riskiess the for expressions closed—form in sign
    negative a with variance consumption of appearance the to attention drew both (1985) Breeden
    and (1984) Campbell positive. is U" when states across output aggregate of dispersion the in ing
    increas- is prices) claims contingent the all of sum the just is (which bond riskiess a of value the that
-   noted markets, complete of presence the in models state—preference of discussion lucid his in (1970),
    Hirshleifer unnoticed. completely gone not has it although literature, the in attention inadequate
    received has point This paper. this of theme central a is rate, risidess the depress to risk creased
    in- for tendency the particular in rates, interest riskiess and risky of endogeneity joint The
    analysis. our from support theoretical some receives paper, that in justified well not though prices,
    stock on effect little have but rate interest the depress might risk increased that (1979) Hendershott
    of conclusion The insignificant. quantitatively as priori a dismissed be cannot rate riskless the on
    risk of effect the Thus magnitude.4 of order same the of be to seen -were effects two the since rate,
                                                     13
exerts dividends future expected in fall a hand, one the On here. operating effects two are there
Evidently, ambiguous. is 11') in ratio dividend/price the on hence (and equity of price the on growth
decreased of effect net the that see we (10'), From 'i). parameter the by (measured substitution
intertemporal to aversion of degree the by determined being drop the of extent the falls, R1 that
see we (9'), From constant. held
                                 Var[2] and 1' with E[1'2] in reduction a of case the Consider
                                                                   —
(11')                 inesscntials     + log(Yi)) — 1)(E[log(i)]       ( = log(Yi/P)
(10')                   inessentiais    + 'log(Yi) + 'y)E[log(2)]— (1 = 1og(Pe)
(9')                       :neasentiaIs    + log(Y1)) — '(E[log(f'2)] = log(R)
                                                                       have: We A. Section from example
consumption lognormal aversion, risk relative constant the in apparent readily are issues The
                     fall. also will ratio dividend—price the that much so drop might rate interest real
the whether ask to lead is one hand, other the On rise. ratios dividend—price and fall rates interest
       —
real       1970's the in seen pattern the yield would growth productivity in reduction this dividend,
future reduced the of price stock the on effect the overturn to as so large sufficiently not is interest
of rate the in drop the If stocks. and bonds both on interest of rate real lower a with associated be
also would rate growth the in reduction       a here, considered models pricing asset Lucas—type the of
framework the in least At unaffected. rates interest equilibrium leave not would it but dividends,
current to relative dividends future expected in reduction a in result probably would whole a as
economy the in productivity of growth expected the in reduction exogenous An 559). p. 1981,
(Gordon, 1973 to 1950 period the for percent 2.1 with compared annum, per percent 0.38 was
U.S. the in person employed per output of rate growth average the 1978, and 1973 Between
                                                                                           hypothesis.6
by constant was rate discount the though rise, would ratio price to dividend the thus and fall
                                                 14
and consumption aggregate with correlated perfectly is bond nominal a on return real the Thus
predictable. perfectly are movements price other any and direction, opposite the in level price the
in movement a by one—for—one met is output to shock any scenario) above the (under because is
This equity! to equivalent is bond nominal a say), constraint, Clower a to (due constant is velocity
and process, deterministic any follows supply money the output, on claims all represents market
stock the when that out points (1982) Lucas demand). money general, in (and, supply money the
by followed process stochastic the on crucially depend will bonds dollar—denominated on return
required The bonds. nominal on return real expected the on risk increased of effect the concerning
inferences to bonds riskiess for results our from directly proceed cannot we Unfortunately,
                                                                                    Bonds Nominal D.
                                                               negative. is effect that when fall and
positive, is saving individual on effect parametric the when rise prices Stock 'y. large for dominate
effects income and small), is   y when (i.e. large is substitution of elasticity intertemporal the
when dominate saving) from (away effects Substitution return. of rate expected the in reduction
a of that as same the is uncertainty rate—of—return in increase an of saving individual on       effect
parametric the asset, risky single   a of form the in be must saving all   When 1972). Modiglia.ni,
and Dreze 1969; (Sandmo, result statics comparative well—known a of analogue equilibrium general
the is symmetry this stocks, of case the In 1. >      - when rise and 1, <   '   when fall prices stock
but rise, always prices bond riskiess shock, either to response In prices. asset on effects their of
terms in symmetry striking a show growth of rate the in a_reduction and risk in increase An
                          falls. rate growth the as rise values equity and dividend, future expected
the in drop percentage the exceeds return of rate required the in drop percentage the 1, > y for
while dominates, effect" "numerator the 1 < y For prices. stock raise to tends consumption of
rate growth the in reduction the accompanies which return of rate required the in fall the hand,
other the On return. of rate required given a for price, stock the on pressure downward direct
                                                  15
                                                    Substitution Intertemporal vs. Aversion Risk A.
                                                                                     Extensions IL
              prices. stock of determination the studying in interest of be to continues event, any in
rate, riskiess "shadow" theoretical The bonds. nominal long—term on rates about predictions rate
riskless the of theory the from extrapolating in cautious be must we Thus judge. to which on basis
little very be to appeVars there tenuous; more be may relationship the bonds, term long For theory.
by given rate riskiess "shadow" the to close be may assets nominal short—term an return expected
the that suggests This viewpoint. that adopt also (1985) Prescott and Mehra zero. to close is rates
bill in embodied risk inflation for premium the that i.e. determination, rate interest short—term
in role negligible a plays risk inflation that is conclusion Their bills. short—term of pricing the
in risk inflation of role the investigate (1985) McDonald and Kane, Bodie, and (1976) Fama
                                                                                   market. stock the
to shocks with identical be not will level price the affect which GNP total to shocks The defined).
(narrowly equity on return the with not wealth, of sources all from payoffs the of sum the with
correlated perfectly be will bonds nominal on return the supply, money deterministic a with Then,
wealth. total of fraction a only represents equity corporate lI—B, Section in extensively discuss I as
Second, bonds). nominal on return real realized the hence (and level price the on shocks supply
output of effect the offset largely might (1986), Huffman and Greenwood and (1982) Plosser and
King by discussed as stock, money the of procycicality Etdogenous endogenous. degree, large
very   a to is, supply money the First, case. the is opposite the that suspect to me lead example
above the from departures realistic two fact, In bonds. index to than equity to closer generally are
bonds nominal States, United the in that, implausible seems it bonds, nominal and bonds riskiess
between distinction the of importance the illustrates powerfully example Lucas the While
                                                                 return. equity the with and output,
                                                   16
                     have: we parameters, independent) (though constant are substitution of ticity
elas- intertemporalthe and aversion risk relative of coefficient the   that so V and U Choosing
                                          (C2)V'
(16)                                                      = U'(C1)
                                   ,9R'E[V'(C2)JU'(O2)
                                        V'(C2)
(15)                                                = U'(C1)
                                   flE[RV(C2)]U(C2)
                                                                  are: conditions order first The
                                                           intertemporally. substitute to willingness
determines U of that while aversion, risk governs V of curvature The consumption. second—period
random the of utility expected the to equal utility provide would that level nonstochastic that i.e.
consumption, of level equivalent" "certainty the is O2 Here functions. concave are V(.) and U(.)
andE[V(ã2)], = V(O2) satisfies O2 where flU(O2), + U(Ci) maximize consumers Formally,
                                               time-additive. remaining while risk, toward attitudes
and choice intertemporalgoverning functions distinct specifies approach This orderings. preference
Neumann—MorgensternVon time—additive, of class the generalizes considerably which and lence",
Equiva- Certainty "Ordinal calls he which preferences of representation a offers (1978) Selden
                                                                                       effects. two the
between distinguish to extended be can analysis previous the how show I section, this In founded.
con- are substitution intertemporal to aversion and aversion risk of effects the   that is preferences
of representation simple this of consequence a emphasizes, 1985) (1982, Hall As aversion. risk
relative of coefficient (constant) the of inverse the be to substitutionof elasticity intertemporal the
constrain choices these particular, In preferences. on restrictions strong implies utility one—period
for function power the and utility Neumann—Morgenstern Von time—separable of choice The
                                                     17
                                                                                            obtain: We
                                   _dor2.     = dE[log(2)] imposing c2, to respect with differentiate
we   Y, of distribution the on spread   mean—preserving       a of   effects the study to again,Once
(22)                                         crVar[log(2)} = Z
(21)       Var[log(2)}— +a(1 (-y + log(Yi)] — 7E[log(f'2) + log(fi) — = E[Re] log
                                             —
(20)         i'))Var[log(22)]+ a(1 —             log(Y)] — 'E[Iog(2) + log(fl) — = log(R)
                                       ('i
                                                          are: model OCE parameter constant lognormal,
the for premium equity the and rate, risk—free the equity, to return expected the for solutions The
(19)                                          —
                           a)Var[1og()].          (1 + E[log(2)] = log()
            have: we (1985), Hall following then and lognormal, conditionally be           Y2   = C2 Let
I. Section of model simple the of those to collapse conditions order first the      ,=a     when that Note
(18)                                   flRfEEc;a1o;. =          C
                                                                                                           and
(17)                                   flE{RC]O =
                                                                                     become: (16) and (15)
Equations substitution.of elasticity the of inverse the is      '    and aversion, risk relative is   a where
                               cl_aV(C)=1 and               U(C)=1,
                                                   18
us allowing market", "stock the in traded not are which assets risky allow to model the extend to
want we results robust obtain to volatility, market stock increased with associated be to uncertainty
economic general in increases expect would we Although overwhelming. not are correlations these
assets, other on returns the with and consumption with correlated significantly is 500 S&P the on
return the while Further, wealth. total of fraction a only comprise equities Corporate economy.
the in assets the of all represents market stock the that asssumption the relax I section, this In
                                                                                Assets Risky Two B.
                                                                       time. over profile consumption
uneven an to averse very are consumers when i.e. "complements", strong are consumption period
second and first when dominates effect saving precautionary The saving. first—period on certainty
un- rate—of—returnof effect the of sign the determines that consumption period second and first
between substitutabilityof degree the is it that finding Selden'8of analogue equilibrium general the
is This sign. the on bearing no has but direction), either (in effect the of magnitude the determine
to helps parameter aversion risk The unity. than less or greater is parameter sustitution poral
intertem- the whether on only depends risk increasing with rises or falls equity on return required
the Whether case. OCE the to (1970) Sandmo extends which paper, (1979) Selden's with miliar
unfa- readers to surprising appear may (24) result The choice. intertemporal without model a in
even defined well is premium equity the since expected, as is This alone. aversion risk on depends
premium equity The substitution. intertemporalto aversion and aversion risk both in increasing
is effect this of magnitude The increases. risk as unambiguously fai.ls again rate riskiess The
(25)                                             a. =
                                                        dZ
                                             —      =
(24)                                   -y)
                                                        dlogE[}
(23)                                   1)               =
                                            —a(-i+          dlog(Rf)
                                                  19
(up is price stock The independent.are    t and e where k,7), + 2(i = Y and hE), + ?(i =           let
case, CRRA simple the in price stock equilibrium the for statics comparative explicit obtain To
                                                                                       concentrated.
is risk increased the which in assets (tradeable) those on premium the raises but effect, derivative
third the through assets all on returns the depress to tends risk Increased equity. to return required
the affecting forces opposing two be still will there before, As capital". "corporate to return the
and consumption covariation.f the increases it that extent the to premium equity the raise will It
rate. riskiess the depress to continue will consumption of variability the raises that shock Any risk.
of measures both involves return stock equilibrium the for expression the Hence rate. riskiess the
determining in risk of notion relevant the remains consumption of variability The consumption.
with return market stock the of covariance the is premium equity the for measure risk propriate
ap..   the capital, on return with correlated perfectly longer no is consumption when Thus,
                                        —
(24)                                        log(1 = Z where     Z, + log(R) = E[ñJ log
              flU'(±Y22))) Cov(.,
                                        equity: on return required the for have we logs, Taking
                                                                    (1982) Shiller and Grossman by
exploited asset tradeable freely any on return the for expression beta" "consumption the is which
                            U'(Y1)                     __________
)23(                  I               OVpeq C —                            ER
                          U'Y2'+?))    (Y2                 U'(Y1)
                                                                                                have:
we Y, + Y' = C2 with but I, Section from (1) condition equation order first the Using economy.
the in assets other all from return the represents Y while stocks, from payoff period second the
represent Y Let payoffs. period second stochastic with "trees" two be to there allow now We
                                                                                       idiosyncratic.
largely be may risk its that or "small", be may sector corporate the that notion the precise make to
                                                      20
                   V-'2 2
                    p        1
                                                     112 £2      1
                    2     r                         2 j-   ',
                                                       1
between bounded is - 2 _ if Thus uniformly. > _____         - 'y if price stock the lowers and formly
                                                         2
                      2.1
uni-1/ < 2+1'22 Y2- if price stock the raises dividends future expected in increase an Thus
                                        - he)(1 + Y(1 + E[('
                         -'2m)]
                                                      have: We case. two—risky—asset the to 'dividends'7
of growth of rate the in reduction a of analysis earlier the modifies approach similar A
                                                                     restrictions. further without effect the
sign to possible appear not does it   13,   <   - < 7 range the In 13. -> if it raises and 7, < - if price
stock the depresses risk increasing then uniformly,             2+Y2 Y2- <
                                                           !<        '2         if! instance, For 1/7. to 1/4
is fraction this for range reasonable a that suggest introduction the in numbers The wealth. total
                                                            -
in sector corporate the of share the as of thought best is Y21+Y22
                                                              2
                                                                - dominates. rate riskiess the
of depression the which above value critical another and price, stock the on effect the dominates
premium risk the in increase the which below unity than greater '' of value critical a notion'of the
                                   i'+l       Yi+Y2
suggestsresult This uniformly.              > - 2 * if value equity the raises and uniformly,
                                                                                                         2
       2    share market stock (stochastic) the if price stock the depresses risk increasing Thus
                                      + (- - _(.)--1(2 = U'(.)) +
                   1)h?'
                                       of sign the by determined is covariance above the of sign The
                                                                          dh
(26)                             U'(.))] + ((U"(.)21 V1Cov[e,
                                                                          peq
                                                            obtain: we h, to respect with Differentiating
(25)       kq))'] + ?(i + he) + ((?2'(l he) + E[2'(1 = 22)] +                   E['(        (P)
                        or   2 of distribution the on depend doesn't that factor multiplicative a to
                                                    21
                                                                                                  effects. tax
on based (1984) Poterba of that to alternative an is which 1970's, the during prices house in
                                                                                              rise
sharp the of explanationan have we Thus sector. corporate the in growth productivity reduced to
prices house of response the for hold will result corresponding A 0. > U" since uncorrelated), are
returns assets' risky two the that assumption the under (again, positive be to seen easily is which
(27)                                   U"(.)2] V21Cov[e, dP"/dh
                    by given is equity corporate to payoff the on spread preserving mean a to prices
house of response the example) CRRA the with (continuing Then 'houses.' as asset second the of
think we Suppose implication. attractive additional an has assets tangibletwo with model The
                                   robust. be to continues sector corporate the in growth productivity
declining to and risk increased to both adjustment of burden the of fraction non—negligible a least
at bear will assets riskiess (relatively) on returns that conclusion The consumption. in substitution
intertemporal on evidence empirical available with consistent range the in lie direction either in
movements price stock with consistent y of values as conclusion, foregone a means any by not
still is it However, credibility. in gains prices stock depress and return of rate required the raise
would volatility market stock increased that (1984) Pindyck of presumption The studied. have we
disturbances two the to response in directions opposite in values equity arid debt of movements
with consistent are   -y   of values reasonable very that find now we         <
                                                                        1),       (i.e. low implausibly is
substitution intertemporal to aversion when only rationalized is anomajy the asset physical one
only with model the in Whereas closely. covary to prices stock and prices bond of failure the
for account can sector corporate the in growth productivity changing and risk time—varying              that
view the of plausibility the raises considerably assets risky two with model the of Analysis
                                                                                       7.   > if falls and
                                                                                              '
4, <   '' if dividends future expected with rises price stock the then probabiity,one, with          arid +
                                                  22
productionneoclassical ordinary an is 1(k) where f(k)(1+hc), as represented is technology The
                             freely. lend and borrow to able as themselves see individuals although
supply, net zero in is asset riskiess the again, Once firms. competitive of maximization profit the
and behavior saving atomistic of interaction the from resulting that with coincide will consumer
representative the of utility the maximize to k chooses who planner a by achieved allocation The
1982). and 1978 Brock, 1980; Mehra, and (Prescott problem planner's a and economy well—behaved
this of competitive"equiibrium the between analogy the exploit I solution, of ease For invested.
and saved or consumed, be either can unity) to (normalized endowment the period, first the In
technology. production returns diminishing a with model1" = "g two—period simple a Consider
                        capital. of product marginal expected equilibrium the on and rate, riskless
the on progress technical of rate the in reduction a or risk increasing of effect the study however,
can, We context. this in fluctuations price stock discuss cannot we capital, of cost reproduction the
reflects run long theoretical this in capital of price relative the Since models.8 growth neoclassical
standard in as capital, of supply elastic fully a of case polar the examine we section this In capital.
of product) marginal the hence (and quantity the in change a through occurs adjustment the
of bulk the run, long the in until, adjusted is place in capital of amount the time, Over
                                        prices. stock in fluctuations observed for account hardly can
elastic highly is goods capital of supply the which in model a Indeed, accumulation. capital than
rather capital, of price relative the "q", in movements through occur return of rate required the in
changes to adjustments periods, long relatively over Even capital.   f product   marginal the in dent
a makes hardly investment year's A run. short—to--medium the of representation reasonable a be
to appear supply, fixed in are goods capital which in far, so examined models exchange The
                                                                            Accumulation Capital C.
                                                                1970's. the about facts stylized major
our all fitting of capable values, parameter reasonable for is, model two-asset the summary, In
                                                     23
                                                                                                capital.
less or more either in result can uncertainty rate—of—returnin increase an thus and dominate, can
effect either general, In planner. the   to open saving of channel only the is accumulation capital
effect; saving precautionary   a reflects This aversion. risk absolute decreasing under positive is term
second the that shows 35) p. (1970, Sandmo in results the of application straightforward A risk.
the of some sidestep to order in consumption first—period increase to planner the leads asset capital
the of riskiness incresed yhereby effect, substitutionthe is This alone. aversion risk by negative is
term first The product. marginal its lowers capital, more accumulating in planner, the analysis my
in that is course, of difference, analytical The saving. individual on uncertainty rate—of—returnof
effect the considered who (1970), Sandmo in (12) equation to related closely is (11) Equation
                               condition. order second the by negative is thusandk)), — U'(l — hE)]
+ d/dk(fiE[U'(.)f'(k)(i= k) — U"(l + hc)f"(k)J + U'(.)(l + he)2(f'(k))2 + 8E[U"(.)(1= H where
(30)             he)]/H, + f(k)8E[U"(.)ef'(k)(l— —E[U'(.)c]f'(k)/H = dk/dh
                                                     return: the to spread mean—preserving a applying
of stock capital equilibrium the on effect the find we h, to respect with (27) Differentiating
(29)                             k) — U'(l = he))]   +
                       Thus: period. second the in consumption to claim riskiess     a purchasing and
consumption first—period his increasing between margin the at indifferftnt be must consumer the
since rate, riskiess shadow the characterize still can we equilibrium, in traded are bills no Although
(28)                      he)] + he))f'(k)(l + flE[U'(f(k)(l = k) — U'(l
                                      is: condition first—order planner's The positive. is he) + (1 that
such is e of support The parameter. scale a is h and variable, random zero—mean a is e function,
                                                      24
                                                        profile. consumption expected the steepening by
rate riskiess the on risk increased of effect depressing the mitigates stock capital the of adjustment
the 0,   dk/dh> when contrast, of way By      effect. impact the exceeds rate riskiess the in drop stock)
capital variable (i.e. run" "long the case,   1   < 'y the in Thus, spread. mean—preserving the of effect
initial the than more by substitutionof rate marginal expected the raising consumption, future less
expectation) (in and consumption present greater means k in drop The fall. to rate riskless the for
tendency the reinforces risk increased to stock capital the of response the 0, < dk/dh When
                                                                                       k. of adjustment the
from resulting consumption of profile time the in change the of substitutionof rate marginal the on
effect the reflects (32) in term secondthe                       =            Since positive. is   U" as long
                                              (Z?)
as negative is it model. exchange the in answer" "full the to exactly corresponds (32) of side hand
right—   the on term first the that Note <0   J and hc)]f'(k) + flE[U"(.)(lR- + k) — U"(l = J where
(32)                       dk/dh   J — —R1f(k)$E[U"(.)eJ= 8E[U'(.)]dR'/dh
                                     dk/dh: for (30) substitutingand (29), differentiating by obtained
is model 1"    = "q the in rate riskless the for capital of riskiness increased of implication The
                                                                               variability. return increased
with falls product) marginal expected the equals now (which capital to return required the one,
exceeds   y   If   economy. exchange the for obtained      that to correspondsexactIy capital to return
of rate required the for implication The one. than less is           - if only and if uncertainty increased
with falls stock capital equilibrium the Thus well. as negative is E[U'(.)e] negative, is U" Since
                                                            —
(31)                                1)f'(k)E{U'(.)e}/H.         ('y = dk/dh
                                       becomes: (30) case, aversion risk relative constant the For
                                                   25
  housing. of price the in rise a and rates, interest real in drop a prices, stock in fall a for account
simultaneously can consider we disturbances the values, parameter reasonable for that, in promise
shows model two-asset a hand, other the On growth. decreased or risk increased          to response in
rise should prices stock that likely appears it asset, tangible one only with model the in Indeed,
work. applied previous much of assumptions the to contrary fall, or rise may prices stock that but
unambiguous, are rate riskiess the on disturbances these of effects the that found have We growth.
productivity decreased or risk increased of consequence a as prices stock and bond of movement
independent the interpretingin arise that issues theoretical the of number a air to tried have I
                                                                                     Conclusion III.
                     rate. riskless the on productivity marginal reduced the of effect the mitigates
case this in stock capital the of adjustment The substitution.of elasticities intertemporallow with
agents of tendencies "smoothing" strong the reflects course, of This, productivity. marginal lower
the to response in capital more accumulate and consumption cupent reduce agents 1, >           -y   when
Conversely, stock. capital fixed a with model the in than model 1" = "q the in more falls case 1 <    '
the in rate riskiess The opportunities. investment of worsening a heralds news that if consumption,
current increase may news" "bad that point the illustrates This tomorrow. consumption expected
                                             —
less have and today, more consume agents         dominates effect substitution the 1, < 'y For ogous.
anal- entirely is capital of productivity marginal expected the in decrease a to response The
                                                   26
a be would q, to respect with elasticity finite a has capital which in case, intermediate The     8
                                                                                                  trees).
the and fruit (the capital the of value scrap the includes    Y framework, two-period Inour
                                                                                                prices.
stock on effects major have could data, the in detect to hard be might which rate, growth run long
the in changes small Even future. the in dividends lower predict indeed do ratios dividend-price
high that find (186) Shiller and Campbell walk, random a to close very are dividends real that
suggest (1985) Shapiro and Rorner, Mankiw, and (1984) Summers and BlanchardAlthough               6
return. of rates all determining of capable one minimal the is choice, portfolio and decision saving
the treats simultaneously which here, given setup intertemporal two—period The differentials.
return determines oniy however, CAPM, The model. CAPM conventional a of context the in
formalized better be perhaps would view Journal" Street "Wall the that think might One
                     11-B.   Section in claim this of qualification important the note However,   '
   lectures. his in exemplified tradition oral the of part a been long has rate riskless the of nature
endogenous this that noted Modiglian.i Franco paper, this of version earlier an reading On
                                                                                        Y. on spread
mean—preserving a not is perturbation his that so E[log(Y2)] in reduction compensating the without
   in increase an treats Campbell that is reconciliation The 2. is '' of value critical the that (1986)
Campbell in (13) equation of implication the with conflict to first at appearsresult This 2
                                                           accumulation. capital of presence the in III
Section in results the with comparison direct as well as effects, substitutionand income into returns
expected in changes the of decomposition explicit allows however, here, taken approach parametric
The (1971). Stiglitz and Rothschild by taken approach the Y2, in expressions the of concavity the
checking by spread mean—preserving general completely a for obtained be could results The         1
                                               Footnotes
27
     undertaking. ambitious more far
                                               28
                                                                                 Theory. Economic
of Journal Uncertainty," under Decisions "Consumption 1972. F. Modigliani, and        J Dreze,
                                  491-508. 51, Studies Economicof Review Model. Pricing Asset
Intertemporal Equilibrium an of Dynamics Comparative 1984. R. Mehra, and J. Donaldson,
                                                    unpublished. Factors. Discount and Dividends
Future of Expectations and Ratio Dividend-Price The 1986. R. Shiler, and J. Campbell,
                                                                        forthcoming. Economic8, •of
Journal Quarterly Model. Exchange Simple a in Returns Stock and Bond 1986. J. Campbell,
                          Press. Chicago of University Chicago: Uncertainty. and Information of
Economics The ed. J. McCall, In Economy. Production a in Prices Asset 1982. W.A. Brock,
                                                             Press. Academic York: New Trade. arid
Growth, Equilibrium, Genera! ed. .1. Scheinkman, and   .1.   Green, In Model. Growth The    1:   Part
Finance, of Theory the and Theory Growth Stochastic of Integration An 1978. W.A. Brock,
                                                                            Economics). Financial
of Journal the in (forthcoming 677 No. Paper Research Business of School Graduate Stanford
Synthesis. A Rates: Interest and Inflation, Production, Consumption, 1985. D. Breeden,
                                                                       Press. Chicago of University
Chicago: States. United the in Structure8 Capita! Corporate ed. B. Friedman, In Portfolios.
Investor in Bonds of Role the and Inflation 1985. R. McDonald, and A. Kane, Z. Bodie,
                                                    273-334. 2, Actipity Economic on Papers ings
Brook- Rates. Interest Real World High on Perspectives 1984. L. Summers, and 0. Blanchard,
     177-181. Section, Statistics Economics and Business As8ociation,Statistical American the of
Meetings 1976 the of Proceedings Changes. Volatility Price Stock of Studies 1976. F. Black,
Company. Publishing Markham Chicago: Riskbearing.of Theory the in Essays 1971. K. Arrow,
                                          References
                                                29
 Market Stock of Examiniation Unbiased "An 1985. Shapiro. M. and Romer, D. N.G., Mankiw,
                                                                                       291-306. 34,
 Finance of Journal States. United the in Problem Formation Capital The 1979. B. Maikiel,
         1429-1445. 46, Econometrica Economy. Exchange an in Prices Asset 1978. R. Lucas,
                                                                555-74. 49, Econometric, Bounds."
 Variance Implied on Based Tests Relation: Value Present "The 1981. Porter. R. and S. Leroy,
                               .
                                                              465-473. 82, Economics of Journal
Quarterly Saving. for Demand Precautionary The Uncertainty: and Savings 1968. H. Leland,
                                                                363-80. 74, Review, Economic icon
At-ncr- Cycle." Business Real a in Prices and Credit, "Money, 1984. Plosser. C. and R. King,
 N.J. Cliffs, Englewood Hall. Prentice Capita!. and Interest, Investment, 1970. 3. Hirshleifer,
                                  909-922. 71, Review Economic American Profitability. and Risk,
Errors, Valuation Taxation, Values: Share Aggregate in Decline The 1981. P. Hendershott,
                                                                         1694. No. Paper Working
Research, Economic of Bureau National Consumption. and Interest Real 1985. R. Hall,
                                                                829. No. Paper Working Research
Economic of Bureau National Consumption. in Substitution Intertemporal 1982. R. Hall,
                                                           222-7. 71, Review, Economic American
Prices." Stock of Variability the of Determinants "The 1982. Shiller. R. and S. Grossman,
                          Brown. Little, Boston: ed. 2nd MacroeConomic8, 1981. R. Gordon,
                      Ontario. Western of University 8530c, No Paper Working Unemployment."
and Inflation of Model Equilibrium Dynamic "A 1985. Huffman. G. and 3. Greenwood,
 839-47. 70, Review, Economic American Market. Stock the and Inflation 1980. M. Feldstein,
                                                                   427-448. 84, Economy Political
of Journal Bills. Treasury on Returns Expected and Uncertainty Inflation 1976. E. Farna,
                                               30
                                            421-36. 71, Review, Economic American Dividends?"
in Changes Subsequent by Justified be to Much Too Move Prices Stock "Do 1981. R. Shiller,
                                                                                    353-360. 37,
Studies Economicof Review Decisions. Savings on Uncertainty of Effect The 1970. A. Sandmo,
                                                                                         586-99.
37, Econometrica, Choice." Portfolio and Consumption, Risk, "Capital 1969. A. Sandmo,
                                                                   66-84. 3, Theory Economic of
Journal Consequences. Economic Its II: Risk Increasing 1971. 3. Stiglitz, and M. Rothschild,
                                                                                         Theory.
Economic of Journal Definitions. I: Risk Increasing 1970. 3. Stiglitz, and M. Rothschild,
                                                 1365-1379. 48, Econometrica Households. neous
Homoge- of Case The Equilibrium: Competitive Recursive 1980. R. Mehra, and E. Prescott,
                                                          M.I.T. manuscript, Unpublished tions.
Fluctua- Market Stock and Volatility of Persistence The 1985. L. Summers, and 3. Poterba,
                                            729-52. 4(Nov.), 94, Economics, of Journal Quarterly
Approach." Market Asset An Housing: Occupied Owner to Subisdies "Tax 1984. J. Poterba,
                                                                                        335-351.
74, Review Economic American Market. Stock the and Inflation, Risk, 1984. R. Pindyck,
                                                                     Journal. Analysts Financial
Market." the and Evaluation, Rational "Inflation, 1979. Richard. Cohn, and F. Modigliani,
                                                                 145-61. 2(Mar.), 15, Economics,
Monetary of Journal Puzzle. A Premium: Equity The 1985. E. Prescott, and R. Mehra,
                            Richmond. of Bank Reserve Federal Review, Economic high? too it Is
Rate: Interest Real After-Tax the of Behavior Recent the and Effect Tax The 1984. Y. Mehra,
                                                                 Finance. of Journal Volatility."
                                              31
                                                               Finance. of Journal Economies.
Production Stochastic in Rates Interest Equilibrium and Co4lsumption 1984. M. Sundaresan,
                                                                         Institution. Brookings
Okun. Arthur of Memory in Essays Quantitie8: and Prices Macroeconomic ed. J. Tobin, In Effect.
Fisher the of Study A Rates: Interest Nominal of Nonadjustment The 1983. L. Summers,
                                              17. Policy, Public on Series Conference Rochester
Carnegie- Fluctuations." Macroeconomic and Markets, Asset "Consumption, 1982. R. Shiller,
