                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SLOW TO HIRE, QUICK TO FIRE:
       EMPLOYMENT DYNAMICS WITH ASYMMETRIC RESPONSES TO NEWS

                                        Cosmin Ilut
                                       Matthias Kehrig
                                       Martin Schneider

                                      Working Paper 20473
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20473


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2014, Revised May 2017




We thank George-Marios Angeletos, Nick Bloom, Yongsung Chang, Pete Klenow, Michael
Reiter, and Peter Zorn as well as workshop and conference participants at the Bank of France,
Minneapolis Fed, Stanford, UC Santa Cruz, Toulouse, NBER Summer Institute, NBER DSGE
meeting, SED Annual Meeting, the EEA Annual Congress, the conference on Causes and
Macroeconomic Consequences of Uncertainty, the 2013 Empirical Macro Workshop, the Ifo
Conference of Macroeconomics and Survey Data, the Annual Meeting of German Economists
Abroad, the Cologne Macro Workshop, and the Frankfurt-Mannheim Macro Workshop for
helpful comments. The views, opinions, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the
U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. Support for this research at the Texas RDC from NSF (ITR-0427889) is also gratefully
acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Cosmin Ilut, Matthias Kehrig, and Martin Schneider. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Slow to Hire, Quick to Fire: Employment Dynamics with Asymmetric Responses to News
Cosmin Ilut, Matthias Kehrig, and Martin Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 20473
September 2014, Revised May 2017
JEL No. D2,D8,E20,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

Concave hiring rules imply that firms respond more to bad shocks than to good shocks. They
provide a unified explanation for several seemingly unrelated facts about employment growth in
macro and micro data. In particular, they generate countercyclical movement in both aggregate
conditional “macro” volatility and cross-sectional “micro” volatility, as well as negative
skewness in the cross-section and in the time series at different levels of aggregation. Concave
establishment-level responses of employment growth to TFP shocks estimated from Census data
induce significant skewness, movements in volatility and amplification of bad aggregate shocks.


Cosmin Ilut                                    Martin Schneider
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Duke University                                Stanford University
223 Social Sciences Building                   579 Serra Mall
Box 90097                                      Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Durham, NC 27708                               and NBER
and NBER                                       schneidr@stanford.edu
cosmin.ilut@duke.edu

Matthias Kehrig
Duke University
Department of Economics
419 Chapel Drive, Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
United States
matthias.kehrig@gmail.com
1        Introduction
A long tradition in macroeconomics studies linear models with shocks that have symmetric distribu-
tions and constant variance. However, a growing body of micro and macro evidence is inconsistent
with this approach. One prominent stylized fact is the countercyclical movement of cross-sectional
volatility. For example, Figure 1 shows that the dispersion of employment growth rates across firms
– here measured by the inter-quartile range – spikes up in recessions and declines in booms. The
figure also illustrates a second familiar example: the negative skewness of aggregate growth rates.1
We show below that negative skewness also obtains at the firm level, both in the time series and
the cross-section.
        The new facts present macroeconomists with two options: either work with exogenous shocks
that have skewed distributions and changing variance, or build nonlinear models. Most of the
literature has taken the former approach. For example, many recent studies of the cross-section of
firms start from exogenous volatility or skewness properties of firm level productivity. Moreover,
exogenous “volatility shocks” have been used to complement more traditional shocks as drivers of
aggregate fluctuations. By design, those studies focus on firms’ reaction to exogenous forces that
generate negative skewness or countercyclical volatility – they do not attempt to understand those
forces or how policy might affect them.
        This paper takes the alternative route: it highlights a nonlinear mechanism that endogenously
shapes the distribution of employment growth and documents its relevance using Census micro
data. The basic idea is that firms use concave hiring rules: when facing firm-level shocks to, say,
productivity, they respond more to bad shocks than to good shocks. Concave hiring rules offer a
unified explanation for why negative skewness and countercyclical volatility should be present both
in the cross-section and in the time series at different levels of aggregation. A firm’s environment –
including policy – thus matters for higher moments of employment growth to the extent it changes
the optimal hiring rule.
        With concave hiring rules, negative skewness and countercyclical volatility at the firm level
emerge in response to many shocks and need not reflect new exogenous forces. Indeed, a concave
hiring rule says that a firm responds more when it receives a bad shock, compared both to other
firms at the same date and to its own past behavior. We thus obtain negative skewness in both the
cross-section and time series even if firm-level shocks are not skewed in either dimension. Moreover,
a bad aggregate shock lowers the average firm-level shock and leads the typical firm to respond
more. The cross-sectional dispersion of employment growth thus increases in bad times even if the
volatility of firm-level shocks is unchanged.
        Concave hiring rules also explain why we observe negative skewness and countercyclical volatil-
ity at the aggregate level. Indeed, a bad aggregate shock makes the sum of all firms respond
more sharply. It thus generates negative skewness of aggregate employment growth (“macro skew-
ness”) and ensures that movements in aggregate employment growth are stronger in recessions
    1
        Similar patterns have been documented for a number of firm-level variables; Bloom (2014) surveys the evidence.



                                                            1
                                                                       Figure 1: Time-varying employment volatility



                                                            0.04                                                                     0.25




                                                                                                                                             Cross-sectional employment growth dispersion
                   Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)   0.02                                                                     0.225


                                                                0                                                                    0.2


                                                            -0.02                                                                    0.175


                                                            -0.04                                                                    0.15


                                                            -0.06                                                                    0.125
                                                                           Aggr. empl. growth
                                                                           Inter-quartile range
                                                            -0.08                                                                    0.1
                                                                    1975      1980       1985     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010




Note: This figure plots demeaned aggregate employment growth in the private economy (left axis in gray) together
with the year-by-year cross-sectional inter-quartile range (right axis in black) of employment growth rates in the
sample of manufacturing establishments described in Section 3. NBER dated recessions are marked by the vertical
gray bars.


(countercyclical “macro” volatility). Existing models that link countercyclical macro volatility to
countercyclical cross-sectional (“micro”) volatility have relied on correlated shocks to the mean and
volatility of productivity. With concave hiring rules, the link emerges endogenously and such shocks
are not needed.
    This paper starts from a simple model that illustrates the key mechanism and derives predictions
for micro and macro moments. Our empirical analysis then proceeds in two steps. The first is to
document volatility and skewness patterns for employment growth. It thus checks predictions
of the model that do not depend on which shocks firms respond to. The second step studies
firms’ responses to specific shocks, namely innovations to TFP.2 We show that those responses are
concave and transform symmetric shocks into skewed employment growth. Moreover, concavity is
systematically related to volatility and skewness in the cross section of firms and is large enough
to contribute significantly to aggregate volatility and skewness.
    We use minimal structure to describe our mechanism – in particular, we do not take a stand
on what makes hiring rules concave. One possibility is direct hiring costs: hiring new workers may
entail costly search, whereas firing is free. Another is financial market imperfections: investment in
new workers requires costs of external finance, whereas downsizing does not. In either case, regula-
tion may matter for the strength of market frictions. Concavity can also obtain without adjustment
   2
     Formally, we consider innovations to profitability, or revenue total factor productivity [TFPR as in Foster et al.
(2008); Hsieh and Klenow (2009)]. For simplicity we refer to this variable as TFP.



                                                                                                     2
costs: we show that decision makers who are averse to Knightian uncertainty (ambiguity) about
the quality of signals also find it optimal to respond more to bad news.3
       While our main results are consistent with any candidate reason for concavity, our empirical
findings of where concavity matters most provide some guidance for how to build nonlinear models
that impose more structure. Most importantly, they suggest a focus on asymmetries at the establish-
ment level. Indeed, we do not find strong evidence to connect concavity of the establishment-level
response to TFP shocks with the size of the parent company. At the same time, establishment-level
responses are more concave if the establishment is smaller, older, and more capital intensive, and
if it employs more non-production workers. Finally, we find more concavity in industries that are
more volatile and produce non-durable goods.
       Confidential Census data on U.S. manufacturing establishments allow detailed micro-level anal-
ysis of employment growth, controlling for time period, industry and other firm-level properties. We
confirm the well known facts that aggregate growth is negatively skewed and that both micro and
macro volatilities are countercyclical. Our mechanism further predicts that employment growth
should be negatively skewed in the cross-section. In the data, the cross-section of employment
growth is indeed negatively skewed in all years.
       We also provide several new results in the time series dimension. As our mechanism suggests,
negative skewness is present not only for aggregates but also at the levels of the industry and the
individual firm. Moreover, rolling window estimates of volatility reveal countercyclical time series
volatility at the industry and firm levels. While our main results are for manufacturing, we make
use of the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to show that the distribution of employment
growth exhibit the same broad patterns for other sectors as well.
       In principle, negative skewness of employment growth could obtain either because firms re-
spond linearly (that is, symmetrically) to skewed (asymmetric) shocks, or because firms respond
asymmetrically to (possibly even symmetric) shocks.4 While our mechanism is relevant for any
type of shock that affects hiring decisions, including demand shocks, for the manufacturing sector
we can obtain more direct evidence by considering firms’ employment responses to TFP shocks.
We construct establishment-level TFP innovations and then run both nonparametric and nonlinear
parametric regressions of employment growth on TFP innovations, controlling in various ways for
other state variables that could be relevant to the firm.
       We find that the relationship between employment growth and innovations to profitability is
usually concave. On average, a firm faced with a typical negative (positive) TFP innovation – which
corresponds to 18% lower (higher) output holding inputs fixed – decreases (increases) employment
by 1.8% (1.2%). We find similar asymmetric hiring responses in the vast majority of parametric
   3
     Intuitively, ambiguity-averse firms evaluate hiring decisions as if taking a worst case assessment of future profits.
With ambiguity about signal quality, the worst case then depends on what the signal says: for a good signal, the
worst case interpretation is that it is noisy, whereas for a bad signal the worst case is that it is very precise. Updating
from ambiguous signals thus endogenously generates asymmetric actions.
   4
     One piece of evidence in favor of asymmetric responses is the countercyclical movement of cross-sectional disper-
sion – it would not follow from skewness of shocks alone. Indeed, if an aggregate shock shifts the mean of a skewed
distribution of shocks and the employment response is linear, the volatility of responses need not change at all.



                                                            3
and non-parametric specifications that we consider, conditioning in particular on size, industry,
and time period. We conclude that at least one important source of shocks to firms, namely TFP
innovations, is propagated via asymmetric adjustment in firm behavior.
   We provide two exercises to make a connection between the moments of employment growth we
have documented and the estimated concave response to TFP shocks. In principle, those two sets
of facts might be unrelated: since TFP shocks are not the only source of uncertainty facing firms,
a concave response to TFP shocks may not be enough to shape moments of employment growth
such as skewness. One way to assess whether there is a connection exploits the cross-section of
firms. If our estimated response reflects asymmetric adjustment to shocks more generally, then
firms with more concave responses to TFP should also have more negatively skewed employment
growth. We thus construct measures of concavity that capture how much of the variation in our
non-parametrically estimated hiring rule of a firm is contributed by its non-linear terms.
   We then compare properties of employment growth across groups of firms that differ in the
concavity of their response to TFP shocks. We find that firms with more concave hiring responses
indeed exhibit more negative skewness in employment growth relative to the moments measured for
their TFP shocks. Moreover, those firms exhibit higher volatility in employment growth relative to
TFP, consistent with the amplification predicted by our mechanism. Finally, we confirm that coun-
tercyclicality of dispersion is stronger for firms with more concave responses to TFP shocks. Taken
together, these cross-sectional results provide further evidence that our mechanism is important for
hiring.
   A second way to connect employment growth moments to our estimates of concavity is to
ask what a concave response to TFP shocks contributes to the overall negative skewness and
countercyclical micro volatility. The starting point here is the distribution of TFP itself: consistent
with the literature, we find that a one standard deviation negative shock to aggregate TFP goes
along with a 7% increase in the micro volatility of TFP. Even linear responses by firms would thus
generate some countercyclicality in employment growth. Our mechanism implies a much larger
response: concavity alone generates an additional 20% spike in the micro volatility of employment
growth. It further transforms and amplifies both average TFP shocks and volatility shocks to
generate significant effects on the higher moments of employment growth.
   The estimated concave responses also contribute significantly to the negative skewness in em-
ployment growth. In fact, the negative skew in employment growth stands in sharp contrast to the
fact that TFP innovations have a nearly symmetric but slightly positively skewed density. It can
therefore not be explained by a linear response to skewed TFP shocks. At the same time, the fitted
value of employment growth explained by the concave response to TFP exhibits cross-sectional
negative skewness of −1.17.
   The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 illustrates the mechanism using a simple organizing
framework. Section 3 introduces the data and describes the distribution of employment growth,
with an emphasis on negative skewness. Section 4 turns to the cross-sectional relationship between
employment growth and TFP innovations and Section 5 illustrates the quantitative effects of that


                                                  4
asymmetric relationship.


Related literature There is now a large literature on business cycle models with exogenous
shocks to idiosyncratic or aggregate volatility. On the one hand, Bloom (2009), Bloom et al. (2012),
Christiano et al. (2014), Arellano et al. (2016), Vavra (2014), and Schaal (forthcoming) derive
implications of cross sectional risk shocks for business cycles, borrowing and lending, consumer
durables, price dispersion, and the effectiveness of policy. On the other hand, Fernández-Villaverde
et al. (2011), Gourio (2012), and Basu and Bundick (forthcoming) study the effects of changes in
conditional higher moments of aggregate TFP. Our paper does not formulate a full-fledged business
cycle model; our goal is to zero in on firms’ asymmetric response as a mechanism to connect micro
and macro volatility. We also emphasize that our mechanism is not incompatible with the presence
of exogenous volatility shocks – instead, we think of it as an amplification mechanism that would
be interesting to explore in the context of business cycle models.5
    While some studies draw connections between micro and macro moments, they look at different
stylized facts. For example, Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) show that the sectoral composition of the
U.S. economy could have contributed to the Great Moderation, holding fixed the distribution of
shocks within sectors. Our paper instead focuses on the business cycle frequency and heterogeneity
within industries. Nimark (2014) derives an endogenous link between large (positive or negative)
movements in aggregates and the dispersion of survey forecasts from a learning mechanism in which
outliers are more salient. While learning could help explain the adjustment behavior we emphasize,
it is critical for our mechanism that adjustment be larger for bad shocks, not simply for large shocks.
    A recent literature has asked why dispersion in measured productivity is countercyclical. Kehrig
(2015) documents countercyclical TFP dispersion and explains it with cyclical entry/exit and over-
heads in production. Bachmann and Moscarini (2011), Kuhn (2014) show how firms’ pricing de-
cisions can lead to countercyclical measured productivity dispersion. Decker et al. (2016) relate
countercyclical productivity dispersion to cyclical investment in intangible production knowledge.
Straub and Ulbricht (2016) study theoretically how nonlinear transformations can induce changes
in volatility. While our paper shares with these studies an emphasis on endogenous movements in
micro volatility, our focus is on employment as well as on the connection between micro and macro
moments as well as the role of skewness. Importantly, we also document the empirical relevance of
a unifying endogenous mechanism using Census micro data.
    Several recent papers have studied the macroeconomic effects of asymmetric firm decision rules,
in particular the resulting asymmetry in the business cycle itself. For example, George and Kuhn
(2014) consider costly capacity choice and investment irreversibilities, Senga (2016) analyzes a
heterogeneous-firm model with learning and Ferraro (2013) studies a search and matching frame-
   5
     Ludvigson et al. (2016) estimate a structural vector autoregressive model and argue that most of conditional
volatility of the unforecastable component in real activity is an endogenous response to exogenous disturbances, in
particular, shocks to real activity or shocks to uncertainty about financial variables. Similarly, Berger and Vavra
(2016) study whether time-varying price dispersion results from exogenously-varying volatility of shocks or time-
varying responsiveness of agents to shocks.


                                                        5
work with heterogeneous workers. They show that asymmetric responses can help explain “deepness
asymmetry” (deep recessions vs. meek booms) and “steepness asymmetry” (rapid recessions vs.
smooth booms) – concepts introduced by Sichel (1993) and studied for aggregate employment by
McKay and Reis (2008).6 Our mechanism is consistent with asymmetry of the business cycle and
creates a connection between aggregate asymmetries and micro and macro behavior of volatility
and skewness.
    While our empirical work focuses on how concave decision rules amplify bad shocks, our propo-
sitions also imply the converse mechanism if policy rules are convex. This perspective helps connect
some results in the literature on investment dynamics. Indeed, the cost of reducing capital at the
firm level is likely higher than the cost of increasing it [see for example, Caballero et al. (1995)
and Ramey and Shapiro (2001)]. With a convex investment policy function, our analysis predicts
positive skewness as well as procyclical dispersion. In fact, Bachmann and Bayer (2014) show that
investment rates exhibit procyclical cross-sectional dispersion as well as positive time-series skew-
ness. Moreover, Bachmann et al. (2013) document a procyclical aggregate volatility of investment.7



2    Macro & micro moments with asymmetric adjustment
To illustrate the basic mechanism, the following minimal framework is sufficient. Consider hiring
decisions by a continuum of firms. An individual firm’s information about its future profitability is
summarized by a sufficient statistics s. For simplicity, we refer to s as the firm’s ”signal”, although
in practice it might represent information gleaned from many separate sources.
    We assume that firms’ signals can be decomposed into a common component a and an idiosyn-
cratic component ε:
                                                    s = a + ε.                                                  (1)

The idiosyncratic component is independent and identically distributed across firms with mean zero
and distribution function Gε . We can thus think of (1) as representing both the distribution of an
individual firm’s signal and the cross-sectional distribution of signals.
    Firms respond to signals about future profitability by changing employment. We assume that
all firms follow the same decision rule
                                                    n = f (s) ,                                                 (2)

where n denotes the employment growth rate and the function f is smooth, strictly increasing, and
strictly concave. The function f describes both how beliefs are formed given the realized signal s
and the optimal employment choice given beliefs.
   6
     Negative skewness in growth rates of macroeconomic aggregates such as consumption and output is also important
in the recent literature on the effect of disasters for asset pricing, following Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006).
   7
     In principle, investment might depend on firm level shocks other than TFP that are themselves skewed. At the
same time, Bachmann et al. (2014) do not find skewness in innovations affecting investment. Their result also points
towards endogenous propagation of shocks as a source of skewness.




                                                         6
   The assumption of concavity reflects asymmetric adjustment: firms respond less to good signals
than to bad signals. We take asymmetric adjustment as given; it can be due, for example, to an
asymmetric hiring cost function through which it is more costly to hire than to fire. It can also be
due to belief formation: In Appendix A we provide an example of a model of information processing
under Knightian uncertainty to show that asymmetry can obtain without asymmetric adjustment
costs.
   Our setup does not take a stand on the relationship between the signal and actual profitability.
In general, there may be some true profitability innovation π, say, which itself has aggregate and
idiosyncratic components, and firms respond to private noisy signals about their own profitability.
In this case, a would contain the aggregate component of π plus noise in common signals that
is correlated across firms and ε would contain the idiosyncratic component of π plus noise in
idiosyncratic signals that is uncorrelated about firms.
   The relative share of noise and “fundamental” is not important for our argument. We only
need that firms respond in a concave way to the random variables s – this feature alone implies
the restriction on the cross-section and time series of firm actions that we are interested in. In
particular, the model is thus consistent with the common assumption that firm-level profitability
follows a Markov chain and firms forecast future profitability given their knowledge of current
profitability, with or without additional noise in signals.
   In general, firm decisions may depend on state variables other than the signal on the next
innovation to profitability. For example, firms might respond differently to shocks depending on
fixed characteristics like industry, or variable characteristics like size, the level of profitability or
the deviation of employment from a target level. For now, these additional features of the firm
decision at a point in time are all subsumed in the function f . In other words, the class of firms
we study in this section is identical along all these dimensions.
   In order to describe common shocks to firms, we condition on the aggregate component a.
Let Gn (n|a) and Gs (s|a) denote the conditional cumulative distribution functions of employment
growth and signals, respectively, given a. We will refer to high values of a as representing “good
times,” that is, times when firms on average receive good news about profitability. An implication
of our assumptions is that the conditional variance var (s|a) is independent of a, so good times are
only reflected in a high mean signal. This is helpful to zero in on the endogenous link between
macro and micro volatility that is driven by asymmetric adjustment. We discuss interaction of
asymmetric adjustment and exogenous shifts in volatility further below.

2.1      Implications for micro and macro volatility of employment
The main intuition for countercyclical volatilities can be seen in Figure 2. The top panel plots the
concave response function f , with the signal realization on the horizontal axis and employment
growth on the vertical axis. The bottom panel shows three densities of signal realizations gs (s|a),
distinguished by a shift in the mean signal. Taking the middle (black) density as a reference point,
a shift to the left (dark gray) density is an arrival of bad times, whereas a shift to the right (light


                                                   7
gray) density is an arrival of good times.
    The figure shows how asymmetric adjustment helps make both macro and micro volatility coun-
tercyclical. Consider first macro volatility: the solid horizontal lines in the top panel represent mean
employment growth for the three densities. They show how bad news generates larger aggregate
responses: the change in aggregate growth in response to bad times (the difference between the
horizontal black and dark gray solid lines) is larger than the change in growth in response to bad
times (the difference between the horizontal light gray and black lines).

                                            Figure 2: Employment growth and signals
                        employment growth
                        density




                                                       news about profitability



Note: Figure plots the (homoskedastic) distribution of signals about future profitability (bottom panel), once centered
around a negative aggregate mean signal (dark gray), once around a neutral aggregate signal (black), and once for
a positive aggregate signal (light gray). The top panel displays how the concave hiring rule (black) transforms
symmetric and homoskedastic signals into asymmetric and heteroskedastic employment responses.


    To illustrate changes in micro volatility, the dotted lines in both panels show inter-decile ranges
for signals (along the horizontal axis) and employment growth (along the vertical axis in the top
panel). The point here is that concavity of the response function accentuates dispersion in signals
in bad times while it attenuates it in good times. The countercyclical cross-sectional volatility
is easiest illustrated for inter-quantile ranges, but this property is inherited by other measures of
dispersion such as the cross-sectional variance.
    Beyond the specific example of Figure 2, the properties of countercyclical macro and micro
volatility require only the signal structure and concavity of the response function. We summarize
this result in the following proposition, with proofs detailed in Appendix B:



                                                                8
Proposition 1      (Macro & micro volatilities) For any two aggregate shock realizations a < a0 ,

   1. the sensitivity of the aggregate action with respect to the aggregate shock is higher at a:

                                            d                         d
                                               E [n|ã]          >       E [n|ã]           ,
                                           dã            ã=a       dã            ã=a0


   2. the cross-sectional variance is higher at a:

                                                 var (n|a) > var n|a0 ,
                                                                     


   3. the inter-quantile range for any two quantiles x and x is higher at a:


                                G−1         −1         −1
                                                          x|a0 − G−1    0
                                                                         
                                 n (x|a) − Gn (x|a) > Gn          ∆e x|a .


       Figure 3 shows the connection between micro and macro volatilities in simulated time series
data. The gray dashed line is a particular sequence of aggregate news at , drawn from a symmetric,
homoskedastic distribution. For each realization of at , we compute the model-implied aggregate
employment growth E [f (at + ε) |at ] – shown as the solid gray line – and the inter-quartile range
of the cross-sectional distribution G−1            −1
                                     n (0.75|a) − Gn (0.25|a) , shown as the starred black line.
                                                                                                8

The latter two (solid gray and starred black) lines move against each other, reflecting the coun-
tercyclicality of micro volatility: the inter-quartile is wide when aggregate employment growth is
low.
       Moreover, comparison of aggregate news and hiring (the two gray lines) that hiring has larger
movements when employment growth is low, whereas the movements are quite similar when em-
ployment growth is high. Asymmetric adjustment thus translates homoskedastic shocks into het-
eroskedastic responses – if we measured the variance of aggregate employment growth over subsam-
ples, we would obtain larger numbers in low growth periods. At the same time, the figure shows
how asymmetric adjustment translates symmetric shocks into negatively skewed responses. This is
another general property of our setup to which we turn next.

2.2      Implications for micro and macro skewness of employment
Figure 2 above suggests that asymmetric adjustment also induces skewness in the cross-section and
the time series. In particular, the distribution of employment growth responses should be more
negatively skewed than the underlying signal distribution. We define skewness using two standard
measures. One is the Fisher-Pearson coefficient of skewness, a moment-based measure defined as a
   8
    For this simulation we assume a piece-wise linear hiring rule and feed in a sequence of at to study the qualitative
patterns of aggregate employment growth and cross-sectional employment growth dispersion.




                                                            9
              Figure 3: Time-varying volatility and negative skewness in simulated data




                                                           Aggr. News                Low aggregate volatility
                                                           Aggr. Hiring
                                                           XS IQR
                       Aggregate News and Hiring




                                                                                                                               Cross-sectional dispersion
                                                   0




                                                                          High aggregate volatility
                                                       0   2     4        6      8        10     12     14      16   18   20
                                                                                        Time


Note: Aggregate employment growth (solid gray line), the cross-sectional inter-quartile range of employment growth
(the starred dark line) are displayed for a simulated sequence of aggregate news (dashed gray line). Downturns in
aggregate employment are deep while upturns are mild, thus creating negative time-series skewness. In recessions the
cross-sectional dispersion widens and, as highlighted by the dotted circles, aggregate volatility rises.


ratio of third and second moments. For a random variable x, the coefficient of skewness is
                                                                                  h             i
                                                                                 E (x − E [x])3
                                                                      γ (x) =                    3      .                                                   (3)
                                                                                        var (x) 2

The second measure is the Kelley skewness,9 based on the distribution’s percentiles and, as such,
more robust to outliers, which is defined as

                                                                               xp90 + xp10 − 2xp50
                                                                     k(x) =                        .                                                        (4)
                                                                                   xp90 − xp10

where xpN denotes the N th percentile of the distribution for the random variable x. The following
proposition states formally that a concave response function induces skewness, measured either as
the coefficient of skewness γ (x) , or as the Kelley skewness k(x).

Proposition 2      (Micro and macro skewness)

   1. Micro skewness:

        (a) For any aggregate shock a the coefficient of skewness of the cross sectional distribution
   9
    Kelley (1947), p. 250, modifies the skewness measure proposed by Bowley (1901) to use the 90th and 10th
percentile instead of the top/bottom quartile.


                                                                                       10
           of employment growth, γ (n|a), is lower than the coefficient of skewness of the cross-
           sectional distribution of signals, γ (s|a).
       (b) The same relationship holds for the Kelley skewness: k (n|a) < k (s|a).

  2. Macro skewness:

       (a) The coefficient of skewness of aggregate employment growth, γ (E [n|a]), is lower than
           the coefficient of skewness of the aggregate signal γ (a).
       (b) The same relationship holds for the Kelley skewness: k (E [n|a]) < k (a) .


   Proposition 2 makes a statement about skewness in general, but it is silent on the cyclical
movements in skewness. It is then natural to ask whether asymmetric adjustment implies systematic
movements in skewness together with movements in micro volatility. To see that movements in
skewness are not implied by concavity of f alone, consider the example of a negative exponential
response function f (s) = −e−s , together with normally distributed noise. The conditional mean of
                                    1
employment given a is then e−a+ 2 var(ε) and the kth centered moment conditional on a is given by
                       h                         i                                           k 
                                             k                                      1
                                                          −ka             −ε          var(ε)
                    E (f (s) − E [f (s) |a]) a = e              E        −e    +e   2                 .


It follows in particular that the coefficient of (3) is independent of aggregate news a.
   The special feature of the negative exponential response function is that curvature as measured
by the coefficient of absolute risk aversion −f 00 (s) /f 0 (s) is the same for all s. The next proposition
provides a more general connection between curvature and skewness.

Proposition 3    (Cyclicality of skewness)

  1. For any two aggregate shocks a < a0 , the coefficient of skewness γ (n|a0 ) of the cross-sectional
      distribution of employment growth at a0 is higher than (lower than, equal to) the coefficient
      of skewness γ (n|a) of cross-sectional distribution of employment growth at a if the coefficient
      of absolute risk aversion −f 00 (s) /f 0 (s) is decreasing in s (increasing in s, constant).

  2. The same condition on the coefficient of absolute risk aversion applies for the cyclicality of
      the Kelley skewness of the cross-sectional distribution of employment growth.


   Intuitively, changes in skewness derive from changes in curvature in the relevant range of signals,
in contrast to changes in volatility that derive simply from changes in the slope of the response
function. It is therefore possible to have countercyclical volatility combined with either counter-
cyclical or procyclical skewness, that is, in bad times the distribution of employment growth can be
more dispersed but less or more negatively skewed. We conclude from these results that our basic
mechanism does not imply definite predictions about changes in cross-sectional skewness over time.

                                                     11
2.3      Employment growth and innovations to profitability
The basic mechanism of asymmetric adjustment works whenever there is a distribution of firm-
specific signals that shifts in mean over the business cycle. Unfortunately, firms’ signals are not
directly observable. However, with some extra structure on what shocks firms respond to, we can
derive a relationship between those shocks and the distribution of employment growth.
       We follow a large literature in focusing on shocks to firm profitability. In particular, we assume
that detrended profitability, denoted by Zti , evolves according to an AR(1) process

                                      Zti = ρZt−1
                                              i
                                                  + zti = ρZt−1
                                                            i
                                                                + uat + uit                                        (5)

where the innovation zti has an aggregate (uat ) and an idiosyncratic (uit ) part, both with mean zero.
       When firms make hiring decisions relevant for date t production, they observe past profitability
 i ,
Zt−1     as well as a signal sit about the current innovation zti . The simplest assumption about signals is
that firms observe the innovations zti perfectly, that is, sit = zti , but our mechanism works also if the
signals are noisy.10 In addition to its signal, a firm’s decision will typically take into account Zt−1
                                                                                                    i ,

as well as possibly the level of employment (that is, firm size), or other features of the production
function captured for example by the firm’s industry. Those characteristics are captured by the
function f .
       Our empirical approach, detailed in Section 4, estimates the degree of concavity of the response
of employment growth to the firm’s signals sit . Since we do not observe firms’ information sets, we
allow for noisy signals with general representation

                                             sit = uat + uit + vta + vti ,                                         (6)

where the idiosyncratic components are independent conditional on uat . In terms of the notation
used above in equation (1), the aggregate news a here corresponds to the common shock uat plus
the correlated noise vta , while the idiosyncratic component ε subsumes both the idiosyncratic prof-
itability innovation uit and the idiosyncratic noise vti .
       Consider now the empirical exercise of running a nonparametric regression of employment
growth on the innovation to the profitability. Suppose further that the econometrician controls
for calendar time, the role of industry, and firm-specific variables, allowing for nonlinear impact of
those variables. The econometrician will then recover the conditional expectation given the true
innovation uat + uit :
                                        g uat + uit = E f (st )|uat + uit .
                                                                       
                                                                                                                   (7)

The only random variable in the expectation is the idiosyncratic noise vti . Both components of the
true innovation are fixed since they are observed by the econometrician, whereas the correlated
noise vta is fixed since it is common to all firms.
  10
    Indeed, for the signal representation in equation (1) the idiosyncratic component uit serves the role of generating
dispersion in signals and the aggregate component uat shifts the mean of the signals over the business cycle.



                                                          12
         What is the effect of unobserved noise vti for inference about the underlying response function
f ? Without any noise, the estimated g function recovers exactly the desired response function
f. Suppose instead that there is idiosyncratic noise but that it is independent of the aggregate
innovation uat . The proof of Proposition 1, part 1 then implies that the conditional expectation
function g is concave (convex, linear) if the response function f is concave (convex, linear). This
means that if an econometrician recovers a concave regression line g, he can rule out that the
actual response function is linear or convex. A concave regression line is evidence in favor of the
asymmetric adjustment that underlies our mechanism.11
         The properties of g are informative about firm adjustment even if the noise vti is not orthogonal
to the aggregate innovation uat . An example of such dependence is that firms might receive more
precise signals in good times. A second order Taylor expansion of the regression line delivers

                                                   1
                         g uat + uit ≈ f uat + uit + f 00 uat + uit var vti |uat + uit .
                                                                                    
                                                    2

The curvature properties of the response g now reflect not only those of the decision rule f but also
the interaction of asymmetric adjustment (captured by the second derivative f 00 ) and the variance.
         Several implications for the shape of f follow. First, concavity of g cannot be due to move-
ments in signal precision alone. Indeed, if f is linear, then g must also be (approximately) linear.
Observing concave g is thus evidence of asymmetric adjustment. Second, suppose that the deci-
sion rule is quadratic and the variance of noise is decreasing and convex in uat , as would be the
case if higher uat increases the number of iid signals observed by the firm. It then follows that a
convex (concave) decision rule implies a convex (concave) average response. The converse holds
if the curvature properties of the decision rule do not change over the domain. We conclude that
measuring a concave average response is indicative of a nonlinear and concave decision rule under
quite general conditions.


3         Employment growth in cross-section and time series
The concave decision rule illustrated in the previous section implies countercyclical volatility in
the cross-section and in the aggregate over time as well as negative skewness in the cross-section
and over time. In this section, we first introduce our micro data sources and then check volatility
and skewness properties for the distribution of employment growth both in the cross-section and
the time series. While we focus on the raw employment data in this section, Section 4 relates
employment dynamics to estimated profitability measures.

3.1        Data sources
We use employment data at several levels of aggregation. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
provides monthly data on employment in the private economy, the ten major sectors, and three-digit
    11
     We emphasize that this conclusion does not depend on homoskedasticity of the innovations uit . In particular, it
is true even if the variance of uit depends on uat , for example because innovations are more dispersed in bad times.


                                                         13
NAICS industries. We also rely on annual data on employment and technology growth contained
in the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (NBER-CES) as well as confidential data
on manufacturing establishments collected by the U.S. Census Bureau. The latter consist of the
Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM), the Census of Manufactures (CMF), and the Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD).
       We use Census CMF and ASM data to construct a large dataset of plants in the U.S. man-
ufacturing sector. This panel spans the years 1972-2011, which allows us to study business cycle
properties over six recessions, including the “Great Recession” 2008/09. Every year, we observe
about 55k establishments which total up to 2.1 million observations. We focus on the establish-
ment as the unit of analysis and use the term “establishment” and “firm” interchangeably, following
convention in the literature.
       We combine the ASM and the ASM portion of the CMF data (identified by establishment type
ET=0), so to obtain a consistent longitudinal panel. By focusing on the ASM portion in all years,
we automatically eliminate all administrative observations (identified by AR=1) which are imputed
from industry means and might thus corrupt moments of the distribution we are interested in.
       We further combine Census data with annual industry-level data from several publicly available
sources: price deflators from the NBER-CES, various asset data from the Capital Tables published
by the BLS and the Fixed Asset Tables published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
Most of this information is only needed to estimate productivity; for this purpose we follow Kehrig
(2015), who documents details about the primary data and transformations required to estimate
productivity.
       We use the standard measure of employment growth: nit ≡ ∆ log(Lit ). This choice is helpful
empirically as it is free of any specific metric. It is, however, not well-defined for firms that just
entered or that are exiting the sample. Entry/exit can be due to economic birth and death of firms
or due to the rotation of the ASM sample in years ending with 4 and 9. Both features are cyclical
and thus not only affect the distribution in general, but have the potential to affect the cyclicality
of employment dispersion we are interested in.
       To check for robustness of our results with respect to cyclical entry and exit, we additionally
construct employment growth rates as defined by Davis and Haltiwanger (1990)12 and confirm our
results using their growth rate. Note that this method is unable to distinguish between units that
exit the economy or units that continue to exit but drop out of the ASM sample. To avoid outliers
driving our results about dispersion, skewness and the employment-productivity link, we winsorize
the 1% tails of the employment and productivity (whose estimation is detailed in Section 4.1) data
in the overall panel.
  12
       This alternative measure of employment growth à la Davis/Haltiwanger is defined as nit   DH
                                                                                                      = 2(Lit − Lit−1 )/(Lit +
Lit−1 ) though Bloom et al. (2012) propose a variant where Lit is replaced by Lit+1 .




                                                           14
3.2    Cross-sectional employment growth dynamics
We focus on the changes in a firm’s total employment, defined as the sum of production and
non-production workers. We focus on hiring rather than hours worked because the data report
employment for all type of workers, while hours worked are only reported for production workers.
This is not only a fraction of employment but it also reflects how the firm chooses overtime hours
relative to normal hours. Furthermore, a firm’s employment variables in the Census data are
considered of very high quality and there are virtually no missing values.
    The asymmetric decision characterizing our model setup predicts that firms with negative signals
reduce employment strongly, but firms with positive signals increase employment only slightly.
As a consequence, this decision rule makes predictions about moments of the employment growth
distribution across firms as summarized by Propositions 1-3: First, employment growth rates should
be more spread-out when most firms receive negative signals, i.e., in recessions. Second, employment
growth should be negatively skewed on average. Third, this skewness is not necessarily cyclical.
To check for these data features, we compute the second and third moments of employment across
all firms in a given year and study the properties of the resulting annual time series which are
summarized in Table 1.13

Cross-sectional employment growth dispersion

Figure 4 displays the year-by-year evolution of the standard deviation and the inter-quartile range
(IQR) of the cross-sectional distribution of employment growth. Both of them show that firms differ
a lot in their employment changes: on average, the firm at the top quartile grows employment by
16.8% more than the firm at the bottom quartile. The standard deviation across all firms is
25.2%. Both dispersion measures increase significantly in recessions.14 The inter-quartile range,
for example, reaches 20.2% on average around a NBER recession compared to an average 15.8% in
boom times.
    In the Great Recession, the IQR experienced its sharpest increase ever, rising by more than half
its normal value before again returning to its long-run average in 2011. The standard deviation
exhibits similar patterns. We also confirm that these patterns are present within 4-digit NAICS
industries in order to avoid our results being driven by cyclical composition changes between indus-
tries with different but constant long-run dispersion. We also confirm that employment-weighted
dispersion follows a similar pattern, so we know that firms in the tails of the distribution with very
   13
      We share an interest in the role of nonlinear employment adjustment at the plant level with empirical work
such as Caballero et al. (1997), who document a countercyclical cross-sectional dispersion of “desired employment.”
To the extent that desired employment is some function of actual idiosyncratic signals about profitability, then the
countercyclical dispersion that they document is consistent with a combination of a countercyclical dispersion in
signals and, as our mechanism highlights, a concave desired employment function. While “employment gaps” are an
interesting hypothetical object and relate to our work, we do not make the assumptions involved in their approach
and instead analyze directly the measured employment response to identified profitability shocks, something that our
more detailed data set allows us to do.
   14
      In the online appendix we confirm the cyclical patterns of employment growth distributions presented in Section
3 for several other measures of the business cycle.



                                                        15
                                                                                Table 1: Cross-sectional moments of employment growth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M oment
                                                             Moment                                                                                                   StDt (nit )                                                  IQRt (nit ) γ(nit )                 k(nit )
                                                             Long-run average                                                                                          0.253                                                        0.168      −0.495                 −0.048
                                                             NBER booms                                                                                                0.244                                                        0.158      −0.448                 −0.018
                                                             NBER recessions                                                                                           0.283                                                        0.202      −0.653                 −0.151
                                                             Great Recession 2008/09                                                                                   0.320                                                        0.220      −0.681                 −0.210

                                                             Corr(dEtaggr , M omentt )                                                                                −0.612∗∗∗ −0.650∗∗∗ 0.211∗ 0.687∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.096)   (0.119)  (0.125) (0.086)
                                                             Corr(#boom qtrs/yeart , M omentt )                                                                        −0.185                                                      −0.474∗∗∗ 0.004 0.457∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.136)                                                      (0.110)  (0.131) (0.104)

                                                             Avge. no. of observations/year                                                                                                                                                   46, 400

                                         Note: Data are averages of those moments of the cross-sectional employment distribution plotted in Figures 4 and
                                         5: M omentt = StDt (nit ), IQRt (nit ), γ(nit ), k(nit ). dEtaggr denotes the BLS growth rate of aggregate employment in
                                         the private economy, #boom qtrs/year denotes the number of expansionary quarters in the entire U.S. economy as
                                         defined by the NBER. Standard errors for the correlation coefficients are computed using a GMM procedure that
                                         corrects for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation as in Newey and West (1987) and is adapted from Hansen et al.
                                         (1988). Census disclosure rules require rounding the number of observations to the nearest hundred.




                                                              Figure 4: Dispersion of the cross-sectional distribution of employment growth


                                         0.04                                                                   0.35                                                                                            0.04                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                       Cross-sectional employment growth dispersion




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cross-sectional employment growth dispersion
Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)




                                                                                                                                                                       Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)




                                         0.02                                                                   0.32                                                                                            0.02                                                                     0.225


                                             0                                                                  0.29                                                                                                0                                                                    0.2


                                         -0.02                                                                  0.26                                                                                            -0.02                                                                    0.175


                                         -0.04                                                                  0.23                                                                                            -0.04                                                                    0.15


                                         -0.06                                                                  0.2                                                                                             -0.06                                                                    0.125
                                                        Aggr. empl. growth                                                                                                                                                     Aggr. empl. growth
                                                        Standard deviation                                                                                                                                                     Inter-quartile range
                                         -0.08                                                                  0.17                                                                                            -0.08                                                                    0.1
                                                 1975      1980      1985    1990   1995   2000   2005   2010                                                                                                           1975      1980       1985     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010




                                         Note: This figure displays the unweighted year-by-year standard deviation (left panel) and inter-quartile range
                                         (right
                                         q      panel) of employment growth across firms for all t=1973-2011 on the right axis. That is, StDt (nit ) =
                                            1/(Nt − 1) i∈t (nit − nt )2 and IQRt (nit ) = np75 − np25
                                                      P
                                                                                           t      t   where nt denotes the mean employment growth, Nt the
                                         number of firms, and npx
                                                               t  the x-percentile in year t. Following common procedure in the literature, we truncate
                                         the 1% tails of the overall panel to remove outliers. The gray dashed line (left axis) represents demeaned aggregate
                                         employment growth. NBER dated recessions are marked by the vertical gray bars.




                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                         few employees are not driving our results.

                                         Cross-sectional employment growth skewness

                                         Our mechanism predicts that the employment distribution should be negatively skewed. Firms
                                         that shrink their employment should have an average rate of change that is larger in absolute value
                                         than that of firms which grow employment relative to the average employment growth. To check
                                         for this data feature, we compute two skewness measures across all firms in a given year and study
                                         the year-by-year properties of these time series.
                                                 Figure 5 displays the year-by-year evolution of the coefficient of skewness and Kelley Skewness:

                                                                                                            1                        PNt                              i
                                                                                                            Nt               − nt )3                            i=1 (nt
                                                                                     γt (nit )     =h                                 i3/2
                                                                                                          1       PNt i             2
                                                                                                          Nt       i=1 (n t − n t )
                                                                                                     (np90 − np50     p50
                                                                                                              t ) − (nt   − np10
                                                                                                                             t )
                                                                                     kt (nit ) =       t
                                                                                                                                                                 np90
                                                                                                                                                                  t   − np10
                                                                                                                                                                         t

                                         where nt denotes the mean employment growth, Nt the number of firms and npx
                                                                                                                  t the x-percentile
                                         in year t. Both the coefficient of skewness, γt (nit ), and the Kelley Skewness, kt (nit ), are scaled so
                                         that they are dimensionless. The latter skewness measure is bounded between −1 and +1, which
                                         correspond to the polar cases of a distribution which is degenerate between the bottom decile and
                                         the median (k(·) = +1) and vice versa when the top decile coincides with the median (k(·) = −1).

                                                           Figure 5: Skewness of the cross-sectional distribution of employment growth


                                         0.04                                                               1.5                                                                                            0.04                                                               0.18
                                                                                                                   Cross-sectional employment growth skewness




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cross-sectional employment growth skewness
Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)




                                                                                                                                                                  Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)




                                                                                     Aggr. empl. growth                                                                                                                                                Aggr. empl. growth
                                                                                     Coeff. of skewness                                                                                                                                                Kelley skewness
                                         0.02                                                               1                                                                                              0.02                                                               0.105


                                             0                                                              0.5                                                                                                0                                                              0.03


                                         -0.02                                                              0                                                                                              -0.02                                                              -0.045


                                         -0.04                                                              -0.5                                                                                           -0.04                                                              -0.12


                                         -0.06                                                              -1                                                                                             -0.06                                                              -0.195


                                         -0.08                                                              -1.5                                                                                           -0.08                                                              -0.27
                                                 1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000    2005     2010                                                                                                          1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000    2005     2010




                                         Note: This figure plots the unweighted year-by-year employment growth skewness measures γ(nit ) (left panel) as well
                                         as k(nit ) (right panel) across all firms for all t=1973-2011. Further details as described in the notes to Figure 4.


                                                 As Table 1 shows, both measures are negative on average. The long-run average of the coefficient
                                         of skewness is −0.495, that of the Kelley skewness is −0.048. The latter means that the left tail of
                                         the distribution (between bottom decile and median) is 10% = (1 + 0.048)/(1 − 0.048) more spread-



                                                                                                                                                                17
out than the right tail (between top decile and median).15 The negative cross-sectional skewness is
also consistent with an asymmetric hiring rule. As we did above with the dispersion measures, we
confirm that no outlier industry or firms at the tails drive the negative employment skewness.
    The coefficient of skewness does not display clear cyclical behavior. While Table 1 suggests that
it is slightly procyclical, the correlation coefficient with aggregate employment is barely significantly
different from zero. At the same time, the Kelley skewness does appear significantly procyclical. In
NBER recessions it decreases to −0.151, which means that the distribution between bottom decile
and median is 36% more spread out than the distribution between top decile and median. The
plausible presence of other unobserved shocks that influence hiring, even if also associated with
concave decision rules but of different shapes, may contribute to a complex cyclical pattern of the
cross-sectional skewness.16
    Panels A.1 and A.2 in Table C.1 in the appendix further reports the same cross-sectional
moments of employment growth for each of the nine main sectors of the U.S. economy to illustrate
that the patterns measured in the manufacturing sector are also present in the rest of the economy.

3.3    Time series employment growth dynamics
Our model predicts negative skewness and countercyclical volatility of employment growth not
only in the cross-section, but also in the time series, both at the level of the individual firm and
at higher levels of aggregation. Indeed, Proposition 2 says that a concave hiring rule f transforms
any sequence of firm-level shocks s into a negatively skewed sequence of employment growth n.
Moreover, Proposition 1 says that during bad times when the aggregate signal a is low, firms
respond more to their signals and we should observe higher volatility at any level of aggregation.
    We compute time series moments for individual manufacturing firms, 19 three-digit NAICS
manufacturing industries, sectoral employment, and the aggregate economy. We construct estima-
tors of the time series standard deviation, denoted by V olt , and time series skewness, denoted by
Asymt , of employment growth within five-year rolling windows as follows:
                                                 v
                                                 u
                                                 u1 X   2
                                             i
                                         V olt ≡ t          (nit+τ − nit )2                                      (8)
                                                   4
                                                     τ =−2
                                                 1 P2
                                                            (nit+τ − nit )3
                                       Asymit ≡ 4 τ =−2 i 3                                                      (9)
                                                          (V olt )

               1   P2
where nit ≡    5
                           i
                    τ =−2 nt+τ   is the average employment growth of firm i in the five-year window
  15
      Davis and Haltiwanger (1990) report a different but related fact: about 35% of total job creation is caused
by firms with strongly positive employment growth (nit DH > 0.666), while strongly negative employment growth
(nit DH < −0.666) accounts for 45% of job destruction. This suggests either that “strongly contracting” firms shrink
employment more than “strongly expanding” firms increase employment or that “strongly contracting” firms are larger
than “strongly expanding” firms.
  16
      The ambiguous cyclicality of the two skewness measures suggests that the condition for pro-/countercyclicality
established in Proposition 3 is not satisfied. When we non-parametrically estimate the hiring rule in Section 4.3, we
confirm that this is the case empirically.



                                                         18
around t.
       We limit our attention to rolling windows of five-year length due to the quinquennial sample
rotation in the ASM and only consider firms that we observe for the consecutive five years. Longer
windows would filter out too many high-frequency changes and thus cover up cyclical patterns we
try to examine; in particular, we would miss the importance of the “Great Recession” towards the
end of our sample.
       Since the actions’ sensitivity to the shock is higher conditional on a negative shock, our mecha-
nism predicts that for the average firm V olti should be countercyclical, and Asymit should fluctuate
around a negative number. Unlike for the cross-sectional moments, we construct these time series
measures at several levels of aggregation. This allows us to study if and how much micro-level
patterns of employment growth wash out with higher levels of aggregation.
       We construct these two measures for every manufacturing firm in the ASM, for employment
growth aggregated to the 19 main 3-digit NAICS manufacturing industries, for employment growth
of the ten sectors in the U.S. economy, and for total private aggregate employment growth. For
the first two, we report averages across firms and industries, respectively. Of course, we have
to be mindful of the fact that our times series using the micro-level Census data span only 41
years, those for 3-digit NAICS industries only 25 years. In addition to that, a large literature in
macroeconomics has documented and studied the “Great Moderation,” that is the declining time-
series volatility of aggregate macroeconomic and micro-level variables [see among others Davis et al.
(2006)]. To account for that feature, we take out a linear trend in both our time series measures.
Unlike volatility, the time series skewness measure does not have a clear and significant trend at
any level of aggregation. We still account for a trend because we do not want any business cycle
results to be contaminated by long-run trends.
       Figures 6 and 7 plot the time series of V olt and Asymt , respectively, of these rolling windows
for two samples: the average across our firms in the ASM and the aggregate economy. Patterns at
the industry and sectoral level look similar, so we merely report them alongside the other results
in Table 2. As in Table 1, we report the long-run and cyclical properties of these rolling windows
at all four levels of aggregation.17

Time series employment growth volatility

As expected from the concavity mechanism, the time series volatility of employment growth, V olt ,
varies over the business cycle and is higher during and around NBER recessions at all levels of
aggregation. For the time series at industry level and higher, our data allow us to examine if these
patterns were even stronger in the “Great Recession” 2008-2010. We find that the Great Recession
years were even more volatile than the typical NBER recession. Unsurprisingly, volatility is stronger
on average at the firm level than the more aggregate levels. The difference across NBER expansions
  17
   Table C.1 in the appendix reports the same moments at both the micro (Panels B.1 and B.2) and aggregate
(Panels C.1 and C.2) level for each of the ten main sectors of the U.S. economy to illustrate that the patterns
measured in the manufacturing sector is also present in the rest of the economy.



                                                      19
                           Table 2: Time series moments of employment growth

        Moment                                                      Aggregation level
                                                   Firm         Industry Manufacturing           Aggregate
        A. Volatility
        Long-run average                           0.197          0.031            0.035            0.021
        NBER booms                                 0.194          0.027            0.033            0.019
        NBER recessions                            0.207          0.047            0.043            0.025
        Great Recession 2008/09                    0.213          0.055            0.049            0.028
        Corr(dEtaggr , V olt )                  −0.468∗∗∗      −0.526∗∗∗          −0.148           −0.173
                                                  (0.124)        (0.121)           (0.116)          (0.109)

        Corr(#boom qtrs/yeart , V olt )         −0.435∗∗∗       −0.326∗∗        −0.298∗∗∗         −0.327∗∗∗
                                                   (0.107)       (0.154)           (0.092)          (0.089)
        B. Asymmetry
        Long-run average                          −0.087         −0.411           −0.451           −0.459
        NBER booms                                −0.078         −0.333           −0.340           −0.429
        NBER recessions                           −0.113         −0.590           −0.713           −0.520
        Great Recession 2008/09                   −0.120         −0.840           −1.103           −0.835
        Corr(dEtaggr , Asymt )                    0.333∗∗        0.0911            0.114            0.068
                                                   (0.131)       (0.1508)         (0.126)           (0.133)

        Corr(#boom qtrs/yeart , Asymt )           0.361∗∗∗        0.126            0.106            –0.010
                                                   (0.117)       (0.190)           (0.249)          (0.285)
        Avge. no. of observations/year            4,500           19                1                 1
        Data Source                               ASM            BLS              BLS               BLS
        Time                                    1972-2013      1990-2015        1947-2015         1947-2015

Note:    Table displays the longitudinal volatility (V olt in Panel A.) and skewness (Asymt in Panel B.) measures as
defined in equations (8) and (9) at various levels of aggregation. We construct these measures for each firm in the
ASM and report the moments – long-run level, levels in expansionary and recessionary years, the moments’ correlation
with two measures of the business cycle – averaged across firms in the first column. The second column reports the
average of the same analysis for 3-digit NAICS manufacturing industries, the third and fourth columns reports the
moments for manufacturing and aggregate employment growth. For more details see notes to Table 1.


and recessions is not as strong as for firms as it is at the more aggregate levels – a feature that we
attribute to noise at the level of many very small firms. Despite that difference in magnitude, time
series volatility of both firm-level and more aggregate employment growth is strongly negatively
correlated with the business cycle.
    We further explore the countercyclical response of the aggregate economy by analyzing the
conditional heteroskedasticity in aggregate employment growth. To that end, we follow the econo-
metric procedure developed in Bachmann et al. (2013) and compute the cyclicality of the squared
residual of aggregate employment growth. These squared residuals obtained from an autoregressive
econometric model tend to be negatively related with aggregate employment growth. Consistent
with the message based on time-series volatility within windows, this provides further evidence on
the countercyclical macroeconomic volatility implication of our mechanism. Details of this exercise


                                                         20
                                                                                              Figure 6: Time-varying volatility of employment growth at the macro and micro level


                                         0.04                                                                                                                 0.036                                                                                                           0.04                                                                             0.22
Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)
                                                                                                                    Aggr. employment growth                                                                                                                                                                            Aggr. employment growth
                                                                                                                    Aggregate volatility                                                                                                                                                                               Firm-level volatility




                                                                                                                                                                         Time-series volatility - aggregate
                                         0.02                                                                                                                 0.03                                                                                                            0.02                                                                             0.21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Time-series volatility - firm
                                                                           0                                                                                  0.024                                                                                                                       0                                                                    0.2


                                         -0.02                                                                                                                0.018                                                                                            -0.02                                                                                           0.19


                                         -0.04                                                                                                                0.012                                                                                            -0.04                                                                                           0.18


                                         -0.06                                                                                                                0.006                                                                                            -0.06                                                                                           0.17


                                         -0.08                                                                                                                0                                                                                                -0.08                                                                                           0.16
                                             1975                                             1980      1985      1990     1995     2000      2005     2010                                                                                                        1975                            1980    1985     1990     1995     2000       2005   2010




                                                            Note: Left panel: V olt measure for aggregate employment in the private economy as defined in equation (8). Right
                                                            panel: The year-by-year average across all firm’s V olti measure in the ASM. Both V olt measures are detrended to
                                                            account for the well-documented “Great Moderation.” Further details as described in the notes to Figure 4.


                                                            can be found in the online appendix.

                                                            Time series employment growth skewness

                                                                                              Figure 7: Time-varying skewness of employment growth at the macro and micro level

                                                                                   0.04                                                                           1                                                                                                                     0.04                                                                   -0.02
                                          Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Aggregate employment growth (demeaned)
                                                                                                                                                                              Time-series skewness - aggregate




                                                                                   0.02                                                                           0.6                                                                                                                   0.02                                                                   -0.045




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Time-series skewness - firm
                                                                                       0                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                         0                                                                -0.07


                                                                                   -0.02                                                                          -0.2                                                                                                                  -0.02                                                                  -0.095


                                                                                   -0.04                                                                          -0.6                                                                                                                  -0.04                                                                  -0.12


                                                                                   -0.06                                                                          -1                                                                                                                    -0.06                                                                  -0.145
                                                                                                          Aggr. employment growth                                                                                                                                                                          Aggr. employment growth
                                                                                                          Aggregate skewness                                                                                                                                                                               Firm-level skewness
                                                                                   -0.08                                                                          -1.4                                                                                                                  -0.08                                                                  -0.17
                                                                                       1975      1980      1985     1990     1995     2000      2005    2010                                                                                                                                1975    1980    1985     1990    1995     2000       2005   2010



                                                            Note: Left panel: Asymt measure for aggregate employment in the private economy as defined in equation (9).
                                                            Right panel: The year-by-year average across all firm’s Asymt measure in the ASM. Analogous to the V olt measures
                                                            in Figure 6, both Asymt measures are detrended to account for the well-documented “Great Moderation.” Further
                                                            details as described in the notes to Figure 4.


                                                                                           Like in the cross-sections, employment growth is skewed negatively over time. This means that
                                                            employment contractions are sharper on average than employment expansions. This is true for
                                                            aggregate, sectoral, industry-level, and firm-level employment growth. For the aggregate employ-
                                                            ment growth time series skewness is at −0.459 while this number is smaller for industry-level and
                                                            firm-level analysis. For the typical firm the rolling-window skewness is only −0.1 on average. Given


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21
our construction, firms may be included in this average which are sampled merely for five years and
then exit or are not sampled any more. If the ASM sample over-represents young firms relative to
old ones and the young firms tend to grow smoothly while older ones shrink in a volatile fashion,
then this could bias our firm skewness measure towards negative infinity and vice versa for the
opposite patterns. As a robustness check we limit our attention to a strongly balanced panel that
contains those 1,900 firms which both exist and are sampled continually from 1972 until 2009.18
Focusing on this balanced panel, the negative skewness is more pronounced at −0.39. This suggests
that firms at the beginning and end of their life exhibit more symmetric growth patterns.
         Unlike the cross-sectional evidence, the negative time series skewness of employment growth is
stronger in recessions than in booms at any level of aggregation. This becomes even more evident
during the Great Recession when the time series skewness of employment growth tends to be about
twice as negative as it is in booms: the skewness of aggregate employment growth for example
declines to −0.835. Time series skewness of the average firm remains distinctly countercyclical
when choosing employment growth or other variables as the measure of the cycle. This is not the
case for the time series skewness at the industry, sectoral, or aggregate levels where the correlation
coefficient is insignificantly different from zero.


4         The joint distribution of employment and TFP
In this section, we show that the firm level employment growth response to TFP shocks is concave.
Section 4.1 describes the core empirical exercise: we construct innovations to the Solow residual,
a measure of TFP and run regressions of employment growth on those innovations, using both
nonparametric and parametric specifications that control for a battery of other variables.
         We then present results in four steps. Subsection 4.2 reports cross-section and time series
properties of our estimated TFP innovations and compares them to those of employment growth.
Subsection 4.3 presents the estimated concave response to TFP shocks. Subsection 4.4 looks at
how concavity varies across a number of “data cuts”. Finally, Subsection 4.5 compares concavity
and moments of employment growth across data cuts.

4.1        Constructing TFP shocks
All steps described in this subsection are done at the industry level to take into account that
the dynamics of productivity may differ across industries. Unless otherwise noted, we consider
industries at the 4-digit NAICS level. This choice allows for rich heterogeneity yet leaves enough
observations in each industry to deliver precise estimates.
    18
    We limit the sample to 2009 here since we want to compare the moments to those of TFP innovations which
we can only construct until 2009 due to data limitations; none of the empirical results presented previously are
significantly different.




                                                      22
Solow residuals

We begin by deriving the Solow residual for every firm i and year t from the following standard
Cobb-Douglas production function (in logs):

                                       yti = srti + β k kti + β l lti + β m mit + β e eit

where yti is production (sales corrected for inventory changes and resales), kti , lti , mit , eit are real
inputs of capital (structures and equipment), hours worked (production and non-production hours),
materials and energy, respectively, and srti is the Solow residual. The production elasticity of
production input X = k, l, m, e, labeled β X , is equated to the revenue share of factor X. This is
the only step where we define an industry at the 6-digit NAICS level, so the β’s are specific to the
6-digit industry.
       Several advantages make this approach very suitable in our context. First, it is fairly free of
structural assumptions and thus very general: we only need to assume that firms maximize profits
and take factor prices as given. Using more involved structural estimates such as Olley and Pakes
(1996) would require us to make timing assumptions about the arrival of information and the
choice of inputs. Some of these would conflict with our own setup where choices are based on
current signals that herald future productivity.

Identification of shocks

We assume that Solow residuals contain an aggregate growth trend, a common and a firm-specific
fixed effect and a stationary component:

                                                srti = gt + A + αi + Zti                                        (10)

where g denotes the long-run (industry-specific) growth rate, A initial technology level (which will
show up as long-run productivity differences across industries), αi a firm-specific fixed effect such
that i αi = 0. The distribution of Zti over time is assumed to be stationary and have mean zero.
    P

Ultimately, we will be interested in TFP shocks, that is, innovations to Zti . Given the assumptions
on Zti , we can identify g and A as follows
                                                                   
                                              E [dsrt ] = E g + dZ t = g
                                                                      
                                               E [srt ] = gt + A + E Z t

where srt ≡ Nt−1             i   is the average Solow residual in t, dsrt its growth rate, Z t ≡ Nt−1            i
                       P                                                                                  P
                         i srt                                                                                i Zt   is
the common cyclical component of technology and Nt and is the number of firms in year t.
       To identify TFP shocks, we assume the same AR(1) stochastic process for Zti that we assumed
in equation (5) in the model section: Zti = ρZt−1
                                              i   + zti .19 After detrending the Solow residual in
  19
       We have also examined other shock processes. First, we decomposed Zti into an industry-wide and idiosyncratic



                                                              23
equation (10) and imposing the assumption of an AR(1) of Zti , we get:

                             Xti ≡ srti − gt − A = αi + Zti = αi + ρZt−1
                                                                     i
                                                                         + zti
                                                Xti = αi (1 − ρ) + ρXt−1
                                                                     i
                                                                         + zti
                                                    = αi (1 − ρ) + ρXt−1
                                                                     i
                                                                         + uat + uit .                             (11)

Then we can estimate the objects αi , ρ and zti in equation (11) with a panel fixed effects regression.20

4.2    Asymmetric shocks or asymmetric responses?
Our model says that concave responses to TFP shocks induce negative skewness. If TFP shocks
are the only source of variation, then Proposition 2 says that employment growth should exhibit
more skewness and countercyclical volatility than TFP shocks themselves. More generally, even if
other shocks are relevant, a comparison of the moments for TFP shocks and employment growth
is informative about what can possibly account for observed skewness in employment growth.

                                          Table 3: Summary Statistics


                    Moment                 TFP Innovation zti        Employment Growth nit
                    Mean                          0                        −0.012
                    Std. Dev.                   0.178                       0.253
                    IQR                         0.179                       0.168
                    IDR                         0.413                       0.475
                    Skewness                    0.072                      −0.495
                    Kelley Skewness           −0.013                       −0.048

                    N                              1, 536k                      1, 808k

Note: Table displays summary statistics for TFP innovations zti and employment growth rates nit . First, cross-
sectional measures are computed for every year and then averaged across years to obtain the average moment displayed
in the table. N refers to the number of observations.

    Table 3 reports annual cross-sectional moments of our estimated TFP shocks as well as employ-
ment growth. The main finding is that TFP innovations are barely skewed across firms in a given
component (denoted by Ztind and ζti , respectively) allowing for different persistences in either component Zti =
Ztind + ζti = ρind Zt−1
                     ind
                         + ρi ζt−1
                                i
                                    + uat + uit . While our estimates for ρi tended to be lower than those for ρind , we
cannot reject the null that the common and idiosyncratic persistence is the same for the majority of four-digit NAICS
industries – a feature that we attribute to estimating these on only 37 periods.
   We also examined whether or not the stochastic productivity component follows a random walk with drift: srti =
αi + Zti = αi + g + Zt−1
                      i
                          + zti but the estimated residuals are clearly autocorrelated which suggests that a random-walk
model is misspecified.
   20
      The fixed effect causes a well-known bias in the estimates of (11). Monte Carlo studies suggest the bias with 37
periods should be rather small. To check for robustness of our results, we also estimate (11) as suggested by Arellano
and Bond (1991) and Blundell and Bond (2000); the resulting measure of TFP innovations is not only extremely
similar to the one we obtain, the resulting employment growth-TFP innovation relationship is equally asymmetric;
these results are detailed in the online appendix.



                                                          24
year. In addition, the cross-sectional standard deviation of a TFP shock on average is 0.178 – by
coincidence it is very close to the inter-quartile range. A firm that is hit by a 1 standard deviation
TFP shock thus produces almost 20% more output than the mean firm.21 By construction, the
mean TFP shock is zero. In contrast, employment growth in manufacturing is negative on average
as the manufacturing sector shrank over time.
       Table 4 reports the time series skewness of TFP shocks and employment growth at different
levels of aggregation. For the micro level we report these numbers separately for an unbalanced
(Panel A) and a balanced (Panel B) panel of firms to account for the possibility that time series
skewness of young firms that exit quickly differs from that of older firms where we get a more
precise estimate of time series moments. We focus on the skewness of the entire time series. In
the unbalanced panel the average time series skewness of employment growth is −0.187 while it
is more negatively skewed in the balanced panel: −0.386. Skewness in both samples is slightly
more negative when we take an employment-weighted rather than the raw average. Firm-level
TFP shocks uit , in contrast, are basically not skewed over time regardless of panel and weighting.
This means that, at the firm level, asymmetric employment patterns are not inherited from the
underlying structural TFP shocks.
       In Panel C we examine the time series skewness of the average four-digit NAICS industry. Our
estimation of TFP shocks in Section 4.1 also produced a TFP shock common to all firms in an
industry, labeled uat . We compared the time series skewness of that industry TFP shock to that
of industry employment growth. While industry TFP shocks tend to be slightly negatively skewed
(−0.292), industry employment growth is even more negatively skewed at −0.937. Again, weighting
industries by their employment strengthens these patterns.
       Panel D repeats the analysis for the manufacturing sector using aggregated industry-level data
from the NBER-CES. Again, manufacturing employment growth is more negatively skewed over
time than sector-wide TFP shocks.
       Finally, Panel E displays the same statistics for the aggregate economy. As in Section 3.3 we
compute aggregate employment growth rates from data on aggregate private employment from
BLS which we annualize. To obtain a measure of an economy-wide TFP shock, we fit the same
stochastic process for log TFP as in Section 4.1 on productivity data estimated in Fernald (2014).
At the aggregate level TFP shocks are actually positively skewed while employment is negatively
skewed both at quarterly and annual frequency.
       At any level of aggregation and any available frequency we find that employment growth is more
negatively skewed than TFP innovations, which are not even skewed at all at the firm level. This
means that asymmetric hiring and firing behavior are not due to asymmetric TFP shocks. Instead,
the evidence is in line with by and large symmetric TFP shocks and a firm policy which translates
  21
     Given our estimated shock process in equation (11), the cross-sectional standard deviation of TFP levels (as
opposed to the above-reported TFP innovations) is 0.289 in a given year. This compares nicely to Syverson (2004)
who estimates the cross-sectional inter-quartile range in the average industry to be 0.290 (measure “Total factor prod.
2” in Table 1); note that the inter-quartile range and standard deviation in our sample have basically the same value.
In a similar procedure, we compute the inter-decile range of TFP levels to be 0.675 which is very close to 0.651
estimated by Syverson (2004).


                                                          25
             Table 4: Time series skewness of TFP innovations and employment growth


        TS Skewness of...     TFP         Empl.                 N           Time           Data source
                             innov.       growth
        A. Full panel of firms
        Raw average          +0.047       −0.187              149,800    1972-2009             ASM
        Weighted average +0.027           −0.379
        B. Balanced panel of firms
        Raw average          +0.037      −0.386                1,900     1972-2009             ASM
        Weighted average +0.041          −0.554
        C. NAICS-4 manufacturing        industries
        Raw average          −0.292      −0.937                 86       1972-2009         ASM (aggr)
        Weighted average −0.299          −1.017                 86       1972-2009         ASM (aggr)
        D. Manufacturing Sector
        Average              −0.589       −0.996                1        1958-2009         NBER-CES
        E. Aggregate Economy
        Quarterly            +0.397       −0.693                1       47:Q1-15:Q2          BLS &
        Annual               −0.132       −0.949                1        1947-2014       Fernald (2014)

Note:   Table displays time series skewness of TFP innovations zti and employment growth rates nit at various levels
of aggregation. To obtain the average time-series skewness for firms in Panels A we first compute the skewness for
each individual firm and then average across firms to obtain the average time series skewness. Panel B redoes the
exercise on a balanced panel of firms, Panel C redoes the same exercise for 86 4-digit NAICS industries. Panels D and
E report the skewness of the (only) time series of TFP innovations and employment growth for the manufacturing
sector and the private economy.




                                                         26
these symmetric shocks into asymmetric employment responses as predicted by Propositions 1-2 in
Section 2. In the following section, we proceed to non-parametrically estimate this hiring rule.

4.3    Employment and TFP: non-parametric evidence
We now examine the average response of employment growth to TFP innovations. We estimate
equation (7) from Section 2.3:
                                           nit = g(zti ) = E f (sit )|zti
                                                                         
                                                                                                              (7’)

As econometricians, we do not observe the firm’s relevant signals. However, as detailed in Section
2, we can recover the conditional expectation g(·) of the hiring decision f (·). This average response
is conditional on what the econometrician measures, namely the observed TFP innovations over
which the firm has (possibly noisy) signals.22 In Section 4.1 we have estimated the current TFP
shock zti , which is observed by the firm. Because TFP is autocorrelated, the firm understands that
the current TFP shock also signals higher future TFP and acts by changing employment, nit .
    We want to estimate (7’) with the least restrictions possible. We therefore start with a non-
parametric approach. Its key advantage is flexibility in the shape of the relationship between
employment growth and TFP – we only require that the response function is smooth. A difficulty
with a nonparametric approach is that it is hard to control for other state variables that might mat-
ter for the strength of an asymmetry of f (·) or that may lead to a spuriously asymmetric estimate
of f (·) merely driven by composition bias.
    To address the potential bias due to the effect of other state variables, we partition the data into
subsamples and estimate (7’) for each subsample separately. We then aggregate the estimates for
each subsample into one representative estimate. In this section, we divide firms into subsamples
by size. Size is an important characteristic because the estimated asymmetry differs strongly along
the size dimension compared. To account for differences in g(·) along other characteristics, we have
repeated this exercise many times on different ways to partition the data and we report results
from these different partitions in Section 4.4.
    Figure 8 displays our non-parametric estimate of (7’). The estimated regression line corresponds
to the function g(·), which reflects the recovered employment growth given technology innovation
zti = uat + uit . The solid black line displays the mean employment change. The main takeaway
is that employment growth responds more strongly to negative TFP innovations than to positive
ones. Furthermore, the shape of the asymmetry is concave over the domain of TFP innovations.23
    The concave pattern is strong in the relevant range of TFP shocks (illustrated by gray bars in
Figure 8): after a typical positive one standard deviation TFP shock (zti = +0.178) employment
grows by 0.62% while it contracts by 1.10% for a negative one standard deviation TFP shock
(zti = −0.178). The employment response is also more sensitive for negative TFP innovations than
  22
     One margin which a firm might use to faster adjust its employment to signals are temporary production workers.
According to Ono and Sullivan (2013), however, the share of temporary workers makes up less than 5% of the
production workers and they find evidence that temporary workers are usually hired to substitute regular production
workers when the firm expects permanently lower output in the future.
  23
     Even at unusually large negative TFP innovations the wide error bands include evidence of concavity.


                                                         27
                                                         Figure 8: Employment growth and TFP innovations



                                                   3.5                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                      Employment Growth: non-parametric estimate (in %)
                                                    3                                                                                            3

                      Density of TFP innovations
                                                   2.5                                                                                           2



                                                    2                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                       z: 0.18
                                                   1.5                                                                 n: 0.62                   0
                                                                                                         z: 0
                                                                                                         n: 0
                                                    1                                                                                            -1
                                                                                        z: -0.18
                                                                                        n: -1.1
                                                   0.5                                                                                           -2



                                                    0                                                                                            -3
                                                    -0.6   -0.5   -0.4   -0.3    -0.2      -0.1      0          0.1   0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6
                                                                                            TFP Innovation



Note: Non-parametric regression of employment growth on TFP innovations for manufacturing firms. The non-
parametric estimate is displayed as the solid black line (right scale), dashed lines are 95% error bands. TFP innovations
are obtained as described in Section 4.1, and their density is plotted in gray bars (left scale). Indicated data points
display employment growth at a typical positive/negative (+1/−1 standard deviation) technology shock relative to
no shock.


positive ones: g 0 (−z) > g 0 (z) , ∀z ≥ 0. For example, the slope of the nonparametric estimate at a
negative TFP shock is more than twice as strong compared to the slope at a positive TFP shock
(0.073 compared to 0.029).

A non-parametric measure of asymmetry

Our final statistic captures the increase in volatility contributed by nonlinearity in the estimated
employment response function g:

                                                                                                   g 0 (0)2 var(z)
                                                                                φg ≡ 1 −                                                                                                                  (12)
                                                                                                     var (g(z))

If the estimated function g is close to linear and g(z) is thus a scaled copy of TFP z, then φg is
close to zero. In contrast, for strongly concave g, the variance of g(z) is larger than that of g 0 (0)z,
and φg is positive. For example, the concavity in overall hiring as displayed in Figure 8 implies
that φg = 0.210.24 The asymmetry is stronger when we estimate a firm’s response for hours worked
instead of employment. We emphasize that we measure hours worked only for production workers;
their hours worked asymmetry measure is φg = 0.841; only 15% of the variability in production
  24
    By itself, the statistic φg measures the contribution of nonlinearity rather than concavity; for example φg > 0
could be generated by convexity in g. Empirically, however, the estimated function g(·) is always concave.


                                                                                                   28
hours worked is due to the linear portion in the hiring rule. This suggests that overtime hours may
be very costly, so the firm is very reluctant to adjust this margin.

4.4    For which firms is concavity stronger?
In this subsection, we partition the data into subsamples that condition on characteristics of the
firm, its parent firm or industry, one control at a time25 . This analysis is useful for two reasons.
First, it shows that concavity of the hiring rule at the firm level is a pervasive phenomenon that is
evident in all subsamples.26 Second, the various cuts of the data and the differential behavior of
the asymmetry are informative about underlying structural reasons behind the concave hiring rule.
    For each characteristic, detailed below, we split the data into octile bins and compute the
asymmetry measure, given by φg in equation (12), averaged over the firms inside that bin. Table
5 summarizes our findings. The fact that almost all cuts of the data still exhibit the asymmetric
employment growth-TFP innovation relationship is reassuring and informative at the same time.
    Our choice of controls is guided by three sets of candidate stories for why hiring rules at the
establishment level might be concave. The first set of stories implies adjustment costs at the
level of the parent company that controls the individual firms (or establishments) in our data. For
example, models of financial frictions typically predict that increasing the number of workers is more
difficult than firing because the parent firm faces a constraint on the amount of funding needed
for an expansion. A typical implication is that larger parent firms face lower financing constraints.
Indeed, firm size often relates to the size of a firm’s collateral and thus its debt capacity.
    The first three columns of Table 5 consider three characteristics of the parent firm: employment,
the number of establishments per parent firm, and whether the parent firm is publicly traded.
Column (I) shows that, except for the first octile, parent firm size is not systematically related to
the asymmetry of the hiring function at the establishment level. This finding stands in contrast to
a simple financial frictions story. Column (II) indicates that the number of units per parent firm
is also not a predictive control. This result suggests that organizational frictions for hiring at the
level of the parent firm are not a major issue. Finally, hiring concavity at the establishment level is
weaker for public than for privately held parent firms, as reported by column (III). Since a major
characteristic of the former is an easier access to credit markets, the latter finding is consistent with
some forms of financing constraints.
    The second set of candidate stories calls for controls at the level of the individual establishment,
shown in columns (IV)-(VII). The main idea here is that if hiring costs reflect costly labor search,
they might be higher for workers that are more skilled or simply those that have to “fit in” to
perform particular tasks. For a larger establishment, we might then expect that more workers are
performing standardized tasks, so that hiring costs are smaller and the hiring rule is less concave.
  25
     “Parent firm,” identified by FIRMID in the data, is the organizational entity controlling what we call a “firm”
(“establishment” in the data, identified by the LBDNUM).
  26
     The asymmetry is also robustly present across time periods. In particular, when we split the sample into periods
of five years, we find that for each period the slope of the non-parametric estimate at minus one standard deviation
technology shock is larger than the slope at a positive one standard deviation shock.



                                                        29
                                            Table 5: Hiring asymmetry φg along various dimensions


                 Parent firm characteristics                 Firm characteristics                Industry characteristics
                 (I)        (II)        (III)        (IV)        (V)       (VI)     (VII)         (VIII)        (IX)
                Size     No. units/ Public/          Size      Share       Age     Capital       Industry    Durables/
     Bin      (empl.) parent firm Private          (empl.) NP empl.               Intensity      volatility non-durables
       1       0.735       0.288       0.210        0.829       0.483     0.206     0.000          0.256       0.339
       2       0.370       0.307       0.399        0.676       0.195     0.259     0.202          0.279       0.631
       3       0.202       0.240                    0.360       0.208     0.211     0.146          0.208
       4       0.126       0.242                    0.286       0.313     0.345     0.220          0.268
       5       0.230       0.128                    0.217       0.304     0.434     0.304          0.354




30
       6       0.301       0.267                    0.149       0.273     0.611     0.395          0.272
       7       0.235       0.215                    0.163       0.459     0.509     0.449          0.583
       8       0.139       0.093                    0.149       0.680     0.532     0.658          0.361
     Note: This table displays the asymmetry measure φg as defined in equation (12), constructed based on estimates
     from each individual bin. Bins are octiles in the distribution of the variable in question; Bin=1 corresponds to
     the lowest, bin=8 to the highest value. Exceptions from this rule are:
     “Age:” bins correspond to 5-year windows (Bin 1=ages 1-5, bin 2=ages 6-10, etc.); the analysis in this column
     is limited to data from 1982 onwards when the measured average age in the ASM becomes stable.
     “Private/Public:” Bin 1 = publicly traded firms, Bin 2 = privately held firms.
     “Durables/Non-durables:” Bin 1 = firms in durable goods industries, Bin 2 = firms in non-durables goods
     industries.
Differences in hiring costs by skill motivate controlling for the share of non-production workers.
It also motivates including capital intensity, assuming that capital is more complementary with
worker skill. Finally, we consider establishment age since young firms may be on an expansion
path: if more resources are always devoted to recruiting, then it is cheaper to respond to good
shocks by hiring.
   Column (IV) shows that the hiring adjustment is more linear for larger firms. The asymmetry in
the first octile for size is similar across columns (I) and (IV), presumably driven by small firms with
few employees. The comparison between the two size effects suggests that the relevant adjustment
friction takes place at the firm/establishment level. Column (V) shows that firms with a higher
share of non-production workers tend to feature more asymmetric hiring functions. Similarly, as
presented in column (VI), there is substantially more concavity for firms with a higher capital
intensity, a fact consistent with stronger frictions in the hiring technology for skilled labor that
highly complements capital.
   Finally, in column (VII), older firms are typically characterized by more concavity. This may be
the result of a life-cycle phenomenon in which there is an initial period of aggressive expansion. In
terms of accumulating experience on the labor market, this effect suggests that the hiring friction
does not subside through a learning by doing mechanism in which the firm gets better in its labor
search activities. In contrast, the age effect is consistent with a view in which younger firms employ
recruiting technologies that reduce frictions adapting to current labor market conditions.
   Our third data cut considers industry characteristics. Column (VIII) shows that firms in more
volatile industries tend to be associated with more concavity. A possible explanation is based on
a model of information processing in which more volatility may lead to more ambiguity about
the quality of signals received by the firm. As detailed in Appendix A, such a model predicts this
relationship arising from an optimal hiring response that is stronger to bad news than to good news.
Finally, column (IX) reports that there is less concavity in durable goods industries, consistent with
inventories acting as a margin that smooths the hiring and firing needs at the firm level.

4.5   Concavity, skewness, and volatility across data cuts
This subsection draws a connection between concavity of firms’ response to TFP shocks and the
properties of employment growth documented in Section 3. If TFP were the only source of variation,
then concavity should be systematically related to, say, negative skewness in the cross-section. The
association should also be strong if either (i) TFP shocks are a major source of variation in hiring
or (ii) concavity of the response to TFP shocks reflects frictions that also apply to the response
to other shocks. Either way, a positive association would provide additional evidence that our
mechanism is important.
   We start from the data cuts in the precious subsection and check if the strength of the employ-
ment patters as predicted by Propositions 1-3 varies with the degree of concavity as estimated by
φg . Our data cuts leave us with about 60 bins of data, and for each of these we know our concavity
estimate as well as the features of the employment and productivity distributions. This allows us


                                                  31
to study the following implications of concave hiring rules: The more concave,

     1. the more dispersed employment growth,

     2. the stronger employment growth dispersion varies over the business cycle,

     3. the more negatively skewed employment growth.

         When we study these predictions we are mindful of the possibility that distributional patterns
in employment growth could be caused by the same patterns in the TFP shocks which differ across
bins as well. We therefore always consider the relative moment - for example we analyze the
dispersion of employment growth in a given bin relative to that of TFP shocks in that same bin.27
For the skewness measures in 3 we consider both the coefficient of skewness and Kelley skewness.
         The scatter plots in Figure 9 confirm our predictions. Relative employment dispersion (plotted
in the top left panel) is almost zero in symmetric bins while it rises to 12% on average in the
most asymmetric bin. Similarly, relative employment dispersion varies more over the business cycle
in asymmetric bins. Indeed, most of the boom-bust differences in the cross-sectional standard
deviation of employment growth (plotted in the top right panel) reported in Table 1 seems to stem
from bins that are asymmetric.
         Bins where hiring is more asymmetric also exhibit more negatively skewed employment growth.
This is true for both the coefficient of skewness (bottom left panel) and the Kelley skewness (bottom
right panel). While bins with a symmetric hiring rule are almost not skewed, Kelley skewness
becomes −0.15 on average in bins with the most asymmetric hiring rule. This means that the
bottom decile is (1 + 0.15)/(1 − 0.15) = 1.35 as far away from the median as the top decile.
         Our results are robust to cutting outliers and provide additional evidence of the impact of con-
cave hiring rules on the employment growth distributions and responses. We omit the longitudinal
implications of our propositions here because none of our data cuts would permit us to study that.
We refer the reader to Tables 4 and 7 as longitudinal evidence for concave hiring rules.


5         Aggregate shocks and concave hiring rules
With concave hiring rules, shocks to average productivity could generate new facts on the cross-
sectional and time series skewness and volatility that are inconsistent with traditional macroeco-
nomic models. In this section, we investigate whether concavity in the response to TFP we have
estimated at the firm level in Section 4 is sufficiently strong to contribute to those facts at the
level of an industry as well as the entire manufacturing sector. Moreover, we ask whether concave
relationship between TFP and employment is also present at those higher levels of aggregation,
and whether firm-level responses can generate that relationship.
         We start in Subsection 5.1 by approximating the concave shape of the empirical relationship
between employment actions and TFP shocks plotted in Figure 8 by a parsimonious parametric
    27
     We experimented with both taking differences and ratios, but since TFP shocks are not skewed in many bins
scaling employment skewness by (unskewed) TFP shocks would lead to extremely large relative values in many bins.


                                                      32
                          Figure 9: Hiring asymmetry and employment moments


                                         Dispersion                                   Dispersion cyclicality
                        0.25                                           0.025



                         0.2                                            0.02



                        0.15                                           0.015



                         0.1                                            0.01



                        0.05                                           0.005



                          0                                                0



                       -0.05                                           -0.005
                               0   0.2   0.4     0.6    0.8   1                 0   0.2      0.4    0.6     0.8   1




                                   Coefficient of skewness                                Kelley skewness
                          1                                               0.2



                         0.5
                                                                          0.1


                          0
                                                                           0

                        -0.5

                                                                         -0.1
                          -1


                                                                         -0.2
                        -1.5



                          -2                                             -0.3
                               0   0.2   0.4     0.6    0.8   1                 0   0.2      0.4    0.6     0.8   1




Note: This scatter plot displays four moments of employment growth (relative to the same moment of TFP shocks)
against the estimated hiring asymmetry φg in each of the 58 bins from columns (I)-(VIII) in Table 5. Solid black line
is a linear regression in that scatter plot. Top row displays patterns of cross-sectional dispersion (top left) and its
cyclicality (top right) while bottom row displays cross-sectional skewness: Pearson’s coefficient of skewness (bottom
left) and Kelley skewness (bottom right).


form. The idea here is to help calibrate micro-founded macroeconomic models to our facts on non-
linear hiring rules. Estimating hiring rules parametrically also helps to flexibly control for other
state variables that could be relevant to the firm without falling prey to the curse of dimensionality
or losing tractability. It thus serves as an additional robustness check on the results from the
previous section.
    In Subsection 5.2, we present results at the aggregate level. In Subsection 5.3, we then combine
the estimated response functions with shocks to average productivity and compute the magnitude
of the response. Finally in Subsection 5.4, we consider the effect of shocks to the volatility of TFP.

5.1     Employment and TFP: firm level parametric evidence
We focus on functional forms motivated by different models of asymmetric adjustment. Many
models with adjustment costs deliver polynomial hiring rules. Other models, - in particular, the

                                                                  33
                                  Table 6: Firm-level employment asymmetry


           Regressions (Ia/b):           nit = β0 + β i + β1 t + β2 Zt−1
                                                                     i   + β3 lti + β4 z + β5 z 2
           Regressions (IIa/b):          nt = β0 + β + β1 t + β2 Zt−1 + β3 lti + β4 z + β5 z 2 + β6 z 3
                                           i          i              i

           Regressions (IIIa/b):         nit = β0 + β i + β1 t + β2 Zt−1
                                                                     i   + β3 lti + β4 z + β7 zI {z < 0}

 Estimate                (Ia)        (Ib)                    (IIa)       (IIb)              (IIIa)       (IIIb)
                           quadratic                              cubic                      piece-wise linear
 β4                  0.0827***   0.0775***                0.0959***   0.1005***           0.0347*** 0.0373***
                       (0.0019)          (0.0053)           (0.0027)           (0.0093)    (0.0034)        (0.0147)

 β5                  –0.0998***         –0.0934***        –0.0956***      –0.0881***
                       (0.0062)          (0.0190)           (0.0063)           (0.0198)

 β6                                                       –0.0901***      –0.1685***
                                                            (0.0163)           (0.0440)

 β7                                                                                       0.0947***     0.0795***
                                                                                           (0.0057)        (0.0217)
 N                     1,536k            1,501k             1,536k          1,501k         1,536k          1,501k
 R2                     0.168            0.1258              0.168          0.1259          0.167          0.1257
 Weighting               no                yes                no              yes            no              yes
 Pos. Resp.            +1.16%            +1.06%             +1.36%          +1.38%         +0.62%          +0.64%
 Neg. Resp.            −1.80%            −1.61%             −1.97%          −1.90%         −2.31%          −2.01%
 Diff. sign.?          Yes∗∗∗            Yes∗∗∗             Yes∗∗∗          Yes∗∗∗         Yes∗∗∗          Yes∗∗∗

Note: *, **, *** on parameter estimates means significantly different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, 1% level, respectively.
Yes***, **, * means that the point estimate of the negative response lies outside the 99%, 95%, 90% error bands,
respectively, of the estimate of a typical positive response and vice versa.


setup with ambiguity-averse decision makers sketched in Appendix A gives rise to piece-wise linear
hiring rules. We consider the general regression

                                    nit = β0 + β i + β1 t + β2 Zt−1
                                                                i
                                                                    + β3 lti + β ζ ζti                         (13)

                          i
where t is a time trend, Zt−1 the lagged TFP level (reflecting our assumption of TFP following an
auto-regressive process), lti the logarithm of employment, and c a constant. ζti is a function of the
technology innovation aimed at a capturing any possible asymmetries.
      We examine the following specifications for asymmetries
                   
                         i         i 2
                   β4 zt + β5 (zt )                   Specification (I): concave,
                   
                   
                   
          β ζ ζti = β4 zti + β5 (zti )2 + β6 (zti )3   Specification (II): non-monotonic asymmetry,
                   
                   
                   β z i + β z i I z i < 0
                   
                                                       Specification (III): piece-wise linear.
                       4 t        7 t    t


      Specification (I) implies that employment growth is increasing and concave (increasing and
convex) in TFP innovations if β 4 > 0, β 5 < 0 (β 4 > 0, β 5 > 0), specification (II) allows for more


                                                           34
flexibility in fitting non-monotone relationships, specification (III) assumes a linear relationship,
but has potentially different slopes for positive and negative innovations.
       For each specification (I)-(III) we run a fixed effects panel regressions to account for persistent
firm-specific factors in hiring. Since the non-parametric analysis above suggested that larger firms
have a less asymmetric hiring policy, we also run a set of the same panel regressions (I)-(III)
weighting each observation by its average employment. This should tell us if the quantitative
relevance of asymmetric hiring goes away if we consider such a “relevance-based” hiring policy.
       Table 6 displays the estimates of a FE panel regression. Ignoring the non-linear terms, a
typical positive (negative) TFP shock increases (reduces) employment growth by 1.5 percentage
points. But we also find considerable evidence for hiring asymmetries: across all specifications,
employment contractions after negative TFP shocks are larger in absolute value than expansions
after a similarly sized positive TFP shock. In the first three rows, all estimates of the non-linear
terms are statistically significant. To assess whether an actual employment expansion is significantly
different from an employment contraction, we evaluate the typical employment response at +1/ − 1
standard deviation TFP innovation: β ζ × ±StD(ζti ). The rows “Pos. Resp.” and “Neg. Resp.”
at the bottom of Table 6 display this typical employment response. For example, the unweighted
estimates for specification (I) imply an employment response after a positive TFP innovation of
0.0827 × 0.18 − 0.0998 × 0.182 = 1.16%.
       We label responses as significantly asymmetric at the X% level if the point estimate for a positive
response lies outside the X% confidence interval of the symmetric negative response and vice versa.
Across all specifications we observe that the hiring asymmetry is significant at least at the 95%
level and that the hiring asymmetry is quantitatively relevant: the typical negative response is at
least 1.5 times as strong in absolute value as the typical positive response and varies from −1.8%
to −2.3%.28 The fit of all specifications seems fairly similar as suggested by a similar R2 .
       The employment-weighted regressions overall imply the same results. The hiring asymmetry is
statistically significant and quantitatively almost as sizable as the one implied by the unweighted
regression (it is smaller by about a tenth).
       We conclude by discussing the other controls. We include the lagged TFP level because the
same TFP shock has probably a different employment effect at a higher TFP level than at a
lower one, especially since our regression setup considers the more persistent effects captured by
changes in the employment growth rate. The lagged TFP level does enter positively which confirms
our intuition. Employment matters positively for hiring, which reflects the fact that large firms
tend to hire more in general. As the negative coefficient on the time trend suggests, the already
negative employment growth rate in the manufacturing sector is accelerating over time – probably
a consequence of increased outsourcing of manufacturing jobs abroad.
  28
    In the online appendix we further show that an asymmetric hiring rule is not an artifact of composition effects
caused by firm life cycle patterns or by labor-saving capital-embodied technological change.




                                                        35
5.2       Employment and TFP: aggregate parametric evidence
In this section, we consider the contemporaneous relationship between TFP shocks and employment
growth at higher levels of aggregation. The idea is to produce aggregate moments that help evaluate
nonlinear business cycle models. Indeed, standard business cycle analysis judges models by how well
they match unconditional second moments. To assess models that can generate our mechanism,
it is informative to consider also nonlinear relationships between aggregates. We thus repeat the
parametric regression at the industry and sector levels. In the next section we ask whether our
estimated firm-level hiring rules are consistent with those regressions.

                                 Table 7: Aggregate employment asymmetry


                       Regressions (Ia/b, III):         nit = β0 + β i + β4 z + β5 z 2
                       Regressions (IIa/b, IV):         nit = β0 + β i + β4 z + β7 zI {z < 0}

                                   Industry regressions                                    Sectoral regression
   Explanatory           (Ia)        (Ib)          (IIa)      (IIb)                      (III)           (IV)
   variables                quadratic               piece-wise lin.                     quadr.      piece-wise lin.
   β4                 0.582***    0.686***      0.389*** 0.430***                      1.333***        0.757**
                      (0.0220)    (0.0228)       (0.0416) (0.0431)                      (0.156)         (0.367)

   β5                –1.370***       –1.648***                                        –13.63***
                      (0.223)         (0.232)                                          (3.281)

   β7                                                  0.380***      0.494***                            1.291**
                                                       (0.0677)      (0.0706)                            (0.596)
   N                    4,375          4,375             4,375         4,375               51               51
   N industries           86             86                86            86                -/-              -/-
   R2                   0.219          0.258             0.218         0.258             0.562            0.553
   Weighting              no            yes               no            yes                no               no
   Pos. Resp.           2.28%         2.68%             1.69%         1.88%              2.06%            1.46%
   Neg. Resp.          –2.80%         –3.31%            –3.35%        –4.03%            –3.07%           –3.94%
   Diff. sign.?        Yes***         Yes***            Yes***        Yes***            Yes***           Yes***

Note: *, **, *** significantly different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, 1% level, respectively. This table displays regression
results using data from the NBER-CES manufacturing database 1958-2009. Industry-level regressions, columns (I-II),
are at the level of four-digit NAICS industries, sectoral regressions, columns (III-IV), at the level of the manufacturing
sector.

    Table 7 shows that concavity does not “wash out”, but is also present at higher levels of aggre-
gation. At the firm level, the typical employment response after a negative TFP shock was about
1.5 times as strong as that to a positive TFP shock. The results show that firing relative to hiring
at the level of four-digit NAICS industries ranges between 1.3 and 2 depending on the specification.
The same is true once we repeat the analysis at the sectoral level. In general, piece-wise linear
hiring rules suggest stronger asymmetries than linear-quadratic rules. This is probably driven by


                                                           36
outliers in the data which have a stronger impact in a linear setup.

5.3      Quantitative significance

In this section we compute the effect of concave hiring rules on employment growth under the
assumption that TFP shocks are the only source of uncertainty. While we cannot expect to generate
all the volatility observed in the data, we can make the case that our mechanism has an important
quantitative contribution. The computations thus make a quantitative connection between the
concave hiring rules estimated in Section 4 and the moments of employment growth measured in
Section 3. They complement the qualitative connection provided by the propositions in Section 2.
       Notation follows the general setup of Section 2. We assume throughout this section that TFP
innovations are observed without noise, that is, firms respond to the signal sit = uat + uit , where the
aggregate and idiosyncratic TFP innovations are mutually uncorrelated and normally distributed
as uat ∼ N 0, σa2 and uit ∼ N 0, σi2 , respectively. A symmetric distribution for TFP shocks is
                                   

motivated by the evidence in Section 4. The estimated volatilities are σa = 0.041 and σi = 0.174.
       We work with the linear-quadratic hiring function
                                                                           2
                                           nit = f (sit ) = αsit − β sit                                        (14)

where α = 0.0827 and β = 0.0998 are the estimated response coefficients taken from Specification (I)
in Table 6. We compute model implied moments of the cross-sectional and time series distributions
of employment growth f (sit ) by feeding a simulated sequence of signals through this concave hiring
function. Table 8 reports relevant statistics, together with comparison numbers taken from the
data as well as a statistics that would obtain for a linear hiring function. We discuss these statistics
in detail below.
       In the online appendix we redo the calculations of this section under various alternative specifi-
cations. In particular, we show that the benchmark specification produces statistics that are more
conservative than alternatives in which we add noise to the signal, as in formula (6). The additional
noise increases the volatility of the firm-specific signals, which produces stronger effects through
the concavity of the hiring rule and thus results in statistics that are larger in absolute value.29
       We have explored two alternative sets of statistics that we do not report. First, we have
considered the non-parametric hiring rule displayed in Figure 8. The quantitative effects using
that rule are slightly stronger than the ones obtained using the parametric hiring rule. We focus
here on the parametric version because it allows for a more transparent analysis given that we can
derive closed form expressions for many relevant moments. Second, we have studied a hiring rule
that is not concave, but instead linear with an inaction region around zero. The resulting statistics
resemble those implied by the linear function. This is not surprising in light of our propositions:
  29
    We have also explored an alternative piece-wise linear function, as estimated for Specification (III) in Table 6,
for which we also find stronger quantitative significance.




                                                         37
the concavity of the function around the negative signal threshold for inaction is counterbalanced
by the convexity around the positive threshold.

                       Table 8: Moments of employment growth with different shocks

                    A.Cross − sectional          (I)                (II)       (III)
                                          IQR(ni |ua =−σ a )
                                                               γ ni |ua = 0 k ni |ua = 0
                                                                                       
                    Moments               IQR(ni |ua =+σ a )
                    Data                       1.278             −0.495       −0.048
                    Linear Hiring                1                   0            0
                    Concave Hiring             1.220             −1.172       −0.269




       B .Time − series     (IV)        (V)                            (VI)                    (VII)
                                                                n(ua =0)−n(ua =−σ a )   n(ua =+σ a )−n(ua =0)
       Moments          Firm skewn. Aggr. skewn.                        ασ a                    ασ a
       Data                −0.386     −0.937                           1.103                   0.899
       Linear Hiring          0          0                               1                       1
       Concave Hiring      −1.037     −0.244                           1.049                   0.950


Note: Moments of the employment growth distribution are defined in equations (15) for column (I), (16) for column
(II), (17) for column (III), and (18) for column (IV). Aggregate employment, used in columns (V)-(VII), is defined
in equation (19).



Countercyclical cross-sectional dispersion

Column (I) of Table 8 shows that concave hiring rules are an important source of countercyclical
dispersion even if the only shocks are symmetric TFP shocks. We consider the cyclical movement
of the inter-quartile range. In the first row – labeled “Data” – we report the ratio of the inter-
quartile range in NBER recessions versus booms: dispersion is 28% higher in recessions (see Table
1). If firm’s hiring rules were linear, then symmetry and homoskedasticty of shocks would imply a
constant IQR over the business cycle, as indicated by a ratio of one in the second row.
    In contrast, with a concave hiring rule the IQR depends on the realization uat . In fact, there is
a closed form solution for the IQR given ua :

                                  IQR(nit |uat ) ≡ (2α − 4βuat )σi Φ−1 (0.75)                                   (15)

where Φ is the standard normal cdf. The IQR also depends on the degree of concavity in the hiring
function here measured by β (relative to α), as well as the idiosyncratic dispersion of shocks σi .
    The third row reports the ratio of the IQR after a negative one standard deviation shock to
aggregate TFP versus a positive one standard deviation shock. A concave hiring rule induces a lot
of countercyclical volatility: feeding aggregate shocks alone increases the IQR in “bad times” by


                                                        38
22%. These numbers illustrate that our estimated concavity is sufficiently strong to generate the
same order of magnitude of fluctuations in dispersion as in the data.

Negative skewness at the firm level

Columns (II)-(IV) of Table 8 show that concave hiring rules together with symmetric TFP shocks
generate significant negative skewness in individual firm employment growth, both in the cross-
section and the time series. The first row in columns (II)-(III) reports the the long-run average
coefficient of skewness and Kelley skewness for the cross-section of firms in the data (again, see Table
1). With a linear hiring rule (β = 0), employment growth would not be skewed, so both numbers
would be zero, as reported in the second row. This is because the cross-sectional distribution of
shocks is always symmetric and its linear transformation will also be symmetric.
   Our setup again allows closed form solution for both measures. At the mean aggregate innova-
tion ua = 0, we have

                                                       6α2 βσi4 + 8β 3 σi6
                                γ nit |uat = 0 = − 
                                               
                                                                         3/2                      (16)
                                                       α2 σi2 + 2β 2 σi4
                                                            β
                                       k(nit |uat = 0) = − σi Φ−1 (0.9).                           (17)
                                                            α

At our estimates, the coefficient of skewness, defined in equation (16) is equal to −1.177, while
Kelley skewness, k(nit |uat = 0) as defined in equation (17), equals −0.269. Both numbers are thus
somewhat higher than the conditional skewness in the data, suggesting that additional idiosyncratic
shocks remove some skewness.
   Column (IV) shows that concave hiring rules also induce significant skewness at the firm level
in the time series. The first row reports the cross sectional average of individual firms’ sample
coefficient of skewness for our balanced panel of firms. We compute time series skewness with
the balanced panel since the simple model here does not consider entry and exit, a factor that
weakens negative skewness for the full panel reported in Table 4. As reported in the second row, a
linear hiring rule again delivers zero skewness: since the overall signal has a symmetric distribution
centered at zero, the linear hiring rule will then produce an employment growth distribution that
is similarly symmetric and centered at zero.
   To evaluate negative skewness predicted by our mechanism, we simulate a panel of firms that
resembles the data panel we document in Table 4: N = 1,900 firms are simulated over T = 37
years 10,000 times. As for the actual data panel, we then calculate, for each simulated panel, the
cross-sectional average of the coefficients of skewness for the firm-level sample of nit , where each
firm has a resulting mean ni and volatility V oli :

                                                N     T
                                             1 X 1 X (nit − ni )3
                                  Asym =                             .                             (18)
                                             N
                                               i=1
                                                   T
                                                     t=1
                                                         (V oli )3/2

   The third row in column (IV) reports the average of these statistics across all simulations. We

                                                     39
obtain skewness that is slightly more negative than in the data.

Aggregate employment growth

Columns (V-VII) of Table 8 show that concave hiring rules not only affect firm-level moments,
but also moments at higher levels of aggregation. In particular, they generate significant negative
skewness for aggregate employment growth. Moreover, relative to the case of linear hiring rules,
they amplify the effect of aggregate TFP shocks on employment growth, and can reproduce a
significant share of the concavity in the aggregate relationships between TFP and employment
growth documented in Subsection 5.2.
    Column (V) looks at aggregate skewness. The row labeled “Data” considers average time series
skewness at the NAICS-4 manufacturing industry level reported in Table 4. To obtain a model coun-
terpart, we integrate over the individual decision rules from (14)30 to obtain average employment
growth
                                           N
                                     a   1 X i
                                             nt = αua − β (ua )2 + σi2 .
                                                                     
                                n (u ) =                                                                       (19)
                                         N
                                               i=1

We simulate aggregate shocks uat for T = 37 years, compute the sample coefficient of skewness and
report in column (V) the average coefficient over 10,000 samples.
    As before, a purely linear rule implies zero skewness since the aggregate shocks are also sym-
metric. In contrast, the estimated concave hiring function leads to negative skewness since the
cross-sectional average action responds stronger to negative innovations. Compared to the average
time-series skewness at the firm level, the aggregate one is not so negative. This happens because
aggregate shocks are smaller and thus the relevant region for the average action features a less
pronounced concavity.
    To assess asymmetric amplification of aggregate shocks, we define a summary measure that can
be computed both from the data and from the model. We consider the movement in aggregate
employment associated with an aggregate TFP innovation and divide it by a scaled version of the
innovation itself:
                                           n(ua ) − n(0)       βua
                                                         = 1 −     .                                           (20)
                                               αua              α
For any given level of ua , this ratio can be computed from the aggregate data by using the fitted
value from the industry-level regression (Ia) in Table 7. It can also be derived from our firm-level
model using implied aggregate employment growth (19). For both model and data measures we
average across industries.
    Intuitively, the ratio thus works like an elasticity of employment growth with respect to TFP
shocks – it shows the amplification (dampening) generated by concave hiring rules for bad (good)
shocks. With a linear hiring rule we have β = 0 and the ratio (20) is equal to one – the response
of employment growth is proportional to the TFP shock. More generally, a negative (positive)
  30
     We assume that distribution of lagged employment levels is orthogonal to the shock distribution; then aggregate
employment growth equals average employment growth.



                                                        40
realization of uα generates a larger (smaller) response. The magnitude of the effect further depends
                                             β
on the relative strength of concavity        α.
    In columns (VI) and (VII), we report the ratio for ua = −σ a and ua = +σ a , respectively. In the
data, the asymmetric relationship between TFP and employment growth implies an amplification by
10% in bad times and a dampening by 10% in good times.31 Aggregating the effect of our estimated
firm-level hiring rules, we get an amplification of 1.05 and a dampening of 0.95, respectively. Our
mechanism thus produces about half of the asymmetric response at the industry level.

5.4    Concave hiring rules and volatility shocks
In this section we study the interaction of concave hiring rules and shocks to the cross-sectional
volatility of TFP. Recent literature following Bloom (2009) explored the role of such shocks as
drivers of the business cycle. We look at both volatility shocks in isolation and at correlated shocks
that combine a drop in average TFP with an increase in cross sectional volatility, as is common in
applications [for example, Bloom et al. (2012), Schaal (forthcoming), Vavra (2014), and Arellano
et al. (2016)].
    In order to assess volatility shocks, we calibrate the cross-sectional dispersion of idiosyncratic
TFP shocks separately for booms and recessions. In our data, the average inter-quartile range in
NBER recessions is about 7% larger than in booms – this is our baseline number for volatility
shocks. It is slightly smaller than that in Bloom et al. (2012), who consider only a sample of long-
lived establishments and find a 13% higher IQR in recessions.32 For robustness, we also use that
number in our exercises, as described below.
    We repeat all exercises reported in Table 8 by replacing average TFP shocks with three new
types of shocks that change volatility. In the first two exercises, there are no average TFP shocks
but only volatility shocks. To connect the model to the data in Table 8, a recession here is defined
as a period of a high idiosyncratic volatility. In particular, in the first exercise σi,t moves randomly
with equal probability between a high value of 0.18 and a low value of 0.168, so that in a recession,
as defined in this exercise, the idiosyncratic risk is 7% larger. In the second exercise, which we refer
to as “large” volatility shocks, we make that increase equal to 13%, consistent with Bloom et al.
(2012). In the third exercise, which we refer to as “correlated shocks”, we bring back the aggregate
TFP shocks that we have used in Table 8, but now make them determine the volatility movements.
In particular, whenever there is a negative (positive) uat shock, the idiosyncratic risk σi,t moves to
its high (low) value of 0.18 (0.168), respectively.
    Since in these exercises we retain symmetry of TFP shocks, there is no effect on cross-sectional
skewness: the numbers in Columns (II)-(III) are exactly the same as under with average TFP shock
  31
     In particular, there the negative response of employment growth to a one standard deviation shock equals 0.028.
This response is larger by a factor of 1.1 compared to the linear effect given by the linear coefficient 0.582 times the
value of the standard deviation of the shock, which equals 0.0436. Similarly, the positive response of 0.0228 is a factor
of 0.9 of its linear counterpart.
  32
     See their Table 1, column 1. They also find a higher long-run dispersion of TFP shocks than we do; as shown in
Section 4.1 our dispersion is roughly consistent with the one found in Syverson (2004).



                                                           41
only, regardless of the type of volatility shock used. As long as the hiring rule is linear, firm-level
time series skewness in Column (IV) changes only with correlated shocks, and even then the effect
is quantitatively small.
   With concave hiring rules, however, volatility shocks can contribute significantly to time series
skewness at the firm level. Intuitively, a mean preserving spread implies that more firms receive very
bad signals to which they respond strongly, while at the same time more firms receive very good
signals to which they respond little. The skewness induced by our mechanism is thus reinforced.
With baseline volatility shocks only, negative skewness is –1.16, whereas with large volatility shocks
it drops to –1.44. With correlated shocks, we obtain –1.08.
   With volatility shocks, the distribution of employment growth mechanically reflects counter-
cyclical volatility in TFP shocks. With a linear hiring rule, when volatility shocks are the only
sources of changes in volatility, the IQR of employment growth thus increases 7% with baseline
volatility shocks or 13% with large shocks. Even the latter number is substantially below the 27%
in the data reported in column (I) of Table 8. As long as volatility shocks are uncorrelated with
ua , they cannot contribute to the moment reported in column (I): equation (15) shows that the
cross-sectional IQR is proportional to cross-sectional volatility.
   Interesting interaction between concavity and volatility shocks obtains in the case of correlated
shocks. Indeed, the IQR of employment growth now increases by 30.5% in bad times. This increase
is notably stronger than the 22% we obtain with average TFP shocks alone. Intuitively, if an average
productivity shock moves the distribution of signals into the concave region of the estimated hiring
rule, then an additional mean preserving spread makes our mechanism stronger. We conclude that
for the shock specification that is most common in applications, there are synergies between concave
hiring rules and volatility shocks.
   Concave hiring rules also induce first order effects of idiosyncratic volatility on aggregates.
Indeed, as long as β > 0, aggregate employment (19) is decreasing in idiosyncratic uncertainty
σi . Quantitatively, if we keep the aggregate shock ua constant at zero, but change idiosyncratic
volatility from its long run average to its baseline high value, aggregate employment growth drops
as if it had been hit by a negative aggregate shock equal to 0.08 standard deviations. Conversely,
when the idiosyncratic volatility drops to its low value, aggregate action increases as if it had been
shocked by a positive innovation of 0.04 standard deviations.
   With correlated shocks, movements in idiosyncratic volatility alter the amplification and damp-
ening of TFP shocks reported in columns (VI) and (VII) of Table 8. Indeed, the ratio (20) increases
to 1.12 if evaluated in bad times (ua = −σ a ): the amplification of bad TFP shocks more than dou-
bles compared to the case of only average changes. At the same time, the ratio evaluated in good
times (ua = σ a ) increases to .99. Intuitively, with a smaller volatility, most firms receive signals
that move their actions closer to the linear function, and thus the dampening effect is smaller.




                                                  42
References
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Patrick J. Kehoe. Financial markets and fluctuations in uncertainty.
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 466, December 2016.

Manuel Arellano and Stephen Bond. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
 evidence and an application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies, 58(2):277–
 297, April 1991.

Rüdiger Bachmann and Christian Bayer. Investment dispersion and the business cycle. American
  Economic Review, 104(4):1392–1416, April 2014.

Rüdiger Bachmann and Giuseppe Moscarini. Business cycles and endogenous uncertainty. Working
  Paper, 2011.

Rüdiger Bachmann, Ricardo J. Caballero, and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. Aggregate implications of
  lumpy investment: New evidence and a DSGE model. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 5(4):29–67, October 2013.

Rüdiger Bachmann, Steffen Elstner, and Atanas Hristov. Surprise, surprise - measuring firm-level
  investment innovations. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP9894, March 2014.

Robert J. Barro. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 121(3):823–866, August 2006.

Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick. Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand. Econometrica,
  forthcoming.

David Berger and Joseph Vavra. Shocks vs responsiveness: What drives time-varying dispersion?
  Working Paper, 2016.

Nicholas Bloom. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica, 77(3):623–685, May 2009.

Nicholas Bloom. Fluctuations in uncertainty. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2):153–176,
  Spring 2014.

Nicholas Bloom, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen Terry. Really
  uncertain business cycles. NBER Working Paper No. 18245, July 2012.

Richard Blundell and Stephen Bond. GMM estimation with persistent panel data: An application
  to production functions. Econometric Reviews, 19(3):321–340, 2000.

Arthur L. Bowley. Elements of Statistics. P. S. King & Son, London, 1901.

Ricardo J. Caballero, Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger. Plant-level adjustment
  and aggregate dynamics. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995(2):1–54, 1995.

Ricardo J. Caballero, Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger. Aggregate employment
  dynamics: Building from microeconomic evidence. American Economic Review, 87(1):115–137,
  March 1997.

Vasco M. Carvalho and Xavier Gabaix. The great diversification and its undoing. American
  Economic Review, 103(5):1697–1727, August 2013.


                                                43
Lawrence J. Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. Risk shocks. American Economic
  Review, 104(1):27–65, January 2014.

Steven J. Davis and John C. Haltiwanger. Gross job creation and destruction: Microeconomic
  evidence and macroeconomic implications. In Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, editors,
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, volume 5, chapter 3, pages 123–168. MIT Press, January 1990.

Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. Volatility and dispersion in
  business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms. In Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth
  Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, volume 21, chapter 2,
  pages 107–179. University of Chicago Press, May 2006.

Ryan A. Decker, Pablo N. D’Erasmo, and Hernan Moscoso Boedo. Market exposure and endogenous
  firm volatility over the business cycle. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(1):148–
  198, January 2016.

Larry G. Epstein and Martin Schneider. Recursive multiple-priors. Journal of Economic Theory,
  113(1):1–31, November 2003.

Larry G. Epstein and Martin Schneider. Ambiguity, information quality, and asset pricing. Journal
  of Finance, 63(1):197–228, February 2008.

John G. Fernald. A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Working
  Paper, April 2014.

Jésus Fernández-Villaverde, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Juan F. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and Martı́n Uribe.
   Risk matters: The real effects of volatility shocks. American Economic Review, 101(6):2530–2561,
   October 2011.

Domenico Ferraro. Asymmetric unemployment dynamics. Working Paper, 2013.

Lucia Foster, John C. Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency:
  Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic Review, 98(1):394–425, March
  2008.

Chacko George and Florian Kuhn. Aggregate implications of capacity constraints under demand
  shocks. Working Paper, 2014.

Itzhak Gilboa and David Schmeidler. Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior. Journal of
   Mathematical Economics, 18(2):141–153, 1989.

François Gourio. Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review, 102(6):2734–2766,
  October 2012.

Lars Peter Hansen, John C. Heaton, and Masao Ogaki. Efficiency bounds implied by multiperiod
  conditional moment restrictions. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83(403):863–
  871, September 1988.

Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), November 2009.

Cosmin Ilut. Ambiguity aversion: Implications for the uncovered interest rate parity puzzle. Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3):33–65, 2012.

                                                44
Matthias Kehrig. The cyclical nature of the productivity distribution. Working Paper, 2015.

Truman L. Kelley.     Fundamentals of Statistics.   Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mas-
  sachusetts, 1947.

Florian Kuhn. Endogenous profitability risk. Working Paper, 2014.

Sydney C. Ludvigson, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng. Uncertainty and business cycles: Exogenous impulse
  or endogenous response? Working Paper, 2016.

Alisdair McKay and Ricardo Reis. The brevity and violence of contractions and expansions. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 55(4):738–751, May 2008.

Whitney K. Newey and Kenneth D. West. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
 autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica, 55(3):703–708, May 1987.

Stephen Nickell. Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica, 49(6):1417–1426,
  November 1981.

Kristoffer P. Nimark. Man-bites-dog business cycles. American Economic Review, 104(8):2320–
  2367, August 2014.

G. Steven Olley and Ariel Pakes. The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equip-
  ment industry. Econometrica, 64(6):1263–1297, November 1996.

Yukako Ono and Daniel Sullivan. Manufacturing plants’ use of temporary workers: An analysis
  using Census microdata. Industrial Relations, 52(2):419–443, April 2013.

Valerie A. Ramey and Matthew D. Shapiro. Displaced capital: A study of aerospace plant closings.
  Journal of Political Economy, 109(5):958–992, October 2001.

Thomas A. Rietz. The equity risk premium: A solution. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1):
  117–131, July 1988.

Edouard Schaal. Uncertainty and unemployment. Econometrica, forthcoming.

Tatsuro Senga. A new look at uncertainty shocks: Imperfect information and misallocation. Work-
  ing Paper, 2016.

Daniel F. Sichel. Business cycle asymmetry: A deeper look. Economic Inquiry, 31(2):224–236,
 April 1993.

Ludwig Straub and Robert Ulbricht. Endogenous second moments: A unified approach to fluctua-
  tions in risk, dispersion, and uncertainty. Working Paper, 2016.

Chad Syverson. Product substitutability and productivity dispersion. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 86(2):534–550, May 2004.

Sara van de Geer and Marten Wegkamp, editors. Selected Works of Willem Van Zwet. Springer,
  2011.

Joseph Vavra. Inflation dynamics and time-varying uncertainty: New evidence and an Ss interpre-
  tation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), February 2014.



                                               45
A     A model with asymmetric information processing
Here we present a simple model based on information processing under ambiguity that delivers
asymmetric hiring decision rules. There is a continuum of firms that at the beginning of each
period get an idiosyncratic noisy signal about end-of-period productivity zti . After observing the
signal, each firm chooses employment in a competitive labor market, where the wage is w. At the
end of the period, productivity is realized. Thus the firm problem is a repetition of static hiring
decisions based on a signal-extraction problem within the period. Firm i’s log productivity is

                                    zti = uat + uit − 0.5 σa2 + σu2
                                                                    


where uat is an aggregate shock, normally distributed with mean a and variance σa2 , and uit is an
idiosyncratic, firm-specific shock, normally distributed with mean 0 and variance σu2 . The variances
σa2 and σu2 are constant over time and known to the firm. The noisy signal about firm’s i productivity
is sit = zti + σe εit , where εit is a standard normal innovation, iid across time and firms. Similarly
to the model used in Epstein and Schneider (2008) and Ilut (2012), we assume that each firm is
ambiguous about the value of σe and has a set of beliefs given by σe ∈ [σ ε , σ ε ].
     The objective of the firm is choose Lit to maximize the multiple priors utility:
                                                 α
                                    max min Lit E σe exp zti |sit − wLit
                                                              
                                Lit [σ ε ,σ ε ]

Faced with uncertainty over the signal-to-noise ratio, the ambiguity-averse firm acts as if the worst-
case σe characterizes the true DGP. The worst-case σe minimizes the conditional expectation of
end-of-period profits, which are a function of the expected zti conditional on the observed signal
sit . Details and axiomatic foundations for the multiple priors utility are provided in Gilboa and
Schmeidler (1989) for the static case and in Epstein and Schneider (2003) for the dynamic version.
      Because of the normality of innovations, the problem above is equivalent to
                                                                    
                                         σe  i i
                                                   1    σe  i i
                                                                          α
                                                                       Lit − wLit .
                                                                   
                      max min exp E         zt |st + var    zt |st                               (21)
                       Lit [σ ε ,σ ε ]              2

    It is analytically helpful to define the relative precision of signal γt as

                                                            var(zti )
                                                  γt =                    .
                                                         var(zti ) + σe,t
                                                                      2


After observing the signal, the posterior conditional mean and variance of zti are given by
                                                            
                                                   1           1
                              E zt |st = γt st + var(zt ) − var(zti )
                                  i i         i            i
                                      
                                                   2           2
                                  i i                   i
                                      
                            var zt |st = (1 − γt ) var(zt ).

The firm problem in (21) then simplifies to
                                                                            α
                                   max min exp γt sit                 Lit        − wLit .
                                                                  
                                     Lit [σ ε ,σ ε ]




                                                             46
    The solution is a hiring policy based on the worst case precision γt∗ , which is characterized by:
                                                               (
                                 hα               i 1           γ if sit < 0
                                    exp γt∗ sit        ; γt∗ =
                                                   1−α
                           Lit =
                                                
                                                                                                  (22)
                                  w                             γ if sit ≥ 0.

The interpretation of the optimal solution is that the firm acts as if the signal precision is high for
bad news and low for good news. The employment decision is then to maximize expected profits
under the worst-case precision γt∗ . This results in an asymmetric hiring decision rule such that
the firm that receives a negative signal sit = −x contracts its employment by more than it would
expand it if the firm would have received a positive signal of the same magnitude, sit = x.


B     Proofs for Section 2
Proof of Proposition 1. Part 1. Write the derivative of aggregate employment growth at the
point a as                            Z                         Z
               d                   d
                  E[f (s)]|ã=a =       f ( + ã)g()d |ã=a = f 0 ( + a)g()d.
              dã                 dã
Since f 00 < 0, we have that for every realization of ε,

                                    a0 > a ⇒ f 0 (a0 + ) < f 0 (a + ).

Part 2. Define the function
                                                    h         i
                         h (a) := var (f (s) |a) = E f (s)2 |a − E [f (s) |a]2 .

Then we have

                        h0 (a) = 2 E f (s) f 0 (s) |a − E [f (s) |a] E f 0 (s) |a
                                                                              

                               = 2cov f (s) , f 0 (s) |a
                                                         


which is negative for all a since f is strictly increasing in s and f 0 is strictly decreasing in s.
   Part 3. The conditional cdf of employment growth at some point f¯ can be written as

                                    Gf f¯|a = Pr f (a + ε) ≤ f¯
                                                                  

                                               = G f −1 f¯ − a .
                                                                


The inverse conditional cdf is therefore

                                     G−1                 −1
                                                                
                                      f (x̄|a) = f a + G    (x̄) .

An increase in a now means shifting the pair of points a + G−1 (x) and a + G−1 (x̄) at which we
evaluate f by the same amount; concavity then means the inter-quantile range shrinks.
   Proof of Proposition 2. The proof uses the following result (Theorem 3.1 in van de Geer
and Wegkamp (2011)).
   Lemma. Let x denote a random variable, φ denote a nonconstant convex function, µj (y) denote
the jth centered moment, and σ(y) the standard deviation of a random variable y. Then for all




                                                    47
k = 1, 2, ..., provided the moments exist, we have

                                     µ2k+1 (x)   µ2k+1 (φ (x))
                                       2k+1
                                                ≤ 2k+1         .
                                     σ      (x)  σ     (φ (x))

    Part 1.a. Define φ (x) = f −1 (x) − a. If x represents the distribution of s, then φ (x) represents
the distribution of ε. The function φ is convex by the concavity of f , and the result follows directly
from the lemma.
    Part 1.b. Define the ratio of 50-10 inter-quantile to 90-50 inter-quantile to be:

                                               P50 (x) − P10 (x)
                                      R(x) =                     ,
                                               P90 (x) − P50 (x)

where P is the percentile of the distribution. Then the Kelley skewness k(x) is decreasing in R(x)
since
                                   (P90 − P50 ) − (P50 − P10 )   1 − R(x)
                          k(x) =                               =                              (23)
                                   (P90 − P50 ) + (P50 − P10 )   1 + R(x)
   Define the ratios of 50-10 inter-quantile to 90-50 inter-quantile for s and f , respectively, to be
Rs and Rf . The x̄ quantile for s is

                                       G−1            −1
                                        s (x̄) = a + G (x̄).

It follows that
                                     G−1 (50) − G−1 (10)
                            Rs =
                                     G−1 (90) − G−1 (50)
                                     f a + G−1 (50) − f a + G−1 (10)
                                                                      
                            Rf   =
                                     f (a + G−1 (90)) − f (a + G−1 (50))

   Comparing Rs to Rf , we find:

       f a + G−1 (50) − f a + G−1 (10)            f a + G−1 (90) − f a + G−1 (50)
                                                                                 
  Rf
     =                                         ÷
  Rs       (a + G−1 (50)) − (a + G−1 (10))          (a + G−1 (90)) − (a + G−1 (50))
     = f 0 (ξL ) ÷ f 0 (ξR ), ξL ∈ a + G−1 (10), a + G−1 (50) ), ξR ∈ a + G−1 (50), a + G−1 (90) )
                                                                                               


    where the last equality comes from Mean Value Theorem. Since f 0 is decreasing and ξL < ξR ,
it follows that Rf > Rs . By equation (23) we have k(n|a) < k(s|a).
    Part 2.a: Write aggregate employment growth as a function of aggregate news

                                       g (a) = E [f (a + ε) |a] .                                 (24)

   The function g is also concave. Indeed, for any a 6= a0 ,

   g λa + (1 − λ) a0 = E f λa + (1 − λ) a0 + ε |λa + (1 − λ) a0
                                                                

                       = E f λ (a + ε) + (1 − λ) (a0 + ε |λa + (1 − λ) a0
                                                                        

                       > λE f (a + ε) |λa + (1 − λ) a0 + (1 − λ) E f a0 + ε |λa + (1 − λ) a0
                                                                                         

                       = λE [f (a + ε) |a] + (1 − λ) E f a0 + ε |a0
                                                               

                       = λg (a) + (1 − λ) g a0
                                               




                                                  48
where the last line uses the fact that ε is independent of a.
    Define now φ (x) = g −1 (x). If x represents the distribution of aggregate employment growth
E [f (a + ε) |a], then φ (x) represents the distribution of a. Since φ is convex, the result follows
directly from the lemma.
    Part 2.b. Denote by Ga (ā) the CDF function for random variable a, and Gg CDF function for
random variable g = g(a), where g(a) is defined in equation (24). We have

                                 Gg (ḡ) = Pr [g(a) ≤ ḡ] = Ga g −1 (ḡ)
                                                                        


In a similar fashion of Proposition 1, Part 3, we can express the x̄ percentile of g, call it ḡx̄ , as:

                                         ḡx̄ = g G−1
                                                        
                                                   a (x̄) .

    Now we are ready compare the ratios of 50-10 inter-quantile to 90-50 inter-quantile for g and a.
First we write the ratio for a as
                                              G−1        −1
                                               a (50) − Ga (10)
                                       Ra =                     ,
                                              G−1        −1
                                               a (90) − Ga (50)

second we write the ratio for g as:

                             G−1        −1
                                             g G−1
                                                         −1    
                              g (50) − Gg (10)  a (50) − g Ga (10)
                      Rg = −1               =  −1
                          Gg (90) − G−1      g Ga (90) − g G−1
                                                                
                                     g (50)                 a (50)

   Comparing Rg to Ra , we find

              g G−1                   −1       g G−1              −1
                                                                      
        Rg           a (50) − g Ga (10)             a (90) − g Ga (50)
            =                                ÷
        Ra        (G−1 (50)) − (G−1 (10))        (G−1 (90)) − (G−1 (50))
            = g 0 (ξL ) ÷ g 0 (ξR ), ξL ∈ G−1        −1               −1     −1
                                                                                  
                                           a (10), Ga (50) ), ξR ∈ Ga (50), Ga (90) )

where the last equality comes from Mean Value Theorem. We have proved in Part 2.a. that g
is strictly concave, and therefore g 0 is decreasing. Since ξL < ξR , we obtain that Rg > Ra . By
equation (23), it follows that the Kelley skewness for g is smaller than that of a.

    Proof of Proposition 3.
    Part 1. Define y = f (a0 + ε) and x = f (a + ε). The random variable x represents the cross-
sectional distribution at a, whereas the random variable y represents the cross-sectional distribution
at a0 . Since f is strictly increasing, we can write y = φ (x), where

                                       φ (x) = f a0 − a + f −1 (x) .
                                                                  


   By the lemma in the proof of Proposition 2, skewness is higher at a0 if φ is convex. The first
and second derivatives are
                   f 0 a0 − a + f −1 (x)
                                         
           0
         φ (x) =                           >0
                        f 0 (f −1 (x))
                   f 0 f −1 (x) f 00 a0 − a − f −1 (x) − f 0 a0 − a − f −1 (x) f 00 f −1 (x)
                                                                                          
          00
         φ (x) =                                                                               .
                                                  f 0 (f −1 (x))3




                                                    49
    Since f 0 > 0 and f 00 < 0, we have φ00 (x) > 0 if and only if

                                 f 00 a0 − a − f −1 (x)      f 00 f −1 (x)
                                                                         
                                − 0 0                     < − 0 −1          .
                                 f (a − a − f −1 (x))        f (f (x))

    This is true if absolute risk aversion is decreasing everywhere. The relationship between in-
creasing absolute risk aversion and lower skewness follows by reversing the inequalities.
    Part 2. Taking derivative of Rf , defined above in the proof of Proposition 2, Part 1.b, with
respect to a:
                 0
                  f a + G−1 (50) − f 0 a + G−1 (10) f a + G−1 (90) − f a + G−1 (50)
                                                                                     
        d
          Rf =
       da                           [f (a + G−1 (90)) − f (a + G−1 (50))]2
                 f a + G−1 (50) − f a + G−1 (10) f 0 a + G−1 (90) − f 0 a + G−1 (50)
                                                                                    
              −
                                    [f (a + G−1 (90)) − f (a + G−1 (50))]2

   To determine the sign of this derivative we only need to focus on the sign of the numerator
term. Dividing the numerator term by a positive term
                           −1
                           G (50) − G−1 (10) G−1 (90) − G−1 (50)
                                                                 


and applying Mean Value Theorem, we obtain the term

                                      f 00 (ξL )f 0 (ξR ) − f 0 (ξL )f 00 (ξR )                     (25)

where
                ξL ∈ a + G−1 (10), a + G−1 (50) ; ξR ∈ a + G−1 (50), a + G−1 (90) .
                                                                                

Divide the term in (25) by f 0 (ξL )f 0 (ξR ), which is positive, to obtain

                                              f 00 (ξL ) f 00 (ξR )
                                                        − 0
                                              f 0 (ξL )  f (ξR )

If −f 00 (s)/f 0 (s) is decreasing in s then Rf is decreasing in a. As a consequence, the Kelley skewness
is increasing in a. The relationship between increasing absolute risk aversion and lower Kelley
skewness follows by reversing the inequalities.


C     Employment patterns by sector
In Sections 3.2 and 3.3 we documented employment patterns in the manufacturing sector using
the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) contains
employee data for all establishments in the entire economy. Even though it covers the manufacturing
(and other establishments) in its entirety, we had preferred the ASM in the main body of our paper
because it allowed us to link employment growth to technology shocks, an object which we cannot
compute in the LBD, and because it measures employment more precisely. We observe quarterly
production employment and the March snapshot of non-production employment. In the LBD, in
contrast, we only observe the March snapshots of all employment, which thus misses some high-
frequency movements.
    Even though the ASM provides the more high quality data, we will now use the LBD to
document the cross-sectional and time series patterns of employment growth for each of the nine


                                                        50
                                      Table C.1: Employment moments by sector


                                                                  Sector
     Moment               Agri-  Mining &       Con-     Manu-    Trspt. &    Wholesale   Retail    FIRE      Services
                         culture Logging struction facturing      Utilities    Trade      Trade
     A Cross-sectional moments of firm-level employment growth
     A.1 Standard deviation
     Long-run average 0.4630       0.4504      0.5194    0.3586   0.3994       0.3469     0.3563     0.3476    0.3631
     Volatility          0.0280    0.0378      0.0232    0.0123   0.0126       0.0146     0.0138     0.0216   0.0112
     Corr(dEtaggr , ...) 0.0366   -0.2078     -0.2615   -0.5830   -0.2959      -0.2231    -0.1302   -0.2492   -0.1927
     A.2 Coefficient of skewness




51
     Long-run average -0.0535     -0.2610   -0.0655    -0.1531    -0.1038      -0.1231    -0.0906   -0.0889   -0.0071
     Volatility            0.2574  0.3346    0.0889     0.1596    0.1509        0.1210     0.1430   0.1918     0.0703
     Corr(dEtaggr , ...)   0.0872  0.2201    0.6592     0.7264     0.3073       0.1965     0.1437    0.3824    0.3700
     B Time series moments of aggregate employment growth
     B.1 Volatility: V olt
     Long-run average 0.0497      0.0494     0.0478     0.0298    0.0200       0.0199     0.0161    0.0151    0.0123
     Volatility            0.0364  0.0249    0.0253     0.0165    0.0092       0.0078     0.0068    0.0051    0.0056
     Corr(dEtaggr , ...)   0.0431 -0.1940   -0.2416    -0.3175    -0.3032      -0.3455    -0.3248   0.0897    -0.3525
     B.2 Asymmetry: Asymt
     Long-run average -0.0310     -0.2566   -0.3029    -0.4804    -0.4126      -0.1758    -0.2488   -0.2824   -0.4525
     Volatility          0.8730    0.6651    0.5912     0.6162    0.5855        0.6287     0.6718   0.4597     0.5089
     Corr(dEtaggr , ...) 0.0819    0.2451   -0.1401    -0.0344    -0.1074      -0.0129    -0.0389   -0.1282   -0.0389
major sectors in the LBD. The objective of this exercise is to demonstrate that the employment
growth patterns documented for manufacturing in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 are pervasive throughout
the economy.
    Panel A.1 shows that cross-firm employment growth dispersion is countercyclical in all sectors
except Agriculture. Panel A.2 reveals that all sectors exhibit a slight negative skew in their re-
spective employment growth distribution, evidence that, on average, employment contractions are
stronger than expansions.
    For the time series analysis, we use monthly employment data from BLS 1947-2015 which gives
us a longer time horizon and broader scope of employment data. Panel B in Table C.1 displays the
time -series patterns of employment growth for the nine major sectors in the private U.S. economy.
Interestingly, aggregate employment growth in almost all other sectors exhibit the same patterns
as in the manufacturing sector. Though most service sectors are less volatile on average, their
volatility is also countercyclical. The only exceptions to this rule are the Agriculture and Finance
sector: the general time series volatility of employment growth is almost one order of magnitude
smaller and it is not cyclical, not even with respect to its own sectoral employment. Furthermore,
the sectoral employment growth time series are negatively skewed, that is, employment downturns
are faster than employment upturns.




                                                52
                                                                               Online appendix
    “Slow to Hire, Quick to Fire: Employment Dynamics
           with Asymmetric Responses to News”
                         Cosmin Ilut, Matthias Kehrig and Martin Schneider

I     Additional empirical evidence
I.1    Conditional heteroskedasticity in aggregate employment
We follow Bachmann et al. (2013) and analyze conditional heteroskedasticity in aggregate employ-
ment growth. To that end, we use monthly data on employment in the private economy collected
by BLS 1947:Jan-2015:Dec, aggregate to quarterly frequency and estimate the following model:
                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                  X
                                                                      ∆ log Et = c + β0 t +              ρi ∆ log Et−i + εt       (26)
                                                                                                  i=1

where εt ∼ N (0, σt ) and σt varies over time. We first determine the optimal lag length p to
be 11 using the Akaike information criterion, then estimate (26) by OLS, recover the residuals
εt , square them and regress them non-parametrically on lagged aggregate employment growth
∆ log Et−1 . To better illustrate the volatility changes of aggregate employment depending on the
level of employment growth, we have normalized the variance at unity for ∆ log Et−1 = 0. As
Figure I.1 shows, volatility is about twice as high for aggregate employment growth rates of -1.8%
than for +1.8%. These differences are statistically significant in the sense the 95% error bands at
either end do not overlap.

             Figure I.1: Conditional heteroskedasticity of aggregate employment growth
                                                                2.2


                                                                 2
                           Variance of residuals (normalized)




                                                                1.8


                                                                1.6


                                                                1.4


                                                                1.2


                                                                 1


                                                                0.8


                                                                0.6
                                                                      -0.015   -0.01    -0.005       0     0.005   0.01   0.015
                                                                                       Lagged employment growth



Note: This figure displays how the volatility of aggregate employment growth depends on the level of employment
growth. We distill this conditional aggregate volatility following the procedure in Bachmann et al. (2013): First, we
regress quarterly aggregate employment growth on a time trend and its own lagged values. The residuals are squared
and then non-parametrically regressed on the lagged aggregate employment growth rate after truncating 1%-iles of
the observations.



                                                                                                 1
I.2    Dynamic correlations
To check if the cyclical properties of employment growth outlined in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 are robust
to the measure of the cycle, we plot several correlograms of second and third moments of both
the cross-sectional and time series employment growth distribution using various cyclical measures
in Figures I.2 and I.3: the share of NBER boom quarters per year, the growth rates of aggregate
employment, gross domestic product, manufacturing value added as well as the HP filtered residuals
of the log-levels of the same variables. To keep the presentation succinct, we omit the correlograms
with HP filtered residuals.
                        Figure I.2: Cyclicality of cross-firm dispersion and skewness


                                           Corr(Cyclet , XS Empl. M omentt+k )

                   Share of NBER boom quarters/year                            GDP growth
             1                                                    1
                       XS IQR
                       XS Coeff. of skewn.
           0.5         XS Kelley skewn.                         0.5

             0                                                    0

          -0.5                                                  -0.5

            -1                                                   -1
              -2          -1           0         1      2          -2     -1        0        1         2

                       Aggr. employment growth                          Mfg. value added growth
             1                                                    1

           0.5                                                  0.5

             0                                                    0

          -0.5                                                  -0.5

            -1                                                   -1
              -2          -1           0         1      2          -2     -1        0        1         2




Note: Each plot displays the correlation of a particular measure of the cycle (indicated above the plot) with the
cross-sectional employment growth inter-quartile range (blue), coefficient of skewness (orange) and Kelley skewness
(green). Standard errors for the correlation coefficients are computed using a GMM procedure that corrects for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation as in Newey and West (1987) and is adapted from Hansen et al. (1988).


    As Figure I.2 confirms the evidence displayed in Table 1: Across all measures of the cycle,
employment growth dispersion across firms is distinctly countercyclical. This countercyclicality
appears significant at the 5% level both contemporaneously and with a one-year lag. The correlation
of cross-sectional skewness with the various cycle measures is less clear. While Kelley skewness is
clearly procyclical at the 5% level contemporaneously and with a one-year lag, Pearson’s coefficient
of skewness is slightly countercyclical, but the correlation coefficient is almost never significantly
different from zero for any leads or lags and measure of the cycle. That the two skewness measures
have opposing correlations with the cycle is still consistent with the predictions of Proposition
3. This proposition can only predict the cyclicality of skewness if the coefficient of absolute risk


                                                            2
         Figure I.3: Cyclicality of time series volatility and skewness of employment growth


                                            Corr(Cyclet , T S Empl. M omentt+k )

                                               Panel A. Firm-level employment
                   Share of NBER boom quarters/year                             GDP growth
             1                                                      1
                       TS volatility (firm level)
                       TS skewness (firm level)
           0.5                                                    0.5

             0                                                      0

          -0.5                                                    -0.5

            -1                                                     -1
              -2          -1            0           1     2          -2    -1       0        1      2

                       Aggr. employment growth                            Mfg. value added growth
             1                                                      1

           0.5                                                    0.5

             0                                                      0

          -0.5                                                    -0.5

            -1                                                     -1
              -2          -1            0           1     2          -2    -1       0        1      2




                               Panel B. Aggregate employment (private economy)
                   Share of NBER boom quarters/year                             GDP growth
             1                                                      1
                       TS volatility (aggregate)
                       TS skewness (aggregate)
           0.5                                                    0.5

             0                                                      0

          -0.5                                                    -0.5

            -1                                                     -1
              -2          -1            0           1     2          -2    -1       0        1      2

                       Aggr. employment growth                            Mfg. value added growth
             1                                                      1

           0.5                                                    0.5

             0                                                      0

          -0.5                                                    -0.5

            -1                                                     -1
              -2          -1            0           1     2          -2    -1       0        1      2

Note: See notes to Figure I.2.



                                                              3
aversion of the estimated hiring rule (see Figure 8) does not monotonically increase or decrease
with the profitability shock. We find that it is not.
    Figure I.3 plots the cyclicality of the “rolling-window” measures of time series volatility and
skewness. We have constructed such five-year rolling windows at the firm level, the industry level,
the sectoral level and the level of the aggregate private economy. To keep the presentation concise,
we only display the results of the two polar cases: the moments constructed at the firm level and
at the level of the aggregate economy. Both rolling-window estimates of second and third moments
have been detrended to account for the long-run decline in volatility (“Great Moderation”), though
in case of the skewness there is almost no discernible trend. The second time-series moment at
all levels of aggregation are distinctly negatively correlated with the cycle. Average firm-level
volatility is slightly more countercyclical than aggregate employment, but both are significantly
countercyclical at the 5% level both contemporaneously and with a one-year lag. This means firms,
industries, sectors, and the aggregate economy become more volatile in recessions.
    Like in the cross-section, time-series skewness does not exhibit an unambiguous cyclical pattern.
At the aggregate level it is never significantly different from being acyclical. At the firm level, time-
series skewness tends to be procyclical (like Kelley skewness in the cross-section), but its significance
depends on the measure of the cycle: time series skewness of the average firm is more positively
correlated with the share of NBER boom quarters per year and aggregate employment growth as
opposed to aggregate and manufacturing output growth measures, where the positive correlation is
barely significant. Interpreting the slight positive correlation, this means that firm firing is larger
in absolute value than its hiring and this difference becomes more pronounced in recessions.

I.3    Alternative TFP measures
Our preferred measure for TFP shocks – the one used in producing Figures 8 and 9 as well as Tables
3, 4, 5, and 6 – is obtained by estimating the fixed-effects panel model in equation (11). The fixed
effect causes a well-known bias in the estimated parameters and TFP innovations. Though Monte
Carlo studies suggest the bias in a long panel like ours should be quite small [see Nickell (1981)],
we re-estimate equation (11) using the instrumenting proposed by Arellano and Bond (1991) and
Blundell and Bond (2000). The resulting measure of TFP innovations is not only extremely similar
to the one we obtain in the fixed effects panel regression, the resulting employment growth-TFP
innovation relationship is equally asymmetric. If the previously observed asymmetric hiring rule
were a mere artifact of biased estimates of TFP innovations, then using the bias-corrected TFP
innovations should yield a symmetric estimate of the hiring rule. This re-estimated hiring rule33
is presented in Table I.1, which shows that the hiring rule is still asymmetric and similar to the
results presented in Table 6.

I.4    Further analysis of composition effects
The asymmetric hiring rule we estimated previously could be an artifact of composition. We
consider two of the most plausible ones: labor-saving capital investment and the firm’s life cycle.
    As for the first, the logic runs as follows: firms that receive a positive technology shock might
invest in new more productive machinery that requires less labor input thus muting employment
growth after positive shocks. But after negative technology shocks firms might simply fire work-
ers and divest machinery thus pronouncing an employment contraction after negative technology
shocks. If that was true, then our observed asymmetry would be caused by firms that upgrade their
  33
    For simplicity we focus on our preferred specifications (I) and (II) from Table 6, but the asymmetry continues to
hold in other specifications.


                                                         4
                            Table I.1: Alternative Measures of TFP Innovations


          Regressions (I)/(III):        nit = β0 + β i + β1 t + β2 Zt−1
                                                                    i   + β3 lti + β4 z + β5 z 2
          Regressions (II)/(IV):        nt = β0 + β + β1 t + β2 Zt−1 + β3 lti + β4 z + β7 zI {z < 0}
                                          i          i              i



                                         Arellano-Bond                       Blundell-Bond
                                     (I)         (II)                  (III)         (IV)
                  Explanatory        quadr.      piece-wise            quadr.        piece-wise
                  variables                      linear                              linear
                  z                  0.0715*** 0.0143***               0.0746*** 0.0127***
                                     (0.0018)       (0.0029)           (0.0018)           (0.0029)

                  z2                 -0.0851***                        -0.0896***
                                     (0.0035)                          (0.0046)

                  z × I{z < 0}                      0.1162∗∗∗                             0.1186∗∗∗
                                                    (0.0045)                              (0.0046)

                  Trend              -0.0032***     -0.0032***         -0.0032***         -0.0032***
                                     (0.0001)       (0.0001)           (0.0001)           (0.0001)
                   i
                  Zt−1               0.0252**       0.0251**           0.0273**           0.0273**
                                     (0.0015)       (0.0015)           (0.0014)           (0.0014)

                  lti                0.2972***      0.2972***          0.2963***          0.2963***
                                     (0.0020)       (0.0020)           (0.0020)           (0.0020)

                  Constant           -1.3019***     1.2961***          1.2999***          1.2941***
                                     (0.0389)       (0.0389)           (0.0389)           (0.0389)
                  Sample             ASM            ASM                ASM                ASM
                  N                  1,536k         1,536k             1,536k             1,536k
                  R2                 0.1688         0.1688             0.1684             0.1684
                  Pos. Resp.         +1.42%         +0.39%             +1.34%             +0.33%
                  Neg. Resp.         −2.68%         −3.56%             −2.57%             −3.44%
                  Diff. sign.?       Yes∗∗∗         Yes∗∗∗             Yes∗∗∗             Yes∗∗∗

Note: *, **, *** significantly different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, 1% level, respectively.


technology. We therefore re-estimate our preferred linear-quadratic specification only for firms that
do not simultaneously invest large amounts (which we identify as possibly labor-saving). Following
the literature, we define a large investment project as exceeding an investment rate of 0.20. Column
(I) in Table I.2, however, confirms that the asymmetry is still present, significant, and quantita-
tively close to what we estimated before, even for firms that do not upgrade their capital stock by
large amounts. Second, we want to check if the observed asymmetry is driven by life-cycle consid-
erations. To that end, we focus on “mid-age” firms, which are less subject to dynamics specific to
entry or exit. We define these as firms three years or more after their creation and three years or
more before their death. 34 Column (II) in Table I.2 shows that the asymmetry does not disappear
when focusing on mid-age firms.
    We thus conclude that compositional effects driven by a firm’s capital goods upgrade and a
  34
   We identify death in the data as exit in the Longitudinal Business Database rather than disappearance from our
main manufacturing sample.



                                                           5
firm’s life-cycle growth and decline are not responsible for the observed asymmetric hiring rule.

 Table I.2: Is Asymmetry Driven by Labor-Saving Capital Investment? By Life-Cycle Patterns?


                Regressions (I)-(IV):       nit = β0 + β i + β1 t + β2 Zt−1
                                                                        i   + β3 lti + β4 z + β5 z 2

                             (I)                (II)            (III)              (IV)
        Explanatory          no large                            mid-age firms
        variables            investments        ≥ 3 years       ≥ 5 years          ≥ 8 years
                                                       away from both firm birth and death
        β0                   -1.3628***         -1.4048***      -1.4042***         -1.4279***
                             (0.0391)           (0.0387)              (0.0322)            (0.0372)

        β1                   -0.0025***         -0.0022***            -0.0014***          -0.0009***
                             (0.0001)           (0.0001)              (0.0001)            (0.0001)

        β2                   0.0247***          0.0311***             0.0313***           0.0301***
                             (0.0015)           (0.0014)              (0.0015)            (0.0013)

        β3                   0.3010***          0.2983***             0.2986***           0.2981***
                             (0.0020)           (0.0020)              (0.0021)            (0.0019)

        β4                   0.0750***          0.0759***             0.0724***           0.0707***
                             (0.0019)           (0.0018)              (0.0021)            (0.0024)

        β5                   -0.1415***         -0.1459***            -0.1575***          -0.1600***
                             (0.0064)           (0.006)               (0.0061)            (0.0059)
                                    i
        Sample               ASM < 0.2
                                    k           ASM mid-age 1         ASM mid-age 2       ASM mid-age 3
        N                    1,406k             1,421k                1,262k              1,132k
        R2                   0.178              0.190                 0.188               0.191
        Pos. Response        +0.89%             +0.89%                0.79%               0.75%
        Neg. Response        −1.79%             −1.82%                −1.80%              −1.77%
        Diff. sign.?         Yes∗∗∗             Yes∗∗∗                Yes∗∗∗              Yes∗∗∗

Note: *, **, *** significantly different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, 1% level, respectively.




II     Alternative specifications for quantitative significance
In this appendix we report results based on alternative specifications to the benchmark signal
structure and parametric function of in equation (14). In Table II.3 we collect the moments defined
in section 5.3. The first two columns give their informal and formal description. Column (M1)
reports values for the benchmark specification. The rest of the remaining columns are based on
alternative model specifications to be introduced below.
    One extension is to allow for noise in the idiosyncratic signal. More specifically, as in equation
(6), we write the general representation of the signal as

                                              sit = uat + vta + uit + vti

where vta and vti are the common                                                             a
                                 and idiosyncratic components of the noise distributed as vt ∼
      2     and vti ∼ N 0, σv,b
                              2
          
N 0, σv,a                        , respectively. We parametrize each of the variances of the noise


                                                           6
through the implied signal to noise ratios

                                                          σx2
                                               κx =
                                                      σx2 + σv,x
                                                              2


for both the aggregate and idiosyncratic components, i.e., x = a, b. Allowing         for
                                                                                         noise in the signals
means that the econometrician recovers the conditional expectation g zti = E f (sit )|zti , as defined
                                                                                  

in equation (7).   We discuss some of the conclusions that can be drawn about f (sit ) based on the
observed g zti in Section 2.3. In this context however, we maintain for expositional purposes
                

the assumption that f (sit ) is still given by the linear-quadratic function in (14), with the same
                                                                                            2
coefficients β 1 and β 2 as those estimated for the estimated g zti = β 1 zti + β 2 zti . Thus, in the
                                                                            

experiments reported below, allowing for noise amounts to maintaining the same decision rule while
increasing the variance of either the idiosyncratic component, uit + vti , or the aggregate one, given
by uat + vta .
    In column (M2), we set κa = κb = 0.5, so that the variance σv,a        2 = σ 2 and σ 2 = σ 2 . We observe
                                                                                a       v,b    i
that all statistics increase as we have essentially made both types of shocks more volatile. The
larger volatility will have larger effects through the same curvature of the hiring rule. In column
(M3), we keep κa = 1, so that there is no aggregate noise, but activate κb = 0.5. We see that the
properties of cross-sectional and time series skewness are the same as in column (M2) since the
amount of idiosyncratic variance is the same. The cyclicality of the cross-sectional dispersion is
very similar to the benchmark case, with a very small difference caused by the larger variance of
idiosyncratic noise. Lastly, in column (M4) we revert to κb = 1 and keep κa = 0.5. Similarly to the
above logic, the cross-sectional and time series skewness are the same as the benchmark case while
the cyclicality of the cross-sectional dispersion is larger.
    A final alternative specification that we investigate is to change the hiring decision rule to a
piece-wise linear function in which employment growth continues to respond stronger to bad than
to good signals. We maintain the benchmark assumption of no additional noise in the signal and
consider the decision rule
                                      f (sit ) = β4 sit + β7 sit I sit < 0
                                                                  

where the coefficients β4 and β7 equal 0.0347 and 0.0947, respectively, as estimated for specification
(III) in Table 6. Column (M5) reports the results for this case. We see that the main qualita-
tive features are maintained and that the piece-wise linear function in general produces stronger
quantitative effects.




                                                       7
         Table II.3: Quantitative significance of estimated concavity of hiring decision rule


   Distribution Moment                                                     (M1)    (M2)    (M3)    (M4)    (M5)
   Description                     Statistic
                                       IQR(ni |ua =−σ )
                                     h                     i
   XS dispersion cyclicality       ln IQR(nt i |ut a =σ a)                 22%     32%     23%     31%     36%
                                                 t   t      a



   XS skewness                     γ(nit |uat = 0)                         −1.17   −1.55   −1.55   −1.17   −1.01

                                   1   PN    1       PT      (nit −ni )3
   TS skewness                     N     i=1 T           t=1 (V oli )3/2   −1.12   −1.49   −1.49   −1.12   −0.99

Note: Column 1 and 2 give the informal and formal description of the distribution moments, where XS refers to
cross-section and TS to time series. Column (M1) the corresponding values for the benchmark specification. Column
(M2) refers to the alternative specification with noise, where κa = κb = 0.5; (M3) with κa = 1, κb = 0.5; (M4) with
κa = 0.5, κb = 1; and (M5) is the piece-wise linear model without noise.




                                                                 8
