                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             STRATEGIC NEWS RELEASES IN EQUITY VESTING MONTHS

                                          Alex Edmans
                                      Luis Goncalves-Pinto
                                          Yanbo Wang
                                            Moqi Xu

                                       Working Paper 20476
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20476


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




For helpful comments, we thank Kenneth Ahern, Steffen Brenner, Craig Brown, Jeff Coles, Wayne
Guay, Tomislav Ladika, Tao Li, Margarita Tsoutsoura, Patrick Verwijmeren, Kent Womack, Jun Yang,
conference participants at the Adam Smith Workshop in Corporate Finance, ASU Sonoran Winter
Finance Conference, China International Conference in Finance, Drexel Conference on Corporate
Governance, Erasmus Workshop on Executive Compensation and Corporate Governance, Finance
Down Under Conference, SFS Cavalcade, Warwick Frontiers of Finance Conference, and seminar
participants at London School of Economics, National University of Singapore, and University of
Hong Kong. Goncalves- Pinto gratefully acknowledges financial support from Singapore MOE AcRF
Tier-1 Grant No. R-315-000-094-133, and Xu gratefully acknowledges financial support from STICERD.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Alex Edmans, Luis Goncalves-Pinto, Yanbo Wang, and Moqi Xu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Strategic News Releases in Equity Vesting Months
Alex Edmans, Luis Goncalves-Pinto, Yanbo Wang, and Moqi Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 20476
September 2014
JEL No. G14,G34

                                            ABSTRACT

We show that CEOs strategically time corporate news releases to coincide with months in which their
equity vests. These vesting months are determined by equity grants made several years prior, and thus
unlikely driven by the current information environment. CEOs reallocate news into vesting months,
and away from prior and subsequent months. They release 5% more discretionary news in vesting
months than prior months, but there is no difference for non-discretionary news. These news releases
lead to favourable media coverage, suggesting they are positive in tone. They also generate a temporary
run-up in stock prices and market liquidity, potentially resulting from increased investor attention
or reduced information asymmetry. The CEO takes advantage of these effects by cashing out shortly
after the news releases.


Alex Edmans                                             Yanbo Wang
The Wharton School                                      INSEAD
University of Pennsylvania                              Boulevard de Constance
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall                     F-77305 Fontainebleau, France
3620 Locust Walk                                        yanbo.wang@insead.edu
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                                Moqi Xu
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu                               London School of Economics
                                                        Houghton Street
Luis Goncalves-Pinto                                    WC2A 2AE London
National University of Singapore                        United Kingdom
15 Kent Ridge Drive, MRB BIZ1 Level 7-43                M.Xu1@lse.ac.uk
Singapore 119245
lgoncalv@nus.edu.sg
1     Introduction

The timely release of information is central to the efficiency of both financial markets and the

real economy. Information can influence real decisions either directly, or indirectly via affecting

stock prices which agents use as signals (see the survey of Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012)).

For example, suppliers, employees, and investors may base their decision of whether to initiate,

continue, or terminate their relationship with a firm on news releases, or stock prices that are

affected by news.1

    News can also have distributional as well as efficiency effects. In particular, news reduces

information asymmetry between investors, thus protecting uninformed investors from trading losses.

Indeed, Regulation FD aims to “level the playing field” between investors by restricting selective

disclosure. Moreover, these distributional consequences in the secondary market may feed back into

efficiency consequences in the primary market. Uninformed investors, who expect future trading

losses due to information asymmetry, may withdraw from the market (Bhattacharya and Spiegel

(1991)) or require a higher cost of capital (Diamond and Verrecchia (1991)), in turn hindering

investment.

    Timely information flows are thus important. Subsequent to Regulation FD in October 2000

and Sarbanes-Oxley in July 2002, corporate news releases have been particularly important in

communicating new information to investors (Neuhierl, Scherbina, and Schlusche (2013)). News

releases do not occur mechanically whenever corporate events take place, but are a discretionary

decision of the CEO. This paper investigates whether CEOs strategically time news releases for

personal gain. Specifically, we hypothesize that a CEO who intends to sell equity in a given month

will delay otherwise past news releases until that month, and accelerate otherwise future news

releases into that month. This is because disclosure can temporarily boost the stock price through

two channels. First, disclosure can attract investor attention. Barber and Odean (2008) argue

that investors need to browse through thousands of stocks when making a buy decision, and so
   1
     Moreover, real decisions may be affected not only by specific releases of information, but also the general
informativeness of stock prices. For example, Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004) show that a blockholder will base
her decision to undertake a costly intervention on whether the benefits of this intervention will be reflected in prices
within her investment horizon.



                                                           2
are particularly likely to buy attention-grabbing stocks. They indeed find that retail investors

are net buyers of such stocks, and Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011) show that such buying leads to

temporary price increases. Second, disclosure can reduce information asymmetry between investors,

encouraging uninformed investors to buy the stock and raising its price. Indeed, Balakrishnan,

Billings, Kelly, and Ljungqvist (2014) find that voluntary disclosures increase liquidity and thus

firm value. Separately, in addition to releasing a greater volume of news, the CEO may also release

more favorable news.

      However, documenting that CEOs disclose more (favorable) news in months in which they sell

equity would not imply a causal relationship from equity sales to disclosure, because the decision to

sell equity is endogenous. For example, if a particular month happens to coincide with many favor-

able events, the CEO will undertake many positive news releases (even in the absence of strategic

considerations) and take advantage of any resulting stock price increase by opportunistically selling

equity. Thus, disclosure causes equity sales rather than expected equity sales causing disclosure.

      We identify a CEO’s likelihood of selling equity in a given month by whether he has stock

or options scheduled to vest in that month. These “vesting months” depend on the timing and

vesting schedule of equity grants made several years prior2 , and thus are unlikely to be affected by

the current information environment. It is unlikely that boards can forecast, to the exact month,

when news is most likely to be released several years in the future. We identify vesting months

between 2006 and 2011 using a new dataset from Equilar, and hand-collect it from proxy statements

and SEC Form 4 filings from 1994 to 2005.

      We find that CEOs are likely to sell equity shortly after it vests, consistent with the optimal

exercise behavior of an undiversified agent (e.g., Kahl, Liu, and Longstaff (2003) and Hall and

Murphy (2002)). Controlling for CEOs’ unvested and vested equity and other determinants of

equity sales, they are 23% (14%) more likely to sell shares in months in which their stock (options)

vest, compared to non-vesting months. Thus, scheduled vesting of equity indeed leads to equity

sales and thus short-term stock price concerns.
  2
       The average vesting horizon in our sample is three years, with a maximum of seven years.




                                                         3
   We use novel data from Capital IQ’s Key Developments database as our source for news re-

leases. Unlike other news sources such as Factiva, LexisNexis, and Dow Jones Newswires, this

database filters the data to eliminate duplicates and extraneous information, and classifies news

into categories. This allows us to stratify the releases into discretionary news (the timing of which

is likely to be under the CEO’s control, such as conferences, client and product announcements, and

special dividends) and non-discretionary news (such as earnings announcements or annual general

meetings (“AGMs”)). Capital IQ also allows us to filter the news by source, thus enabling us to

focus on news released by the firm, rather than the media.

   We show that firms release significantly more discretionary news in vesting months than in

non-vesting months, controlling for other determinants of news releases, such as months in which

there is an earnings announcement, AGM or board meeting, analyst coverage, and unvested and

vested equity. Firms also significantly reduce disclosures in the months before and after the vesting

month. There are 2% more discretionary news releases in vesting months than non-vesting months,

and 5% more than in prior months. The value of vesting equity is also significantly associated

with the number of news releases. In contrast, the amount of non-discretionary news releases is no

different between vesting and non-vesting months. These results are robust to removing out-of-the-

money options, which are unlikely to be exercised upon vesting, and equity with performance-based

vesting provisions, which may not vest if performance thresholds have not been met.

   We then examine the positivity of news releases by studying the tone of media coverage imme-

diately afterwards. Textual analysis from Thomson Reuters News Analytics indicates that media

articles after discretionary news releases are more favorable in vesting months than non-vesting

months, suggesting that the CEO releases more favorable discretionary news in vesting months.

There is no difference in the tone of media coverage following non-discretionary news.

   Next, we study the effect of news releases on stock returns and trading volume to verify whether

they indeed improve the conditions for equity sales. The disclosure of one discretionary news item

in a vesting month generates a significant 16-day abnormal return of 28 basis points (“bps”). The

31-day return is smaller (14 bps), suggesting a temporary attention boost.




                                                 4
      The average CEO equity sale is 6.2% of the average daily trading volume. Thus, the CEO may

benefit from not only the higher price that results from disclosure, but also any increased liquidity.

On the first day after a discretionary news release, abnormal trading volume rises by 0.32% of

shares outstanding, compared to the mean of 0.22%. This value decreases over time, consistent

with an attention story. The CEO’s average equity sale (on a sale day) represents 0.165% of shares

outstanding. Thus, the abnormal trading volume generated by the news releases, which is nearly

double, can provide adequate camouflage.

      The final step is to show that CEOs indeed take advantage of the observed short-term run-

ups in stock price and trading volume. We find that the median interval between a discretionary

disclosure in a vesting month and the first equity sale by a CEO is 5 days, and the median interval

until the CEO sells the entire vesting amount is 7 days.

      Our paper is mainly related to two literatures: corporate disclosures and equity vesting. Starting

with the former, several papers examine the relation between disclosure and equity incentives

(Penman (1982), Noe (1999), Nagar, Nanda, and Wysocki (2003), Cheng and Lo (2006), and

Brockman, Khurana, and Martin (2008)). These studies investigate standard measures of incentives

which are likely to be endogenous to the information environment. Other papers study disclosure

incentives that stem from channels other than the CEO’s contract. In Balakrishnan, Billings, Kelly,

and Ljungqvist (2014), exogenous broker closures or mergers reduce public information and thus

increase managers’ incentives to disclose in response. Yermack (2014) finds that firms release less

news when the CEO is on vacation and thus disclosures involve particularly high effort. Ahern and

Sosyura (2014) find that bidders in stock mergers with fixed exchange ratios originate significantly

more positive news stories, which improves their stock price and thus merger terms. While the

decision to undertake a stock-financed merger may be driven by the expectation of imminent

positive news releases3 , we study disclosure incentives that result from equity grants made several

years prior. Another difference is that we study the incentives of the CEO in particular, rather than

the firm in general: the news releases in our setting benefit the CEO specifically. While Bebchuk

and Fried (2004) argue that CEOs negotiate higher grant-date pay, we show that CEOs can also
  3
      Ahern and Sosyura (2014) thus undertake a battery of tests to address alternative explanations for their results.



                                                           5
increase the value of their pay upon vesting. For example, applied to the average annual CEO

vesting equity of $5.18 million, the 16-day return of 28 bps translates into a gain of $14,504, in

line with the gains to illegal insider trading. These gains come at little cost: changing the timing

of news releases is legal4 , and involves less effort than other actions to boost the stock price, such

as cutting investment projects. However, while meaningful for the CEO, these gains are small

compared to firm value. Thus, we do not claim to identify a major agency problem between the

CEO and shareholders. The main effect of delaying news releases may be on stakeholders who

made decisions prior to the vesting month with less information, or on the distribution of wealth

between shareholders who traded in prior months.

      Other papers study disclosures around option award (rather than vesting) dates. Aboody

and Kasznik (2000) hypothesize that managers who receive scheduled option grants just before

earnings announcements are more likely to have private information than those who receive grants

afterwards. Studying 70 earnings forecasts, they find that the former group is more likely to

issue pessimistic earnings forecasts, which may lower the grant strike price. Daines, McQueen,

and Schonlau (2014) find that before (after) scheduled option grants, management issues negative

(positive) earnings guidance, and 8-K filings of material corporate events exhibit negative (positive)

announcement returns. We study the CEO’s incentives to time news in general, using a sample

of 166,000 news releases that predominantly contains disclosures other than earnings guidance

and 8-K filings, and show how the effect differs across discretionary and non-discretionary news.

Many of these news releases do not have a clear direction (e.g. company conference presentations,

earnings release dates). They thus affect the stock price through a different mechanism than

earnings forecasts or 8-K filings – attracting attention or reducing information asymmetry – and

thus also affect trading volumes. While options have been markedly replaced by stock in recent
  4
      See the Internet Appendix of Ahern and Sosyura (2014) for the legality of strategic news disclosure.




                                                          6
years (Frydman and Jenter (2010)), we show that the CEO’s existing stock as well as option holdings

affect his disclosure incentives.5

       The second literature studies the relationship between vesting equity and corporate decisions.

Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen (2014) show that newly-vesting equity is associated with declines in

investment and a greater likelihood of meeting or narrowly beating earnings forecasts. Ladika and

Sautner (2013) show that, in response to the adoption of FAS 123R, some firms chose to accelerate

option vesting, and such accelerated vesting was associated with a reduction in capital expenditure.

While those papers show that newly-vesting equity affects real decisions, we show that it can affect

the information environment, thus linking a corporate finance variable (the CEO’s contract) to

financial markets. Since news releases are much easier to manage than real decisions, disclosure

is arguably the most plausible arena in which short-term concerns will manifest. In addition,

Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen (2014) study the Equilar data, which starts in 2006, while Ladika

and Sautner (2013) use the R.G. Associates Option Accelerated Vester Database, which covers

May 2004 to February 2006. We use the Equilar data from 2006 to 2011, and hand-collect data

from 1994 to 2005. Gopalan, Milbourn, Song, and Thakor (2014) study a different measure of

short-term incentives – the duration (average vesting horizon) of the CEO’s equity holdings. We

do not use duration in our setting as it is endogenous to current equity grants and the decision

to retain previously-vested equity, both of which may be correlated with the current information

environment.

       In addition to the literature on short-term incentives in particular, our paper also contributes

to the literature on CEO compensation in general. While this literature is substantial, it is very

difficult to document causal effects. The survey of Frydman and Jenter (2010) notes that “compen-

sation arrangements are the endogenous outcome of a complex process. This makes it extremely

difficult to interpret any observed correlation between executive pay and firm outcomes as evidence
   5
      Yermack (1997) shows that CEOs can also increase the value of their option grants by influencing their award
dates around pre-scheduled earnings announcements. Options are more likely to be awarded before (after) positive
(negative) earnings surprises. Smukler (2009) documents anecdotal examples of companies releasing negative infor-
mation shortly after what he assumes to be the vesting dates of options. We have data on actual vesting dates and
conduct a systematic study.




                                                        7
of a causal relationship.” We use a measure of CEO incentives that is unlikely to be driven by the

current contracting environment, allowing us to show that CEO contracts affect behavior.

    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and Section 3 shows that CEOs

frequently sell equity in vesting months. Section 4 presents our core results, linking the frequency

and positivity of discretionary news releases with equity vesting schedules. Section 5 shows that

news releases lead to short-term increases in stock prices and trading volume, and that the CEO

takes advantage of these increases by selling equity shortly after such releases. Section 6 discusses

robustness tests and Section 7 concludes.



2    Data and Variable Construction

This section describes the variables used in our analysis. Our goal is to study how disclosure is

affected by the CEO’s concerns for the stock price in a given month. Theoretically, these concerns

will arise if he has equity vesting in that month, because he is likely to sell his vesting equity for

diversification reasons (e.g., Kahl, Liu, and Longstaff (2003) and Hall and Murphy (2002)). We thus

seek to identify these vesting months. Information on vesting schedules is available in SEC Form

4, which must be filed after a stock or option award. For each grant, the Form 4 filing provides the

number of securities granted and the grant date in a standardized table, and vesting information

in a footnote. For example, Form 4 indicates that John H. Eyler, Jr. of Toys “R” Us was awarded

20,000 restricted shares on April 1, 2004. The footnote reads:

    “These shares vest 50% on the second anniversary of the award date and 100% on the third

anniversary of the award date.”

    We use these footnotes to calculate the number of shares scheduled to vest on each date. Here,

10,000 shares vest on April 1, 2006, and the remaining 10,000 vest on April 1, 2007.

    For option grants, a second source of vesting information is SEC proxy statements, which provide

information on all options granted during the year in a format comparable to Form 4. The number

of securities, exercise price, and maturity are in a standardized table, and the vesting schedule is in




                                                  8
a footnote. For example, the 2001 proxy filing of IBM states that Louis Gerstner received 650,000

options with an exercise price of $109.62. The footnote reads:

   “Mr. Gerstner’s grant becomes exercisable in two equal installments, on March 1, 2001, and on

March 1, 2002.”

   Here, 325,000 options vest on March 1, 2001, and the remaining 325,000 vest on March 1, 2002.

   In a randomized sample of options, we find that the information quality is higher in proxy

statements than in Form 4 filings, which are not filed regularly and sometimes missing altogether.

Unfortunately, proxy statements do not provide grant-level vesting information on restricted stock,

which would allow identification of vesting months, but only the number of shares vesting in the

current fiscal year as a whole. Therefore, we hand-collect option vesting information from proxy

statements and stock vesting information from Form 4 filings, from 1994 (when SEC filings become

available electronically) to 2005. To make the hand-collection manageable, we restrict our pre-2006

sample to firms that were part of the S&P 500 Index in any year within that period.

   For grants starting from 2006-2011, we use the Equilar dataset. Using proxy statements and

Form 4 filings, Equilar provides vesting information for all stock and option grants to executives of

Russell 3000 firms, in a standardized format. For each grant, Equilar records the date and size of the

grant, the vesting period, and whether the grant exhibits cliff vesting (where the entire grant vests

at the end of the vesting period) or graded vesting. Graded vesting means that part of the grant

vests prior to the end of the vesting period, but it is unclear whether it corresponds to straight-line,

back-loaded, or front-loaded vesting. We assume that graded vesting refers to straight-line vesting

on an annual schedule, as most pre-2006 grants with graded vesting vest on this basis.

   We use these vesting schedules to create the variable V estingM onth, a dummy variable that

equals one if the CEO has any equity vesting in a given month. We also create V estingSensitivity,

the dollar sensitivity of the vesting securities to a 100% change in the stock price, which takes into

account the amount of vesting equity. To do so, we first calculate the delta of the vesting securities.

We obtain the strike price and maturity date of a given option grant from either the proxy statement

or Equilar. We use this information, together with the average monthly stock return volatility over

the past 12 months, annual dividend yield from CRSP, and the one-month Treasury bill rate as


                                                   9
the risk-free rate, to calculate the Black-Scholes delta. We sum across the deltas of all vesting

option grants and add the number of vesting shares (since the delta of a share is 1) to calculate the

aggregate delta of all vesting securities. This delta measures the dollar sensitivity of the vesting

securities to a $1 increase in the stock price. We multiply it by the stock price at prior month-

end to form V estingSensitivity. This sensitivity is comparable across firms with different stock

prices and is analogous to the Hall and Liebman (1998) incentive measure, but focuses on vesting

equity rather than the entire equity portfolio. While the delta represents the effective number of

vesting shares, the sensitivity represents their effective value. We use the logarithm of one plus

V estingSensitivity due to significant skewness.

       Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen (2014) use V estingSensitivity as their key independent variable,

because they study the link between short-term incentives and investment. Since reductions in

investment lower future firm value and thus the CEO’s unvested equity holdings, the CEO will

trade off the short-term gain from disinvestment with the potential long-term loss. In contrast, it is

less clear that strategically timing news has a substantial effect on long-run firm value; instead, its

main effects are likely to be on other stakeholders or on the distribution of wealth between trading

shareholders. In addition, news timing arguably involves less effort than changing investment plans,

and so it may be that vesting equity of any amount induces the CEO to increase disclosures. We

thus use both V estingM onth and Log(1+V estingSensitivity) as independent variables in different

specifications. Our discussion will primarily concern the V estingM onth results since they are easier

to interpret – in particular, we can compare the amount of news disclosed in vesting versus non-

vesting months, and versus the previous and the following month.6

       Our identification strategy is that vesting equity causes the CEO to be concerned about the

current stock price, because he is likely to sell vesting equity for diversification reasons. Some

CEOs hold already-vested equity, which could also lead to stock price concerns if they are free to

sell it. However, any association between vested equity and news releases is difficult to interpret
   6
      Our method of identifying equity vesting also differs from Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen (2014), who study the
actual equity that vests in a given year. By looking at actual vesting ex-post, they do not require the assumption that
graded vesting refers to straight-line vesting. However, their measure is only available on an annual basis, consistent
with their analysis of investment, which is also available on an annual basis. We study the number of news releases
in a given month, which requires us to estimate the number of shares and options that vest in a given month. Thus,
we follow Gopalan, Milbourn, Song, and Thakor (2014) by studying predicted vesting ex-ante.


                                                          10
because the CEO’s decision to hold onto vested equity is endogenous – for example, it could

be driven by the anticipation of future positive news releases. In addition, the CEO may face

explicit or implicit constraints on selling his vested equity. These same constraints also support our

identifying assumption that CEOs increase equity sales in vesting months, because vesting relaxes

these constraints. One constraint may result from ownership guidelines set by the board. These

guidelines are typically satisfied only by vested equity (Core and Larcker (2002)), and so vesting

allows the CEO to sell equity without violating the guidelines. Second, the CEO may hold vested

equity voluntarily for control reasons. Since unvested equity does not provide voting rights, vesting

allows additional sales without falling below his desired level of voting rights. Similarly, the CEO

may hold a threshold level of vested equity to signal confidence in the firm. Consistent with these

points, we show in Section 3 that CEOs sell significantly more equity in vesting months, even after

controlling for already-vested equity. Note that our identification does not require the CEO to sell

his entire equity upon vesting, only that vesting months are a significant determinant of equity

sales.

    Our main analysis links equity vesting to news releases. We obtain data on news releases

from Capital IQ’s Key Developments database, which starts in 2002. This database consists of

information from over 20,000 public news sources, company press releases, regulatory filings, call

transcripts, investor presentations, stock exchanges, regulatory websites, and company websites.

The database has several attractive features compared to other standard news data sources, such as

Factiva, LexisNexis, and Dow Jones Newswires. First, it pre-filters the data to eliminate duplicates

and extraneous information. This results in a much cleaner dataset which consolidates all the

different sources of a particular news item in a single record. Second, it classifies news releases into

different items, allowing us to stratify them into two main categories. The first is discretionary

news, the timing of which is likely to be under the CEO’s control, such as conferences, client and

product announcements, and special dividends. Non-discretionary news is likely outside the CEO’s

control, such as earnings announcements or AGMs. Appendix B provides the full classification, as

well as the frequency of the different news items, and Appendix C shows examples of Capital IQ

news items for Wal-Mart in the first quarter of 2012. Third, Capital IQ allows us to filter the news


                                                  11
by source. We exclude news released by the media, and retain only news items generated from

within the firm: those whose sources are company websites, newswires that disseminate corporate

press releases (e.g. Business Wire, PR Newswire, Market Wire, and GlobeNewsWire), SEC filings,

and the Capital IQ transactions database (e.g. M&A announcements, debt issuances, and share

buybacks). Some of the other data providers (e.g. Factiva) forbid automated downloads, thus

restricting their use in academic research. While researchers have frequently used the Capital IQ

database for transactions, we are one of the first to use its Key Developments database of news

items.7

      We relate N ewsEvents, the number of news events, to either V estingM onth or Log(1+V estingSensitivity).

We control for several other determinants of news releases, described in more detail in Appendix A.

AGM and Board are dummy variables for whether there is an AGM or board meeting that month,

which Dimitrov and Jain (2011) show are positively associated with news releases. EAY early and

EAQuarterly are dummy variables for whether that month featured a yearly or quarterly earnings

announcement. EarningsSurprise is that quarter’s earnings surprise, taken from the Institutional

Broker Estimates Services (“I/B/E/S”) database. Analyst is the log of one plus the number of

analysts following the stock (from I/B/E/S). Balakrishnan, Billings, Kelly, and Ljungqvist (2014)

show that firms release more news to compensate for a loss in analyst coverage. After filtering for

the availability of these controls, we have 166,041 news releases.

      We also control for V estedSensitivity and U nvestedSensitivity, the sensitivity of the CEO’s

already-vested and unvested equity, which are calculated analogously to V estingSensitivity. We

also use the logs of one plus those variables due to strong skewness. Due to the aforementioned

potential constraints on the sale of vested equity, we do not have clear predictions for the sign of

its coefficient. Since the strategic reallocation of news releases may not have a significant long-term

effect on firm value, the association with unvested equity is also unclear.

      To gauge whether the news releases are positive or negative, we use data on the tone of sub-

sequent media coverage from the Thomson Reuters News Analytics (“News Analytics”) database.
  7
    We are aware of only two working papers that use the Key Developments database: Nichols (2009) and Cohn,
Gurun, and Moussawi (2014)




                                                    12
This database contains firm-specific news articles from 41 media outlets that Thomson Reuters

transmits to its clients. It uses linguistic parsing to measure the proportion of words in a media

article that are positive, neutral, or negative.8

      A separate analysis links equity vesting to equity sales, to show that vesting equity indeed

induces short-term stock price concerns. (For brevity, we will use the term “equity sales” to refer

to both standard sales of stock, and sales of shares acquired after option exercises.) We obtain

data from the Thomson Financial Insider Trading database, which is collected from SEC Form

4. SalesM onth is an indicator that equals one if the CEO sells any equity in a given month,

and SalesAll is an indicator that equals one if, by that month, the CEO has sold all the equity

that vested in the most recent vesting month. We control for Log(1+V estedSensitivity) and

Log(1+U nvestedSensitivity), because a CEO with significant unvested equity may have greater

diversification needs and thus sell equity more readily upon vesting. We also control for AGM ,

Board, EAY early, EAQuarterly, and EarningsSurprise, because these events may lead to news

releases that temporarily boost the stock price and encourage equity sales.

      Our remaining tests investigate the stock price and trading volume reaction to news releases,

which we study using a standard event-study methodology, and we also study the interval between

news releases and equity sales.

      Table 1 presents the summary statistics for our main variables. Panel A shows that vesting

periods average 3.4 years for stock and 3.6 years for options, with a maximum of 7 and 6.3 years,

respectively. Thus, vesting equity is determined by equity grants awarded to the CEO several

years prior, and can plausibly be considered exogenous to the current information environment. In

months with corporate news events in Capital IQ, a typical firm has an average of 4 news releases,

of which 3 are discretionary. Including the months with no news, the averages are 1.8 and 1.5. The

average (median) media article comprises 36% (23%) positive words, 38% (32%) negative words,

and 26% (16%) neutral words.
  8
      The News Analytics database covers 1996-2011; we only use the data starting from 2003, due to potential
survivorship bias prior to 2003 (see Scherbina and Schlusche (2013)).




                                                     13
    In Panel B, we provide summary statistics on equity vesting and equity sales by CEOs. CEOs

sell on average $5.4 million of equity per year, there are 3 vesting months on average per year, and

CEOs trade in 4 out of 12 months on average.

    Appendix D reports the correlations between some of the main variables used in this study.

Appendix E shows the distribution of events across the months in a calendar year. The first quarter

contains nearly 40% of vesting months and more than 70% of yearly earnings announcements. It

will therefore be important to control for month fixed effects in our analyses.



3     Equity Vesting Months and CEO Sales

This section studies whether CEOs indeed sell equity soon after it vests. In Table 2, we compute

the average distance between the month in which a CEO’s equity vests and the month in which we

first observe a subsequent equity sale.9

    Panel A shows that in more than 50% of cases, the CEO sells stock in the vesting month. The

frequency of first equity sales in any subsequent month is less than 10%. The pattern is similar for

the exercise of options, but with lower magnitudes for the vesting month. In Panel B, we report

the time it takes for a CEO to sell all the equity that vests in a vesting month. In 17% of cases, the

CEO sells all the equity within the vesting month. The differences between the vesting month and

future months, although significant, are smaller in Panel B because it measures the likelihood of

selling equity by a particular month. Thus, mechanically, the further out the month, the more time

the CEO has to sell all of his vesting equity. However, the frequency of all sales in any subsequent

month remains below 10%.

    The CEO pays a lower, long-term, capital gains tax rate if he waits 12 months after stock

vesting or option exercise before selling his shares (e.g. Cicero (2009) and Fos and Jiang (2014)).

However, in Table 2, equity sales in month 12 are only 2% higher than in month 11, and much
    9
       The following example illustrates how we treat the case of multiple vesting months before a sale. Assume that
equity vests in March and June, and that the first observed sale is in July. We consider this observation as both a
first sale 4 months after the March vesting month, and a first sale 1 month after the June vesting month.




                                                        14
smaller than the frequency of sales in the vesting month. Since most vesting-related trades happen

in the vesting month, we use this month for identification.

    In Table 3, we conduct a multivariate regression on the determinants of CEO sales:



                 Saless,t = α + β ∗ V estingM onths,t + ρ ∗ M onthBef ores,t +                    (1)

                          + ν ∗ M onthAf ters,t + γ ∗ Controls + Fixed Effects + s,t ,



where s indexes a firm and t indexes a month. We use year, month, and firm fixed effects to control

for unobservable firm-level or time-specific determinants of equity sales. The dependent variable

Sales is SalesM onth in Panel A and SalesAll in Panel B. Our key independent variable of interest

is V estingM onth. We also include indicators for one month before (M onthBef ore) and one month

after (M onthAf ter) the vesting month. The remaining controls are as described in Section 2.

    The results in Table 3 are consistent with those in Table 2. In column (1), we report that CEOs

are 23% more likely to sell shares in a month in which stock vests than in a month in which no

stock vests; this figure is 14% for options (column (2)). Moreover, CEOs are 15% more likely to

sell the full amount of vesting stock in the vesting month than by any subsequent month (column

(3)); this figure is 8% for options (column (4)). The control variables load with the expected sign.

CEOs are more likely to sell equity in months where earnings are announced or there is an AGM,

the greater the earnings surprise, and the greater his unvested equity.

    Overall, the results in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that managers sell equity shortly after vesting,

and so vesting equity induces the CEO to be concerned with short-term stock prices. Since the

results are similar between stock and options, we will consider aggregate vesting of all equity in the

bulk of the paper.



4    News Releases in Equity Vesting Months

This section studies the relation between equity vesting months and the quantity and positivity of

news releases.




                                                  15
4.1      Quantity of News Releases

Table 4 reports the core result of this paper, that vesting equity is significantly related to news

releases. We run the following model for the number of news events, under the assumption of a

Poisson error structure:



              N ewsEventss,t = α + β ∗ V estingM easures,t + ρ ∗ M onthBef ores,t +                                 (2)

                                  + ν ∗ M onthAf ters,t + γ ∗ Controls + Fixed Effects + s,t



       This model accounts for the discreteness and skewness of our data by using an explicit stochas-

tic specification for the news variable. In particular, we assume that our dependent variable

(N ewsEvents) follows a Poisson distribution.

       In Panel A, our independent variable of interest (V estingM easure) is the V estingM onth

dummy. We add indicators for the one month before and after (MonthBefore and MonthAfter,

respectively). All specifications include year, month, and firm fixed effects.10 Column (1) in-

cludes the non-compensation controls: indicators for other newsworthy months AGM , Board,

EAY early, and EAQuarterly), as well as EarningsSurprise and Analyst. It shows that firms

release 2% more discretionary news in vesting months.11 Column (3) adds the compensation con-

trols of Log(1+V estedSensitivity) and Log(1+U nvestedSensitivity) and the figure rises to 5%.12

In contrast, columns (2) and (4) show that the amount of non-discretionary news is no different

between vesting and non-vesting months, consistent with the CEO having less latitude to control

non-discretionary news.

       There is also a significant reduction in discretionary news both one month before and one

month after the vesting month, suggesting that the CEO may be strategically delaying news until

the vesting month and accelerating it into the vesting month. Firms release 5% more discretionary
  10
      The results are unchanged when using CEO instead of firm fixed effects. They are also unchanged when using
fiscal year instead of calendar year effects.
  11
      To obtain this figure, we divide the coefficient of 0.0355 by the average number of discretionary news releases
of 1.48 per month, which is reported in Table 1, Panel A.
   12
      We present specification (1) without the compensation controls since the sensitivity of vested equity mechanically
falls in vesting months, potentially leading to multicollinearity. However, Appendix D shows that the correlation
between V estingM onth and Log(1+V estedSensitivity) is small in practice.



                                                          16
news in the vesting month compared to the prior month, both with the non-compensation controls

(column (1) and all controls (column (3)).

   Panel B uses Log(1+V estingSensitivity) as the main independent variable. The sensitivity

of vesting equity is significantly positively related to discretionary news releases, but unrelated to

non-discretionary news releases.

   The above analysis quantifies the increase in news releases in vesting months versus non-vesting

months. A broader question is the extent to which news releases are higher in months in which

the CEO sells equity in general. Equity sales can stem from channels other than vesting equity

– for example, a CEO may voluntarily hold already-vested equity as a long-term investment, but

later decides to rebalance his portfolio. Since actual equity sales are endogenous, we use vesting

months as an instrument. The two properties of vesting months discussed earlier – their high

correlation with sale months and their determination by equity grants awarded several years prior

– are analogous to the relevance criterion and the exclusion restriction for a valid instrument.

   In Table 5, we report the results of an instrumental variables Poisson regression estimated via

Generalized Method of Moments, in which we instrument the endogenous regressor SalesM onth

using V estingM onth. The control variables are as in Table 4, except that we remove M onthBef ore

and M onthAf ter, as well as firm fixed effects. We test how the probability of selling in a given

         \onth affects N ewsEvents. We find significant coefficients on SalesM
month SalesM                                                               \onth for dis-

cretionary news but not non-discretionary news. Thus, in months in which CEOs are predicted to

sell equity, they release more discretionary but not non-discretionary news.


4.2   Positivity of News Releases

While Section 4.1 studies the quantity of news items released, this section studies their positivity.

Our hypothesis is that, in vesting months, the CEO should release not only a greater number of

news items, but also more positive news. We measure the positivity of news releases using the tone

of media coverage immediately after the disclosure, since more positive news should lead the media

to write more favorable articles about the company.




                                                 17
   In Table 6, we conduct an “event-study”-type analysis of the effect of news releases on the tone

of subsequent media coverage. Our dependent variable is the abnormal tone of a media article,

measured by the percentage of positive, neutral, or negative words as reported in News Analytics in

the 2-day ([0,1]), 16-day ([0,15]), and 31-day ([0,30]) period afterwards, minus the average positive,

neutral, or negative tone score for media articles over [-300,-46]. The univariate analysis in Panel A

shows that discretionary disclosures in vesting months lead to media coverage with more positive

(columns (1)-(3)) words and fewer neutral (columns (4)-(6)) words across all windows, consistent

with the news releases themselves being positive. Columns (7)-(9) show no systematic change in

the proportion of negative words, but columns (10)-(12) show that the “net positivity” of media

coverage (proportion of positive words minus proportion of negative words) is significantly greater

in all windows. There is no systematic pattern for non-discretionary news releases in the vesting

month. For example, the net positivity measure is significantly negative for [0,1] but significantly

positive for [0,30]. Similarly, there is no systematic pattern for non-vesting months. For both

discretionary and non-discretionary news, the net positivity measure is significantly negative for

[0,1] but significantly positive for [0,15].

   Panel B controls for other newsworthy events on the day of the news release: days of earnings

announcements (EADay), AGM meetings (AGM Day), and board meetings (BoardDay). The

results are similar to Panel A. We also test for the difference in media tone between vesting and

non-vesting months after controlling for these events. Discretionary news releases lead to the

proportion of positive words in a [0,1] window being 1.3 percentage points higher in vesting than

non-vesting months, significant at the 1% level. The difference is also significant at the 1% level

for the [0,15] and [0,30] windows, and for the net positivity measure over all three windows. In

contrast, the difference for non-discretionary news releases is insignificant across all three windows,

for both the positivity and net positivity measures. These results suggest that managers release

significantly more positive discretionary news in vesting months than non-vesting months, but the

positivity of non-discretionary news is no different.

   Figure 1 graphically illustrates the results of Table 6. It depicts the difference in tone of media

coverage over a [0,30] day window after discretionary news releases in vesting months versus non-


                                                  18
vesting months. The frequency of positive words is significantly larger after discretionary news

released in vesting months compared to non-vesting months. It is negatively correlated with the

frequency of neutral words, suggesting that the media is substituting away from neutral into positive

words, consistent with Table 6.



5     Returns and Volume in Equity Vesting Months

We have shown that CEOs release more news in vesting months, and that such news is more likely

to be positive. Our hypothesis is that they do so to increase the stock price and trading volume, by

reducing information asymmetry and attracting investor attention. In Table 7, we study whether

news releases indeed have these effects. In Panel A, we calculate the average 2-day ([0,1]), 16-day

([0,15]), and 31-day ([0,30]) cumulative abnormal return (CAR) and daily abnormal trading volume

around the release of discretionary news. We use these different windows to test whether any price

and volume increases are temporary, as predicted by an attention story. The CAR is calculated

over the CRSP value-weighted index, using a beta estimated over [-300,-46]. The daily abnormal

trading volume is the daily trading volume minus the average trading volume over [-70,-31], divided

by the number of shares outstanding, and excludes the CEO’s own trades.

    The univariate analysis of Panel A shows that a discretionary news release in a vesting month

is associated with a 16-day CAR of 28 bps (t = 4.54); the 2-day CAR is similar. The positive stock

price reaction to discretionary news releases in vesting months is consistent with these releases being

more positive, as documented in Table 6. However, it could also arise from the news attracting

attention to the stock – thus, Section 4 uses the tone of media articles, rather than the stock price

reaction, as our measure of the positivity of news releases. As a back-of-the-envelope calculation

of the dollar gain to the CEO, Table 1, Panel B reports that the average annual value of CEO

equity vesting is $5.18 million.13 Therefore, a 28 bp CAR implies an average gain of $14,504.

While this gain appears modest, it is in line with gains reported in cases of illegal insider trading.
  13
      This figure represents the CEO’s gain if he discloses one additional news item in each vesting month, and sells
the vesting equity 16 days after the disclosure. Instead of using the CEO’s average annual vesting equity, we could
use his average annual equity sales of $5.44 million. This would imply slightly higher gains for the CEO.




                                                         19
For example, Meulbroek (1992) reports a median gain per security of $17,628.14 This figure is for

1980-9 (i.e. with a midpoint of 1985) whereas our numbers are for 2002-11 (i.e. with a midpoint of

2007). Adjusting for inflation, the Meulbroek (1992) number becomes $33,968 in 2007 terms. Since

insider trading is illegal and thus highly risky, it is logical that the benefit should be higher than

for strategic news timing. Moreover, the gain to strategic news timing is even higher if the CEO

discloses several news items. In addition to entailing no legal cost, it arguably involves less effort

than other attempts to inflate the stock price (such as changing investment projects). The estimated

gains to the CEO are economically meaningful but also plausible. In particular, while significant

for the CEO (especially because they come at little cost), they are not substantial compared to

firm value, and so it is unlikely that boards would intervene to prevent such strategic timing. The

main effect is on stakeholders who base their decisions on the stock price, or on the distribution of

wealth between trading shareholders.

       Panel A also reports the price reactions to disclosures in non-vesting months. The 2-day CAR

for discretionary news in non-vesting months is smaller than for vesting months, at 17 bps compared

to 25 bps, while the 16- and 31-day CARs are higher. These results suggest that the CEO may

be releasing particularly attention-grabbing news in vesting months, which has a short-lived price

impact. Panel B shows that, after controlling for EADay, AGM Day, and BoardDay, the 2-day

(25 bps) and 16-day (28 bps) CARs to discretionary news releases are significant at the 1% level,

and the 31-day (15 bps) CAR is significant at the 10% level. The 2-day reaction to discretionary

news is 8 bps higher for vesting months than non-vesting months, significant at the 5% level. In

contrast, the difference in reactions for non-discretionary news is insignificant, consistent with the

CEO having less latitude to affect non-discretionary news.

       In addition to increasing the stock price, news releases can also benefit the CEO by increasing

the trading volume, thus reducing the price impact of his equity sales. The right-hand side of Table

7, Panel A, reports that, in a vesting month, the release of discretionary news generates significant

average daily abnormal trading volume of 0.32% (t = 31.53) of shares outstanding over 2 days,
  14
      This figure includes not only CEOs but all defendants formally charged with insider trading. As an example
of a high-profile case, Martha Stewart avoided losses of $45,673 when she sold shares of ImClone Systems in 2001,
leading to a insider trading trial and indictment.



                                                       20
and 0.03% (t = 7.47) over 16 days.15 The average abnormal trading volume is insignificant over

31 days, consistent with news releases creating a short-lived attention boost, consistent with the

CAR being lower over [0,30] than [0,15]. The above figures compare to an average daily trading

volume of 0.22%, and the CEO’s average equity sale (on a sale day) of 0.165% of shares outstanding.

Thus, the 2-day abnormal trading volume is nearly double the average CEO equity sale, and so

can provide adequate camouflage. Note that this high ratio is not because CEO sale volumes are

small: the average CEO equity sale is 6.2% of the average daily trading volume.

       Panel B adds controls for other events and finds a similar pattern. The abnormal trading volume

associated with discretionary news is significantly higher for vesting than non-vesting months using

a 2- or 16-day window (0.05% and 0.01% with p-values of 0.00 and 0.03, respectively), suggesting

that news in vesting months attract more attention. The difference is insignificant for the 31-

day window (0.01% with a p-value of 0.29). For non-discretionary news, the difference in abnormal

trading volume between vesting and non-vesting months is insignificant across all windows (p-values

ranging from 0.55 to 0.86). The abnormal trading volume for non-discretionary news is higher than

for discretionary news, likely because the former category includes earnings announcements.

       Since the stock price and volume increases are temporary, we study whether CEOs indeed take

advantage of these short-term effects by selling their equity shortly after news releases in vesting

months. Figure 2 illustrates the number of trading days between a discretionary news release and

the first subsequent CEO equity sale. We focus on discretionary news releases that are within 30

days of the most recent vesting date, as these releases are most likely to be prompted by vesting

(and thus the intention to sell) rather than other reasons. Half of the first equity sales occur within

5 days after the release of discretionary news in vesting months, compared to more than 45 days

for non-discretionary news.16 In Figure 3, we show that it takes the median CEO only 7 days to

sell all of his newly-vested equity after the release of a discretionary news item that is within 30

days of the most recent vesting date.
  15
     The figures in Table 7 exclude the CEO trades from the calculation of abnormal trading volume. Including
them has very little effect on the results.
  16
        We also consider only the release of non-discretionary news that is within 30 days of the most recent vesting
date.




                                                          21
    Overall, our results indicate that the timing of corporate news may be influenced by CEOs

seeking to attract investor attention, reduce information asymmetry, or release more positive news.

The greater price reaction to discretionary news releases in vesting versus non-vesting months

suggests that the market does not take into account the CEO’s greater incentives to release news in

vesting months. Thus, news releases do affect stock prices, and so potentially have redistributional

consequences and affect real decisions. One potential explanation for why the market does not take

into account the CEO’s short-term concerns is that data on equity vesting is not salient and must be

hand-collected from footnotes and Form 4 filings. Lilienfeld-Toal and Ruenzi (2014) find long-run

abnormal returns to portfolios formed on standard measures of CEO incentives (wealth-performance

sensitivity). That even standard elements of the CEO’s contract are not fully incorporated by the

market is consistent with the market not taking into account the CEO’s equity vesting schedule, the

calculation of which requires hand collection from footnotes. Similarly, Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen

(2014) find that CEOs with significant vesting equity enjoy superior earnings announcement returns.

In addition, while a rational market may discount the information content of positive news releases

issued by a manager with vesting equity, the positive returns to disclosures may stem from them

attracting attention (rather than their information content), which is less likely to be discounted.

Indeed, we also find a greater volume reaction to discretionary news released in vesting versus

non-vesting months, consistent with an attention story.



6    Robustness Tests

This section examines the robustness of our main findings in Table 4 to alternative samples and

measurement choices. In Table 8, we report estimates obtained from using the same specification

as column (3) of Table 4 (the effect of vesting equity on the number of discretionary news releases,

including all controls), unless otherwise noted. To save space, we report only the coefficients

on the independent variables of interest. Panel A studies V estingM onth, M onthBef ore, and

M onthAf ter, and Panel B investigates Log(1+V estingSensitivity).




                                                22
      In column (1) of Panel A, we restrict our sample to firms that were part of the S&P 500 at

some point during the period between 1994 and 2011. This restriction excludes small firms in the

Russell 3000 covered by Equilar. The positive and significant coefficient on V estingM onth, and the

negative and significant coefficients on M onthBef ore and M onthAf ter, suggest that our results

in Table 4 are not driven by small firms that could be illiquid or release little news.

      In column (2), we restrict our sample to firms covered in the Equilar database, which covers

Russell 3000 firms from 2006 to 2011 and has been used by prior literature, such as Gopalan,

Milbourn, Song, and Thakor (2014) and Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen (2014). This excludes our

hand-collected data of S&P 500 firms for the period between 1994 and 2005. Our results remain

significant, which suggests that they are not due to any particular feature or systematic bias of our

hand-collected data.

      Aboody and Kasznik (2000) and Daines, McQueen, and Schonlau (2014) argue that CEOs

release more negative news before the award date of an option grant, and more positive news after

the award date. In column (3), we control for GrantM onth, a dummy variable for the award date

of (actual) option grants. The coefficient on V estingM onth remains positive and significant and

the coefficients on both adjacent months remain negative and significant.17

      In column (4), we run a placebo test in the spirit of Daines, McQueen, and Schonlau (2014).

In particular, we create a pseudo-vesting month that is exactly 6 months after the actual vesting

month. The coefficient is insignificant, suggesting that the result is not driven by other spurious

events with a cyclical pattern.

      Bettis, Bizjak, Coles, and Kalpathy (2010) find that performance-based vesting provisions have

become increasingly common in equity grants. Such grants will not vest on their scheduled vesting

date if certain performance thresholds have not been met, and so may provide weaker incentives

to release news. Column (5) excludes from our sample all equity grants with performance-based

vesting provisions; this information is available in Equilar and the footnotes of Form 4 filings and

proxy statements. Our results are unchanged.
 17
       Appendix D shows the distribution of vesting and award months across the calendar year.




                                                       23
    The award of restricted stock to CEOs has become more common than options recently (Fryd-

man and Jenter (2010)), in part due to the option backdating scandal. In columns (6) and (7) we

limit our sample to stock and options, respectively. For both stock and options, V estingM onth

remains positive and significant; thus, our results are not driven by a component of compensa-

tion (options) that is becoming less common nowadays. The coefficients on M onthBef ore and

M onthAf ter remain negative in both columns, although they are now insignificant, likely because

each specification only uses partial information on the CEO’s equity.

    In column (8) we define a vesting month as a month in which either stock and/or in-the-money

options vest. The rationale is that out-of-the-money options are unlikely to be exercised upon

vesting, and thus provide the CEO with incentives to increase the stock price. The coefficient on

V estingM onth remains positive and significant, and the coefficient on M onthBef ore is negative

and significant.

    In Panel B of Table 8, our main independent variable is (Log(1+VestingSensitivity)). The model

specifications presented in Panel B are similar to those in Panel A, except that in column (3) we

control for Log(1+GrantSensitivity) (the log of one plus the sensitivity of new equity grants)

instead of GrantM onth. In column (4), we replace option deltas with intrinsic values and calculate

VestingSensitivityAdjusted, which assigns a value of 0 for out-of-the-money options and a value of

1 for in-the-money options. Again, the rationale is that only in-the-money options are likely to be

exercised immediately upon vesting. The results remain significant.



7    Conclusion

This paper shows that managers strategically time the disclosure of discretionary corporate news to

coincide with the scheduled vesting of their equity grants. Discretionary disclosures are significantly

higher in months in which equity is scheduled to vest, and significantly lower in the months before

and after vesting. They are associated with favorable media coverage, suggesting that they are

positive in tone. The news releases lead to temporary increases in the stock price and trading




                                                  24
volume, consistent with an attention story. CEOs exploit these temporary effects: the median

CEO sells all his vesting equity within 7 days of a discretionary news release in a vesting month.

   Our results have two main implications. First, we show that a CEO’s contract affects firm

behavior; moreover it affects not just corporate decisions (as typically studied by the myopia liter-

ature) but also the firm’s information environment. This result links corporate finance to financial

markets. Second, we provide evidence that CEOs strategically time the release of news, using a

measure of CEO incentives that is likely exogenous to the current information environment. In-

formation does not just flow mechanically to financial markets when events occur, but instead the

timing of news releases can be strategically chosen by the CEO. These news releases in turn af-

fect stock prices, and thus may have distributional consequences on shareholders who trade, and

efficiency consequences on stakeholders who base their decisions on corporate news or stock prices.




                                                 25
References

Aboody, D., and R. Kasznik, 2000, “CEO Stock Option Awards and the Timing of Corporate
  Voluntary Disclosures,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 29, 73–100.

Ahern, K., and D. Sosyura, 2014, “Who Writes the News? Corporate Press Releases During Merger
  Negotiations,” Journal of Finance, 69, 241–291.

Balakrishnan, K., M. Billings, B. Kelly, and A. Ljungqvist, 2014, “Shaping Liquidity: On the
  Causal Effects of Voluntary Disclosure,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2008, “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
  Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Review of Financial Studies, 21,
  785–818.

Bebchuk, L., and J. Fried, 2004, Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
  Compensation. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bettis, C., J. Bizjak, J. Coles, and S. Kalpathy, 2010, “Stock and Option Grants with Performance-
  Based Vesting Provisions,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 3849–3888.

Bhattacharya, U., and M. Spiegel, 1991, “Insiders, Outsiders, and Market Breakdowns,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 4, 255–282.

Bond, P., A. Edmans, and I. Goldstein, 2012, “The Real Effects of Financial Markets,” Annual
  Review of Financial Economics, 4, 339–360.

Brockman, P., I. Khurana, and X. Martin, 2008, “Voluntary Disclosure around Share Repurchases,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 89, 175–191.

Cheng, S., and L. Lo, 2006, “Insider Trading and Voluntary Disclosures,” Journal of Accounting
  Research, 44, 815–848.

Cicero, D., 2009, “The Manipulation of Executive Stock Option Exercise Strategies: Information
  Timing and Backdating,” Journal of Finance, 64, 2627–2663.

Cohn, J. B., U. G. Gurun, and R. Moussawi, 2014, “Micro-Level Value Creation Under CEO
  Short-Termism,” Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.

Core, J., and D. Larcker, 2002, “Performance Consequences of Mandatory Increases in Executive
  Stock Ownership,” Journal of Financial Economics, 64, 317–340.




                                               26
Da, Z., J. Engelberg, and P. Gao, 2011, “In Search of Attention,” Journal of Finance, 66, 1461–
  1499.

Daines, R. M., G. R. McQueen, and R. J. Schonlau, 2014, “Right On Schedule: CEO Options
  Grants and Opportunism,” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia, 1991, “Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of
  Finance, 46, 1325–1359.

Dimitrov, V., and P. C. Jain, 2011, “It’s Showtime: Do Managers Report Better News Before
  Annual Shareholder Meetings?,” Journal of Accounting Research, 49, 1193–1221.

Edmans, A., V. Fang, and K. Lewellen, 2014, “Equity Vesting and Managerial Myopia,” Working
  Paper, London Business School.

Faure-Grimaud, A., and D. Gromb, 2004, “Public Trading and Private Incentives,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 17, 985–1014.

Fos, V., and W. Jiang, 2014, “Out-Of-The-Money CEOs: Inferring Private Control Premium from
  CEO Option Exercise,” Working Paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Frydman, C., and D. Jenter, 2010, “CEO Compensation,” Annual Review of Financial Economics,
  2, 75–102.

Gopalan, R., T. Milbourn, F. Song, and A. Thakor, 2014, “Duration of Executive Compensation,”
  Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Hall, B., and J. Liebman, 1998, “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 113, 653–691.

Hall, B., and K. Murphy, 2002, “Stock Options for Undiversified Executives,” Journal of Accounting
  and Economics, 33, 3–42.

Kahl, M., J. Liu, and F. Longstaff, 2003, “Paper Millionaires: How Valuable Is Stock to a Stock-
  holder Who Is Restricted from Selling It?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 385–410.

Ladika, T., and Z. Sautner, 2013, “Managerial Short-Termism and Investment: Evidence from
  Accelerated Option Vesting,” Working Paper, University of Amsterdam.

Lilienfeld-Toal, U. V., and S. Ruenzi, 2014, “CEO Ownership, Stock Market Performance, and
  Managerial Discretion,” Journal of Finance, 69, 1013–1050.




                                               27
Meulbroek, L., 1992, “An Empirical Analysis of Illegal Insider Trading,” Journal of Finance, 47,
  1661–1699.

Nagar, C., D. Nanda, and P. Wysocki, 2003, “Discretionary Disclosure and Stock-Based Incentives,”
  Journal of Accounting and Economics, 34, 283–309.

Neuhierl, A., A. Scherbina, and B. Schlusche, 2013, “Market Reaction to Corporate Press Releases,”
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48, 1207–1240.

Nichols, D. C., 2009, “Proprietary Costs and Other Determinants of Nonfinancial Disclosures,”
  Working Paper, Cornell University.

Noe, C., 1999, “Voluntary Disclosures and Insider Transactions,” Journal of Accounting and Eco-
  nomics, 27, 305–326.

Penman, S., 1982, “Insider Trading and the Dissemination of Firms’ Forecast Information,” Journal
  of Business, 55, 479–503.

Scherbina, A., and B. Schlusche, 2013, “Economic Linkages Inferred from News Stories and the
  Predictability of Stock Returns,” Working Paper, University of California Davis.

Smukler, R., 2009, “Executive Compensation: Further Investigation Into Option Award Vesting
  Dates,” Unpublished Manuscript, New York University.

Yermack, D., 1997, “Good Timing: CEO Stock Option Awards and Company News Announce-
  ments,” Journal of Finance, 52, 449–476.

       , 2014, “Tailspotting: Identifying and Profiting from CEO Vacation Trips,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 113, 252–269.




                                               28
                                                                 Table 1: Sample Statistics
This table reports the summary statistics for the main variables used in this study. The data on vesting schedules is hand-collected from proxy state-
ments (options) and Insider Trading filings (restricted stock) for S&P 500 firms for 1994-2005. For 2006-2011, vesting schedules are extracted from the
Equilar database, which covers Russell 3000 firms.     The data on insiders’ transactions is extracted from Thomson Reuters Insider Trading filings (SEC
Form 4), and the data on firm and stock characteristics comes from Compustat and CRSP, respectively.          Data on corporate news events is from the
Capital IQ database, which covers 2002-2011.     Data on the tone of media coverage is from Thomson Reuters News Analytics, which covers 2003-2011.

   PANEL A: Equity Granted, CEO Incentives, News Events, and Stock/Firm Characteristics
                                                         Obs     Mean     Median    STD     Skewness   Kurtosis   1st Pctile   25th Pctile   75th Pctile   99th Pctile


   Stock Grants:
   Vesting Period                                       10,877    3.42     3.00     1.22      1.44      13.59       1.00          3.00          4.00          7.00
   Value Granted (millions)                             10,877    1.06     0.70     0.95      0.00      0.00        0.01          0.26          1.74          2.73
   % Cliff                                              10,877    0.37     0.00     0.48      0.54      1.29        0.00          0.00          1.00          1.00

   Option Grants:
   Vesting Period                                       14,947    3.61     4.00     1.13      0.59       7.64       1.00          3.00          4.00          6.33
   Value Granted (millions)                             14,947    0.45     0.23     0.51      0.00       0.00       0.00          0.07          0.67          1.52
   % Cliff                                              14,947    0.15     0.00     0.36      1.93       4.73       0.00          0.00          0.00          1.00

   CEO Incentives:
   V estedSensitivity (dollar units)                    65,400   13,594    3,982   39,730    15.39     380.97         0            2           13,095       139,444
   V estingSensitivity (dollar units)                   35,100   16,000    3,328   48,000      9        173           0           750          12,000       230,000
   U nvestedSensitivity (dollar units)                 114,000   26,000    8,075   51,000      5         42           1          1,778         27,000       260,000

   Corporate News Events (Excluding No-News Months):
   All News                                             51,100    4.02       3      3.52     8.65      192.05         1            2             5             14
   Discretionary News                                   48,100    3.53       3      3.40     10.15     235.01         1            2             4             13

   Corporate News Events (Including No-News Months):
   All News                                            115,000    1.79       0      3.09      7.05     163.89         0            0             3             11
   Discretionary News                                  115,000    1.48       0      2.81      8.98     235.97         0            0             2             10

   Stock Characteristics:
   Return                                              100,287   0.011     0.006    0.164     7.61     485.97      -0.374        -0.064        0.075         0.488
   Trading Volume                                      99,407    0.217     0.160    0.224     7.62     189.19      0.012         0.092         0.269         1.034

   Firm Characteristics:
   Market Capitalization (millions)                    114,000   3,700     720     15,000      13        213         19           250          2,200         54,000
   Earnings Surprise                                   100,417    0.22      0       1.22      2.90      17.36       -3.54          0             0             7

   Tone of Media Coverage:
   Positive Score                                      850,932   0.359     0.232    0.275    0.615      1.913       0.046        0.164         0.563         0.856
   Neutral Score                                       850,932   0.381     0.318    0.262    0.673      2.230       0.112        0.137         0.589         0.926
   Negative Score                                      850,932   0.260     0.162    0.267    1.016      2.577       0.007        0.041         0.404         0.819
                                                                       Table 1: Continued


PANEL B: Equity Vesting and CEO Equity Sales
                                                    Obs      Mean      Median       STD       Skewness   Kurtosis    1st Pctile   25th Pctile   75th Pctile   99th Pctile


Monthly Calculations (All Months):

VestingMonth Dummy                                114,623     0.16       0.00       0.37         1.83       4.33       0.00          0.00          0.00           1.00
SalesMonth Dummy                                  114,623     0.09       0.00       0.28        2.92        9.53       0.00          0.00          0.00          1.00
Average Number of Trades                           10,028      5.44      1.00       18.21        9.59      143.48      1.00          1.00          3.00          84.00
Vesting Quantity (Stock and Options) [000’s]      114,623    14.73       0.00      174.35      136.70    23,000.00     0.00          0.00          0.00         266.90
Vesting Quantity (Stock Only) [000’s]             114,623     3.52       0.00       37.66       94.41    14,000.00     0.00          0.00          0.00          81.00
Vesting Quantity (Options Only) [000’s]           114,623     11.20      0.00      168.78      149.61    26,000.00     0.00          0.00          0.00         225.98
Vesting Value (Stock and Options) [000’s]         114,385    291.44      0.00     2,110.12      26.27     1,381.99     0.00          0.00          0.00        6,183.08
Average Quantity Traded [000’s]                   114,623      3.98      0.00       55.57       95.89    14,000.00     0.00          0.00          0.00          85.78
Average Value Traded [000’s]                      114,385    114.79      0.00     1,581.97      99.85    16,000.00     0.00          0.00          0.00        2,581.89

Monthly Calculations (Non-Zero Months Only):

Average Number of Trades                          10,028       5.44       1.00      18.21       9.59      143.48       1.00          1.00          3.00         84.00
Vesting Quantity (Stock and Options) [000’s]      18,682     90.34      35.33      423.90      57.82     4,001.19      0.51         12.50         93.75        750.00
Vesting Quantity (Stock Only) [000’s]             10,362      38.95     16.00      119.61      31.68     1498.19       0.33          6.25         39.33        333.33
Vesting Quantity (Options Only) [000’s]           13,312      96.47     41.25      486.89      53.13     3,219.40      1.00          16.31        100.00       758.33
Vesting Value (Stock and Options) [000’s]         18,641    1,788.34    473.75    4,964.49     11.45      262.44       3.92         146.66       1,474.83     21,000.00
Average Quantity Traded [000’s]                   10,028      45.54      13.13     182.77      30.11     1,373.40      0.16           4.45         40.00       480.00
Average Value Traded [000’s]                      10,025    1,309.73    287.90    5,195.41     31.47     1,584.53      2.42          77.31       1,036.58     15,000.00

Yearly Calculations (Non-Zero Vesting or Non-Zero Trading Only):

Number of Vesting Months                           1,287      3.11        2.00       3.47       3.53      19.41         1.00         1.00          3.00          19.00
Number of Trading Months                            721       4.23       3.00       4.07        2.94      16.43        1.00          2.00          5.00         20.00
Vesting Quantity [000’s]                           1,287     255.94     101.09     518.70       7.41      86.14        1.15         37.99         266.78      2,426.83
Vesting Value [000’s]                              1,286    5,179.85   1,890.67   14,467.40     6.39      58.60        23.14        677.89       5,435.41     49,000.00
Average Quantity Traded [000’s]                     721      166.71      65.62     340.14       6.90      74.26         0.81         20.39        179.00       1,623.78
Average Value Traded [000’s]                        721     5,436.13   1,808.97   9,322.94      4.57      29.76        17.16        454.71       5,333.94     63,000.00
                 Table 2: Time from Vesting to First Sale and to Full Sale
This table reports the distance between the month of equity vesting and the month of the first observed sale
of the CEO (Panel A), as well as the time it takes the CEO to sell all the equity that vested in the most recent
vesting month (Panel B). The data on equity vesting is extracted from Equilar (for Russell 3000 firms for 2006-
2011) and hand-collected from SEC Form 4 and proxy statements (for S&P500 firms for 1994-2005). The data
on CEO trading is extracted from Thomson Financial Insider Trading filings (SEC Form 4). In Panel A we
present the results for stock and options separately. In Panel B, we aggregate equity sales that are the result
of either stock or option vesting. We show the frequency of observations and their respective percentages.

                                          PANEL A: First Sale            PANEL B: Full Sale
                                     Stock              Options           Stock and Options
                 # Months         Freq.     Perc.     Freq.     Perc.    Freq.       Perc.


                     0           3,787       52       3,369      34      1,759         17
                     1            567        8         833        8       669           7
                     2            311        4         555        6       435           4
                     3            267        4         468        5       440           4
                     4            210        3         350        3       303           3
                     5            172        2         319        3       286           3
                     6            176        2         345        3       350           3
                     7            147        2         261        3       266           3
                     8            130        2         236        2       217           2
                     9            140        2         281        3       293           3
                    10            158        2         311        3       331           3
                    11            158        2         275        3       302           3
                    12            248        3         386        4       745           7
                    13             86        1         154        2       291           3
                    14             43        1         114        1       185           2
                    15             41        1         111        1       172           2
                    16             37        1          86        1       124           1
                    17             29        0          69        1       123           1
                    18             28        0          85        1       152           1
                    >18           482         7       1,419      14      2,712         27
                                Table 3: Equity Vesting and CEO Sales
This table reports the results on the relationship between CEO equity sales and equity vesting months.
The dependent variable is SalesM onth in columns (1) and (2), and SalesAll in columns (3) and (4).
The variable V estingM onth is an indicator function that equals one if an equity grant vests in a given
month.    The variables M onthBef ore and M onthAf ter indicate the months before and after the vesting
month. Controls are described in Appendix A. t-statistics are in parentheses, standard errors are clustered
at the firm level, and ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

             Dependent Variable:                 SalesMonth                     SalesAll
                                            Stocks       Options       Stocks              Options
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)                 (4)


             MonthBefore                    0.0062      -0.0006       -0.0092***        -0.0071**
                                            (1.14)        (-0.12)        (-2.85)          (-2.50)
             VestingMonth                 0.2347***     0.1394***      0.1492***       0.0837***
                                           (24.34)        (18.08)        (23.33)         (16.51)
             MonthAfter                     0.0086        -0.0022     0.0177***           0.0044
                                            (1.55)        (-0.47)         (4.70)          (1.43)
             EAYearly                     0.0329***     0.0411***       0.0126**        0.0184***
                                            (4.37)         (5.16)         (2.55)          (3.64)
             EAQuarterly                   -0.0027        -0.0032        -0.0021         -0.0024
                                            (-0.95)       (-1.08)        (-1.23)          (-1.42)
             AGM                          0.0200***     0.0220***       0.0091**        0.0103***
                                            (3.50)         (3.76)         (2.46)          (2.73)
             Board                           0.01           0.01          (0.00)          (0.00)
                                            (0.60)         (0.79)        (-0.39)          (-0.18)
             EarningsSurprise             0.0039***     0.0037***     0.0018***        0.0017***
                                            (4.42)         (4.18)         (3.11)          (2.90)
             Log(1+VestedSensitivity)     0.0045***     0.0044***          0.00             0.00
                                            (3.09)         (3.02)         (0.22)          (0.12)
             Log(1+UnvestedSensitivity)   0.0089***     0.0102***      0.0024***       0.0033***
                                            (7.38)         (8.23)         (5.06)          (6.95)
             Constant                      -0.1517       -0.1740*      -0.0377**       -0.0536***
                                            (-1.48)       (-1.70)        (-2.52)          (-3.72)

             Firm Fixed Effects              Yes           Yes          Yes                 Yes
             Year Fixed Effects              Yes           Yes          Yes                 Yes
             Month Fixed Effects             Yes           Yes          Yes                 Yes
             Observations                   62,901        62,901       62,901              62,901
             R-squared                      0.1947        0.1703       0.1015              0.0738
                     Table 4: Timing of News Events Around the Vesting Month
This table reports the Poisson regression on the relationship between the count of corporate news releases and
vesting months. The dependent variable N ewsEvents is the count of corporate news releases. In Panel A,
our main independent variable (V estingM easure) is an indicator function that equals one if a particular month
is a vesting month (VestingMonth), and zero otherwise. We also include the months surrounding the vesting
month, using the functions M onthBef ore and M onthAf ter indicating the months before and after vesting, re-
spectively. In Panel B, our main independent variable (V estingM easure) is the sensitivity of newly-vesting eq-
uity to changes in the stock price (Log(1+VestingSensitivity)). Controls are described in Appendix A. t-statistics
are in parentheses, and ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

          PANEL A: Vesting Month Dummy as Main Independent Variable
          Dependent Variable:          Discretionary   Non-Discretionary   Discretionary   Non-Discretionary
          NewsEvents                        (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)


          MonthBefore                   -0.0329***        -0.0906***        -0.0326***        -0.0900***
                                          (-4.39)            (-4.97)           (-4.35)           (-4.93)
          VestingMonth                  0.0355***            -0.0100        0.0349***            -0.0100
                                           (4.87)            (-0.70)            (4.77)           (-0.76)
          MonthAfter                     -0.0137*         -0.1153***          -0.0142*        -0.1163***
                                          (-1.89)            (-6.31)           (-1.95)           (-6.36)
          EAYearly                      0.0513***          0.5490***        0.0514***          0.5489***
                                           (4.75)            (25.11)            (4.76)           (25.11)
          EAQuarterly                   0.3015***          1.0286***        0.3018***          1.0289***
                                          (58.58)           (105.23)           (58.61)          (105.25)
          AGM                           0.1118***          1.1844***        0.1118***          1.1843***
                                          (11.49)            (66.75)           (11.48)           (66.74)
          Board                         0.5326***           0.0942**         0.5333***         0.0949**
                                          (26.27)             (1.99)           (26.29)            (2.00)
          EarningsSurprise                0.0034*         0.0348***           0.0031*         0.0344***
                                           (1.83)             (9.95)            (1.66)            (9.83)
          Analyst                       0.0148***            -0.0007        0.0148***            -0.0007
                                          (12.15)            (-0.23)           (12.10)           (-0.23)
          Log(1+VestedSensitivity)                                           0.0073**             0.0028
                                                                                (2.57)            (0.39)
          Log(1+UnvestedSensitivity)                                          0.0014*            0.0027
                                                                                (1.89)            (1.56)

          Firm Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
          Year Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
          Month Fixed Effects              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
          Observations                    57,576            54,168            57,576            54,168
                                    Table 4: Continued

PANEL B: Sensitivity of Newly-Vested Equity as Main Independent Variable
Dependent Variable:          Discretionary   Non-Discretionary   Discretionary   Non-Discretionary
NewsEvents                        (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)


Log(1+VestingSensitivity)     0.0035***           -0.0008         0.0035***           -0.0009
                                (4.34)            (-0.43)           (4.27)            (-0.45)
EAYearly                      0.0502***         0.5241***         0.0503***         0.5242***
                                (4.79)            (24.87)           (4.81)            (24.87)
EAQuarterly                   0.3008***         1.0312***         0.3011***         1.0313***
                               (59.06)           (106.82)          (59.10)           (106.82)
AGM                           0.1164***         1.1852***         0.1163***         1.1852***
                               (12.10)            (67.76)          (12.10)            (67.76)
Board                         0.5382***          0.0941**         0.5387***          0.0943**
                               (27.43)             (2.05)          (27.44)             (2.05)
EarningsSurprise              0.0037**          0.0345***          0.0034*          0.0343***
                                (2.00)            (10.01)           (1.84)             (9.96)
Analyst                       0.0155***           -0.0003         0.0154***           -0.0003
                               (12.88)            (-0.09)          (12.82)            (-0.10)
Log(1+VestedSensitivity)                                          0.0076***            0.0029
                                                                    (2.71)             (0.41)
Log(1+UnvestedSensitivity)                                          0.001              0.0004
                                                                    (1.61)             (0.35)

Firm Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Year Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Month Fixed Effects              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                    59,060            55,521            59,060            55,521
                               Table 5: News Releases and Equity Sales
This table reports the results of an instrumental variables Poisson regression estimated via GMM. We relate corporate
news releases with months in which the CEO sells equity. We instrument the endogenous regressor SalesMonth using
VestingMonth which results in the instrumented variable SalesM \onth. Controls are described in Appendix A. We also
control for year and month fixed effects. We allow for heteroskedasticity of the errors, and we cluster the errors by firm.
t-statistics are in parentheses and ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                           Dependent Variable:               Discretionary   Non-Discretionary
                           NewsEvents                             (1)              (2)


                              \onth
                           SalesM                              0.2751**            -0.1449
                                                                 (2.21)             (-0.71)
                           EAYearly                              0.0012           0.6671***
                                                                 (0.06)            (15.46)
                           EAQuarterly                         0.3517***          0.8471***
                                                                (20.67)            (16.98)
                           AGM                                 0.1655***          1.2411***
                                                                 (9.47)            (43.56)
                           Board                               0.9709***          0.5758***
                                                                (23.90)             (7.67)
                           EarningsSurprise                    0.0229***          0.0345***
                                                                 (2.91)             (4.90)
                           Analyst                             0.0449***           -0.0004
                                                                 (8.45)             (-0.12)
                           Log(1+VestedSensitivity)             0.0328*               0.00
                                                                 (1.69)             (0.17)
                           Log(1+UnvestedSensitivity)           0.0107*              0.00
                                                                 (1.71)             (0.95)
                           Constant                           -0.2144***         -2.8994***
                                                                 (-3.25)           (-28.08)

                           Year Fixed Effects                     Yes               Yes
                           Month Fixed Effects                    Yes               Yes
                           Observations                         103,330           103,330
                                                                              Table 6: Tone of Media Coverage
This table reports the results of an event-study on the effect of corporate news releases on the tone of subsequent media coverage.     We denote by DV and
DNV the discretionary news released in vesting and non-vesting months, respectively.     Similarly, we denote by NDV and NDNV the non-discretionary news
that released in vesting and non-vesting months, respectively.    The dependent variable is the proportion of positive (columns (1)-(3)), neutral (columns (4)-
(6)), negative (columns (7)-(9)), or positive minus negative (columns (10)-(12)) words in a [0,1], [0,15], and [0,30] window in excess of their respective aver-
ages over [-300,-46]. These proportions are calculated from the Thomson Reuters News Analytics database. Below Panel B, we test for the difference in the
tone of media coverage between vesting and non-vesting months, after the release of discretionary (DV-DNV) and non-discretionary (NDV-NDNV) news. Con-
trols are described in Appendix A. t-statistics are in parentheses, and ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

   Panel A: Univariate Analysis

                                                 Positive Score                             Neutral Score                             Negative Score                           Positive-Negative
                                      [0, 1]         [0, 15]       [0, 30]       [0, 1]        [0, 15]        [0, 30]      [0, 1]        [0, 15]         [0, 30]      [0, 1]         [0, 15]        [0, 30]
                                       (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)           (11)           (12)

   Vesting Months:

   Discretionary (DV)               0.0092***      0.0151***      0.0039***    -0.0088***    -0.0172***     -0.0044***    -0.0004       0.0021**        0.0005      0.0096***      0.0131***       0.0034***
                                      (5.91)        (13.18)         (6.35)       (-6.64)       (-18.21)        (-8.42)     (-0.28)        (2.02)         (0.90)        (3.65)        (6.67)          (3.27)
   Non-Discretionary (NDV)           -0.0043       0.0055***      0.0030***     -0.0044*     -0.0106***      -0.0022**   0.0087***      0.0051***       -0.0009     -0.0131***       0.0003         0.0039**
                                      (-1.63)        (2.64)         (2.67)       (-1.93)        (-6.17)        (-2.26)     (3.55)         (2.64)        (-0.84)       (-2.86)        (0.09)          (2.01)
   Non-Vesting Months:

   Discretionary (DNV)              -0.0034***     0.0046***      0.0011***    0.0042***     -0.0077***     -0.0020***    -0.0008       0.0031***       0.0009***    -0.0026**      0.0015*          0.0002
                                      (-4.96)        (9.12)         (3.89)       (6.99)        (-18.01)       (-8.41)      (-1.33)        (6.83)          (3.73)       (-2.30)       (1.78)          (0.37)
   Non-Discretionary (NDNV)         -0.0069***     0.0046***      0.0025***    0.0041***     -0.0056***       -0.0002    0.0029***        0.001        -0.0023***   -0.0098***     0.0036**        0.0048***
                                      (-5.68)        (4.87)         (4.79)       (3.83)         (-7.12)       (-0.40)      (2.58)         (1.18)          (-4.93)      (-4.68)       (2.21)          (5.39)




   Panel B: Multivariate Analysis

                                                 Positive Score                             Neutral Score                             Negative Score                           Positive-Negative
                                      [0, 1]         [0, 15]       [0, 30]       [0, 1]        [0, 15]        [0, 30]      [0, 1]        [0, 15]         [0, 30]      [0, 1]         [0, 15]        [0, 30]
                                       (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)           (11)           (12)


   DV                                0.0092***     0.0152***      0.0040***    -0.0088***    -0.0172***     -0.0044***     -0.0003        0.0020**        0.0005    0.0095***      0.0131***       0.0035***
                                       (5.92)        (13.20)         (6.32)       (-6.59)      (-17.91)       (-8.31)       (-0.23)        (1.98)         (0.86)       (3.65)        (6.69)          (3.28)
   NDV                               -0.0066**      0.0044**      0.0029***      -0.0036     -0.0112***     -0.0028***    0.0102***      0.0068***       -0.0001    -0.0168***      -0.0024           0.003
                                       (-2.48)        (2.20)         (2.67)       (-1.53)       (-6.70)       (-3.02)       (4.29)         (3.79)         (-0.10)      (-3.74)       (-0.70)         (1.63)
   DNV                              -0.0035***     0.0046***      0.0011***    0.0042***     -0.0077***     -0.0020***     -0.0008       0.0031***      0.0009***    -0.0027**      0.0016*          0.0002
                                       (-4.98)        (8.88)         (3.88)       (6.98)       (-17.63)       (-8.22)       (-1.21)        (6.53)         (3.51)       (-2.33)       (1.76)          (0.45)
   NDNV                             -0.0089***     0.0037***      0.0023***     0.0050***    -0.0062***       -0.0007    0.0038***      0.0025***      -0.0016***   -0.0127***       0.0012        0.0039***
                                       (-6.29)        (3.52)         (4.03)       (4.11)        (-7.02)       (-1.53)       (3.07)         (2.62)         (-3.06)      (-5.37)       (0.68)          (4.00)
   EADay                              -0.0005        -0.0009        0.0012     -0.0077***      -0.0003           0       0.0082***         0.0011        -0.0013      -0.0086*       -0.002          0.0025
                                       (-0.17)       (-0.41)         (1.10)       (-3.19)       (-0.15)        (0.03)       (3.32)         (0.60)         (-1.26)      (-1.86)       (-0.56)         (1.31)
   AGMDay                            0.0203***     0.0108***        -0.0006      0.0054*      0.0054**      0.0056***    -0.0257***     -0.0162***     -0.0049***    0.0460***     0.0270***        0.0043*
                                       (5.60)         (4.00)        (-0.43)       (1.72)        (2.42)         (4.44)       (-8.00)        (-6.70)        (-3.77)      (7.56)        (5.87)          (1.73)
   BoardDay                            0.0073        -0.0065       -0.0060*       0.0024        0.0052        0.0037       -0.0098         0.0013         0.0023       0.0171       -0.0078         -0.0082
                                       (0.87)        (-1.04)        (-1.74)       (0.33)        (0.99)         (1.25)       (-1.30)        (0.24)         (0.75)       (1.21)        (-0.73)         (-1.42)

   Observations                      170,371        170,371        170,371      170,371       170,371        170,371      170,371        170,371        170,371      170,371        170,371         170,371
   R-squared                          0.0008         0.0018         0.0005       0.0007        0.0043         0.001        0.0007         0.0006         0.0003       0.0007         0.0005          0.0003



   Test: DV-DNV=0                    0.0127          0.0106        0.0029        -0.013        -0.0095       -0.0024      0.0005         -0.0011        -0.0004      0.0122         0.0115          0.0033
   p-value                            0.00            0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00        0.76            0.77           0.50        0.00           0.00            0.01

   Test: NDV-NDNV=0                  0.0023          0.0007        0.0006       -0.0086        -0.005        -0.0021      0.0064         0.0043         0.0015       -0.0041        -0.0036         -0.0009
   p-value                            0.42            0.74          0.61          0.00          0.01           0.04        0.01           0.03           0.15          0.40           0.33            0.65
                        Table 7: Reactions to News Events in the Vesting Month
This table reports the results of an event-study on the effect of corporate news releases on subsequent stock returns and
trading volume. We denote by DV and DNV the discretionary news released in vesting and non-vesting months, re-
spectively. Similarly, we denote by NDV and NDNV the non-discretionary news that released in vesting and non-vesting
months, respectively. We use a [0,1], [0,15], and [0,30] window. The cumulative abnormal return is the raw buy-and-
hold return adjusted using a beta estimated over [-300,-46] with a market model. The average daily abnormal trad-
ing volume is in excess of its average value in the period [-70,-31], and excludes the CEO’s own trades. Panel A re-
ports a univariate analysis, and Panel B reports a multivariate analysis that controls for other newsworthy events, de-
scribed in Appendix A. Below Panel B, we test for the difference in the the stock price and volume reactions between
vesting and non-vesting months, after the release of discretionary (DV-DNV) and non-discretionary (NDV-NDNV) news.
t-statistics are in parentheses, and ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

      Panel A: Univariate Analysis
                                       Abnormal Returns (Basis Points)        Abnormal Trading Volume (Percent)
                                        [0, 1]    [0, 15]     [0, 30]          [0, 1]      [0, 15]     [0, 30]
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)
      Vesting Months:

      Discretionary (DV)               25.00***   27.78***     14.26*         0.3191***    0.0335***     -0.0021
                                        (7.93)     (4.54)      (1.69)          (31.53)       (7.47)       (-0.51)
      Non-Discretionary (NDV)          28.01***   32.91***     18.54          0.6345***    0.0984***    0.0319***
                                        (4.16)     (2.73)      (1.15)          (39.29)      (13.00)       (4.69)
      Non-Vesting Months:

      Discretionary (DNV)              17.27***   30.62***    22.26***        0.2730***    0.0229***    -0.0069***
                                        (11.26)    (11.15)     (5.88)          (57.94)      (10.73)       (-3.67)
      Non-Discretionary (NDNV)         21.79***   54.26***    52.81***        0.6445***    0.1042***    0.0339***
                                         (6.67)     (9.41)     (6.79)          (71.45)      (25.50)        (9.63)



      Panel B: Multivariate Analysis
                                       Abnormal Returns (Basis Points)        Abnormal Trading Volume (Percent)
                                        [0, 1]    [0, 15]     [0, 30]          [0, 1]      [0, 15]     [0, 30]
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)


      DV                               25.01***   27.85***     14.64*         0.3198***    0.0334***      -0.0019
                                         (7.00)     (4.39)     (1.69)          (29.71)       (7.08)        (-0.46)
      NDV                              24.85***    24.04**      10.94         0.6546***   0.0984***     0.0308***
                                         (3.94)     (2.15)     (0.72)          (34.43)      (11.80)        (4.21)
      DNV                              17.33***   30.55***    22.16***       0.2723***    0.0225***     -0.0069***
                                        (10.69)    (10.61)     (5.64)          (55.76)      (10.48)        (-3.66)
      NDNV                             17.37***   43.77***    42.42***        0.6549***   0.1024***     0.0320***
                                         (5.17)     (7.34)     (5.22)          (64.75)      (23.08)        (8.22)
      EADay                            25.02***   63.19***    74.24***        0.2100***    0.0437***     0.0227***
                                         (3.75)     (5.34)     (4.60)          (10.46)       (4.96)        (2.94)
      AGMDay                              -7.88     -21.05    -47.67**       -0.5368***   -0.0731***    -0.0263***
                                        (-0.90)    (-1.36)     (-2.26)         (-20.43)      (-6.34)       (-2.60)
      BoardDay                           -23.94      18.89      15.03          -0.0896     0.0611**      0.0495**
                                        (-1.12)      -0.50      -0.29           (-1.40)      (2.17)        (2.00)

      Observations                      183,826    183,793     183,755         183,825      183,787      183,745
      R-squared                          0.0011     0.0015     0.0009           0.0409       0.0035      0.0006


      Test: DV-DNV=0                     7.68        -2.7       -7.52          0.0475       0.0109        0.005
      p-value                            0.05        0.68        0.41           0.00         0.03          0.29
      Test: NDV-NDNV=0                   7.48       -19.73     -31.48          -0.0003       -0.004      -0.0012
      p-value                            0.31        0.07       0.04             0.67         0.55         0.86
                                                                    Table 8: Robustness Tests
This table reports the results of robustness tests to alternative samples and measurement choices. We use the same specification as column (5) of Table 4, unless other-
wise noted. In Panel A, our main independent variable is an indicator function that equals one if a particular month is a vesting month (VestingMonth), and zero oth-
erwise. Column (1) restricts our sample to firms that were part of the S&P 500 at some point over 1994-2011. Column (2) restricts our sample to firms covered in the
Equilar database, which covers Russell 3000 firms over 2006-2011. Column (3) controls for grant award months. Column (4) runs a placebo test that uses a pseudo-vesting
month that is 6 months after the actual vesting month. Column (5) excludes all equity-based grants with a performance-based vesting provision. Column (6) considers re-
stricted stock only, and column (7) considers options only. Column (8) redefines a vesting month as a month in which either stock and/or in-the-money options vest, exclud-
ing the cases in which only out-the-money options vest. In Panel B, our main independent variable is the sensitivity of newly-vesting equity to changes in the stock price
(Log(1+VestingSensitivity)). The specifications presented in Panel B are similar to those in Panel A, except that we use Log(1+GrantSensitivity) instead of GrantM onth
in column (3), and in column (4) we replace option deltas with their intrinsic values of 0 for out-the-money options and 1 for in-the-money options, with which we cre-
ate the variable Log(1+VestingSensitivityAdjusted). t-statistics are in parentheses, and ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


   Panel A: Vesting Month Indicator
                                          (1)          (2)                 (3)                (4)                   (5)                   (6)         (7)          (8)


   Sample                               S&P 500      Equilar               All                All      No Performance-Based Vesting       All         All          All
   Stock/Options                          All          All                 All                All                  All                   Stock       Option        All

   MonthBefore                         -0.0261***   -0.0327***          -0.0322***                              -0.0336***              -0.0087     -0.0165     -0.0338***
                                          (-2.60)      (-4.35)             (-4.28)                                 (-4.36)               (-0.64)     (-1.50)      (-4.14)
   VestingMonth                         0.0339***   0.0342***            0.0219***                               0.0362***             0.0348***   0.0460***    0.0291***
                                          (3.46)       (4.67)              (2.88)                                  (4.84)                (2.60)      (4.35)        (3.66)
   MonthAfter                           -0.0223**    -0.0148**           -0.0151**                              -0.0196***              -0.0154     -0.0067       -0.0059
                                          (-2.32)      (-2.04)             (-2.08)                                 (-2.63)               (-1.16)     (-0.63)      (-0.74)
   PseudoVestingMonth                                                                        0.0116
                                                                                             (1.48)

   Fixed Effects (Firm+Year+Month)        Yes          Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes         Yes          Yes
   Additional Controls                     No           No             GrantMonth              No                   No                     No          No           No
   Number of Observations                21,504       57,461             57,576              50,198               57,576                 57,576      57,576       57,576


   Panel B: Vesting Sensitivity
                                          (1)          (2)                 (3)                (4)                   (5)                   (6)         (7)          (8)


   Sample                               S&P 500      Equilar               All                All      No Performance-Based Vesting       All         All          All
   Stock/Option                           All          All                 All                All                  All                   Stock       Option        All

   Log(1+VestingSensitivity)            0.0020**    0.0035***           0.0032***                                0.0036***             0.0035**    0.0047***    0.0031***
                                         (2.14)       (4.24)              (3.93)                                   (4.35)               (2.29)       (3.75)       (3.72)
   Log(1+VestingSensitivityAdjusted)                                                       0.0023**
                                                                                            (2.24)

   Fixed Effects (Firm+Year+Month)        Yes          Yes               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                    Yes         Yes          Yes
   Additional Controls                     No           No       Log(1+GrantSensitivity)       No                   No                     No          No           No
   Number of Observations                21,879       58,937            59,060               59,060               59,060                 59,060      59,060       59,060
                                             1.7%


                                                                                                                                     Positive Score
                                             1.3%                                                                                    Neutral Score
                                                                                                                                     Negative Score


                                             0.9%
    Difference in Sentiment Score Between
        Vesting and Non−Vesting Months




                                             0.5%



                                             0.1%



                                            −0.3%



                                            −0.7%



                                            −1.1%



                                            −1.5%
                                                 0   2   4   6   8      10       12        14        16        18        20     22   24      26       28   30
                                                                     Number of Days After the Discretionary News Release Date




                                               Figure 1: Tone of Media Coverage After Discretionary News Releases
This figure shows the difference between vesting and non-vesting months regarding the tone of media coverage after
the release of discretionary news. We show the differences in average positive, neutral, and negative sentiment scores
of the media articles, as reported in the Thomson Reuters News Analytics database over [0,30] in excess of the average
score over [-300,-46].
            0.16

            0.15

            0.14

            0.13

            0.12

            0.11

             0.1

            0.09
Frequency




            0.08

            0.07

            0.06

            0.05
                                                                                                                                         Discretionary News
            0.04
                                                                                                                                         Non−Discretionary News
            0.03

            0.02

            0.01

              0
                   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 >45

                                                                    Number of Days from News Releases to CEO Equity Sales



                                   Figure 2: Number of Days from News Releases to CEO Sales
  This figure reports the distribution of the number of trading days between the date of the release of corporate news
  and the first observed equity sale of the CEO. We consider news releases in vesting months, and show the results
  separately for discretionary and non-discretionary news items. We truncate the y-axis at 0.16 for better visualization
  of the graph. The frequency bar for non-discretionary news for more than 45 days between the release of news and
  the first CEO sale (> 45), has a value of 0.61. News items are obtained from the Capital IQ database, which covers
  2002-2011. We consider only discretionary news that is released within 30 days of the most recent vesting date.
            0.12


            0.11


             0.1


            0.09


            0.08


            0.07
Frequency




            0.06


            0.05

                                                                                                                        Discretionary News
            0.04
                                                                                                                        Non−Discretionary News

            0.03


            0.02


            0.01


              0
                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45>45
                                                           Number of Days from News Rleases to CEO Full Sale



             Figure 3: Number of Days from Discretionary News Releases to CEO Full Sale
This figure shows the distribution of the number of trading days between the date of the release of discretionary news
and the date the CEO sells all the equity that vested in the most recent vesting month. For the purpose of this graph,
we only consider discretionary news released in the 30 days after the vesting date. We truncate the y-axis at 0.12 for
better visualization of the graph. The frequency bar for non-discretionary news for more than 45 days between the
release of news and the CEO’s full sale (> 45), has a value of 0.16.
                          Appendix A: Variable Definitions

Variable                              Definition
                                Variable Definitions
AGM                                    is an indicator function that equals one if a particular
                                       month coincides with the firm’s annual general meeting,
                                       and zero otherwise.
AGMDay                                 is an indicator function that equals one if a particular day
                                       coincides with the firm’s annual general meeting, and zero
                                       otherwise.
Analyst                                is the log of one plus the number of analysts following a
                                       particular stock. The number of analysts is obtained from
                                       the I/B/E/S files.
Board                                  is an indicator that equals one if a particular month coin-
                                       cides with a board meeting, and zero otherwise.
BoardDay                               is an indicator that equals one if a particular day coincides
                                       with a board meeting, and zero otherwise.
EADay                                  is an indicator function that equals one if a particular day
                                       coincides with the firm’s earnings announcement, and zero
                                       otherwise.
EAQuarterly                            is an indicator function that equals one if a particular
                                       month coincides with the firm’s announcement of quarterly
                                       earnings, and zero otherwise.
EAYearly                               is an indicator function that equals one if a particular
                                       month coincides with the firm’s announcement of annual
                                       earnings, and zero otherwise.
EarningsSurprise                       is the earnings surprise measure (SUE) from the I/B/E/S
                                       database.
GrantMonth                             is an indicator function that equals one if there is an equity
                                       grant award in that month, and zero otherwise.
Log(1+GrantSensitivity)                is the log of one plus the dollar sensitivity of the CEO’s
                                       granted equity to a 100% change in the stock price.
MonthAfter                             is an indicator function that equals one if a given month is
                                       immediately after a vesting month, and zero otherwise.
MonthBefore                            is an indicator function that equals one if a given month is
                                       immediately prior to a vesting month, and zero otherwise.
Negative Score                         is the proportion of negative words out of the total number
                                       of words of a media article in the Thomson Reuters News
                                       Analytics database.
Neutral Score                          is the proportion of neutral words out of the total number
                                       of words of a media article in the Thomson Reuters News
                                       Analytics database.
NewsEvents                             is the count of the number of news items released in a given
                                       month.
Positive Score                         is the proportion of positive words out of the total number
                                       of words of a media article in the Thomson Reuters News
                                       Analytics database.
PseudoVestingMonth                     is an indicator for a pseudo-vesting month that is exactly
                                       6 months after the actual vesting month.
Sales                                  is equal either to SalesMonth or to SalesAll, defined below.
SalesAll                                  is an
                                    Variable    indicator function that equals one when, by a par-
                                             Definitions
                                            ticular month, the cumulative equity sales of a CEO adds
                                            up to the amount of equity that vested in the most recent
                                            vesting month, and zero otherwise.
SalesMonth                                  is an indicator function that equals one if there is a CEO
                                            equity sale in a given month, and zero otherwise.
Trading Volume                              is the ratio of the daily number of shares traded to the
                                            number of shares outstanding.
Log(1+UnvestedSensitivity)                  is the log of one plus the dollar sensitivity of the CEO’s
                                            unvested equity to a 100% change in the stock price.
Log(1+VestedSensitivity)                    is the log of one plus the dollar sensitivity of the CEO’s
                                            already-vested equity to a 100% change in the stock price.
VestingMonth                                is the calendar month in which stock and option grants are
                                            pre-scheduled to vest according to the Equilar database
                                            and manual identification.
Log(1+VestingSensitivity)                   is the dollar sensitivity of the CEO’s newly-vesting equity
                                            to a 100% change in the stock price.
Log(1+VestingSensitivityAdjusted)           is the dollar sensitivity of the CEO’s newly-vesting equity
                                            to a 100% change in the stock price, in which we replace
                                            option deltas with intrinsic values: we assign a value of
                                            zero for OTM options and a value of one to ITM options.
Appendix B: Distribution of Corporate News Events


Panel A: Discretionary News Items      Percentage of All Events
                                     All Months   Vesting Months
Company Conference Presentations      11.936%          14.208%
Conferences                           8.582%           11.962%
Earnings Calls                        8.764%            9.243%
Earnings Release Date                 8.291%            8.753%
Client Announcements                  8.467%            7.566%
Product-Related Announcements         7.742%            7.533%
Executive/Board Changes - Other       6.202%            5.687%
Buyback Update                        3.025%            3.367%
Fixed Income Offerings                3.557%            3.223%
Dividend Affirmations                 3.172%            3.131%
M&A Transaction Closings              3.423%            2.645%
Shelf Registration Filings            1.696%            1.749%
M&A Transaction Announcements         2.266%            1.503%
Buybacks                              1.351%            1.405%
Debt Financing Related                1.392%            1.179%
Business Expansions                   1.543%            1.118%
Changes in Company Bylaws/Rules       0.804%            1.045%
Strategic Alliances                   1.055%            1.025%
Lawsuits & Legal Issues               0.961%            0.801%
Dividend Increases                    0.706%            0.797%
Shareholder/Analyst Calls             0.578%            0.653%
Private Placements                    0.858%            0.634%
Corporate Guidance - New/Confirmed    0.581%            0.512%
Follow-on Equity Offerings            0.689%            0.490%
Seeking Acquisitions/Investments      0.320%            0.342%
Analyst/Investor Day                  0.193%            0.289%
Special Calls                         0.289%            0.256%
Preferred Dividend                    0.228%            0.228%
M&A Calls                             0.191%            0.142%
Sales/Trading Statement Calls         0.135%            0.120%
Delayed SEC Filings                   0.259%            0.114%
M&A Transaction Cancelations          0.132%            0.091%
Corporate Guidance - Raised            0.149%           0.085%
Executive Changes - CFO               0.126%            0.079%
Guidance/Update Calls                 0.123%            0.079%
Corporate Guidance - Lowered          0.131%            0.069%
Business Reorganizations              0.077%            0.051%
Labor-related Announcements           0.072%            0.049%
Dividend Decreases                    0.023%            0.043%
Seeking to Sell/Divest                 0.038%           0.039%
Executive Changes - CEO               0.066%           0.033%
Subtotal                              90.193%         92.339%

                                        (Continues on the next page)
                        Appendix B: Continued


Panel A: Discretionary News Items (Cont.)     Percentage of All Events
                                            All Months   Vesting Months
Special Dividend Announced                    0.031%         0.033%
Impairments/Write Offs                        0.037%         0.030%
Spin-Off/Split-Off                            0.047%         0.028%
Restatements of Operating Results             0.042%         0.022%
Composite Units Offerings                     0.015%         0.020%
Delayed Earnings Announcements                0.022%         0.018%
Seeking Financing/Partners                    0.013%         0.018%
Address Changes                               0.027%         0.016%
M&A Rumors and Discussions                    0.010%         0.016%
Potential Buyback                             0.008%         0.008%
Dividend Initiation                           0.005%         0.006%
IPOs                                          0.128%         0.006%
Exchange Changes                              0.007%         0.004%
Fiscal Year End Changes                       0.007%         0.004%
Name Changes                                  0.016%         0.004%
Dividend Cancellation                         0.005%         0.002%
Debt Defaults                                 0.002%         0.000%
Legal Structure Changes                       0.003%         0.000%
Structured Products Offerings                 0.000%         0.000%
Ticker Changes                                0.015%         0.000%
Subtotal                                     0.440%          0.238%
Total Discretionary                          90.633%        92.577%

Panel B: Non-Discretionary News Items         Percentage of All Events
                                            All Months   Vesting Months
Announcements of Earnings                     6.085%         3.922%
Annual General Meeting                        2.180%         2.521%
Board Meeting                                 0.349%         0.466%
Auditor Changes                               0.256%         0.205%
End of Lock-Up Period                         0.306%         0.183%
Delistings                                    0.154%         0.100%
Regulatory Agency Inquiries                   0.033%         0.026%
Bankruptcy - Emergence/Exit                   0.001%         0.000%
Bankruptcy - Filing                           0.002%         0.000%
Bankruptcy - Other                            0.003%         0.000%
Total Non-Discretionary                      9.367%          7.423%
Total                                         100%            100%
    Appendix C: Examples of Capital IQ Items for Wal-Mart in Q1 2012


GVKEY   Year   Month   Day   Event Type          Title                                                   Source

11259   2012   1       5     Lawsuits & Legal    Keller Rohrback L.L.P. Announces Preliminary Ap-        Business Wire
                             Issues              proval of Class Action Settlement against Wal-Mart
                                                 St
11259   2012   1       5     Lawsuits & Legal    Keller Rohrback L.L.P. Announces Preliminary Ap-        Business Wire
                             Issues              proval of Class Action Settlement against Wal-Mart
                                                 St
11259   2012   1       17    Executive/Board     Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Announces Executive Changes        PR Newswire
                             Changes - Other
11259   2012   1       17    Executive/Board     Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Announces Executive Changes        PR Newswire
                             Changes - Other
11259   2012   1       20    Lawsuits & Legal    Wal-Mart Women Plaintiffs File Expanded Texas           PR Newswire
                             Issues              Class Action against Wal-Mart Stores Inc
11259   2012   1       20    Lawsuits & Legal    Wal-Mart Women Plaintiffs File Expanded Texas           PR Newswire
                             Issues              Class Action against Wal-Mart Stores Inc
11259   2012   2       6     Lawsuits & Legal    MacroSolve, Inc.    Files Patent Infringement Suit      Market Wire
                             Issues              Against Wal-Mart Stores Inc
11259   2012   2       6     Lawsuits & Legal    MacroSolve, Inc.    Files Patent Infringement Suit      Market Wire
                             Issues              Against Wal-Mart Stores Inc
11259   2012   2       9     Client Announce-    MMA Elite Supplements Powered by Muscle Pharm           PR Newswire
                             ments               Corp. Available at Wal-Mart Stores
11259   2012   2       9     Client Announce-    MMA Elite Supplements Powered by Muscle Pharm           PR Newswire
                             ments               Corp. Available at Wal-Mart Stores
11259   2012   2       16    M&A      Rumors     X5 Denies Karusel Sale Talks With Wal-Mart              Prime-Tass
                             and Discussions                                                             English-language
                                                                                                         Business Newswire
11259   2012   2       16    M&A      Rumors     X5 Denies Karusel Sale Talks With Wal-Mart              Prime-Tass
                             and Discussions                                                             English-language
                                                                                                         Business Newswire
11259   2012   2       21    Earnings Calls      Wal-Mart Stores Inc., Q4 2012 Pre Recorded Earnings     Business     Wire;
                                                 Call, Feb 21, 2012                                      Company Website
11259   2012   2       21    Announcements       Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Announces Unaudited Consol-        Business Wire
                             of Earnings; Cor-   idated Earnings Results for the Fourth Quarter and
                             porate Guidance     Fu
                             - New/Confirmed
11259   2012   2       21    Earnings Calls      Wal-Mart Stores Inc., Q4 2012 Pre Recorded Earnings     Business     Wire;
                                                 Call, Feb 21, 2012                                      Company Website
11259   2012   2       21    Announcements       Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Announces Unaudited Consol-        Business Wire
                             of Earnings; Cor-   idated Earnings Results for the Fourth Quarter and
                             porate Guidance     Fu
                             - New/Confirmed
11259   2012   3       1     Dividend      In-   Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Increases Annual Dividend for      Business Wire
                             creases             the Fiscal Year Ending Jan. 31, 2013
11259   2012   3       4     Conferences         Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Raymond James         PR        Newswire;
                                                 & Associates’s 33rd Annual Institutional Investors C    Business      Wire;
                                                                                                         GlobeNewswire;
                                                                                                         Company        Web-
                                                                                                         site; Market Wire;
                                                                                                         Regulatory     News
                                                                                                         Service; SE
11259   2012   3       6     Conferences         Merrill Lynch & Co., Inc., Bank of America Merrill      PR        Newswire;
                                                 Lynch 2012 Consumer & Retail Conference, Mar 06,        Business      Wire;
                                                                                                         GlobeNewswire;
                                                                                                         Company Website
11259   2012   3       7     Company     Con-    Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Presents at Raymond James &        PR        Newswire;
                             ference Presenta-   Associates’s 33rd Annual Institutional Investors Co     Business      Wire;
                             tions                                                                       GlobeNewswire;
                                                                                                         Company        Web-
                                                                                                         site; Market Wire;
                                                                                                         Regulatory     News
                                                                                                         Service; SE
11259   2012   3       7     Company     Con-    Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Presents at Bank of America        PR        Newswire;
                             ference Presenta-   Merrill Lynch 2012 Consumer & Retail Conference,        Business      Wire;
                             tions               Ma                                                      GlobeNewswire;
                                                                                                         Company Website
11259   2012   3       22    Lawsuits & Legal    Wal-Mart Stores Inc. to Pay $2.1 Million for Califor-   The      Associated
                             Issues              nia Costumers                                           Press    State    &
                                                                                                         Local Wire
11259   2012   3       28    Company     Con-    Wal-Mart Stores Inc. Presents at CIBC Retail and        Business      Wire;
                             ference Presenta-   Consumer Conference, Mar-28-2012 11:30 AM               GlobeNewswire;
                             tions                                                                       Canada         News
                                                                                                         Wire;     Company
                                                                                                         Website;    Market
                                                                                                         Wire
11259   2012   3       28    Conferences         CIBC World Markets, Inc., CIBC Retail and Con-          Business      Wire;
                                                 sumer Conference, Mar 28, 2012                          GlobeNewswire;
                                                                                                         Canada         News
                                                                                                         Wire;     Company
                                                                                                         Website;    Market
                                                                                                         Wire
                             Appendix D: Correlation of Main Variables


                                     (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)     (7)    (8)    (9)    (10)   (11)   (12)
All News                      (1)   1.00
Discretionary News            (2)   0.98   1.00
Non-Discretionary News        (3)   0.49   0.33   1.00
SalesMonth                    (4)   0.03   0.03   0.03   1.00
VestingMonth                  (5)   0.03   0.02   0.04   0.20   1.00
EAYearly                      (6)   0.07   0.04   0.15   0.09   0.23    1.00
EAQuarterly                   (7)   0.18   0.10   0.46   0.03   0.06    0.37   1.00
AGM                           (8)   0.10   0.05   0.29   0.03   0.03   -0.08   0.08   1.00
Board                         (9)   0.10   0.09   0.09   0.01   0.02    0.03   0.04   0.03    1.00
Log(1+VestingSensitivity)    (10)   0.04   0.03   0.04   0.22   0.94    0.24   0.07   0.03    0.02   1.00
Log(1+VestedSensitivity)     (11)   0.08   0.09   0.01   0.05   0.01    0.00   0.02   0.00    0.00   0.04   1.00
Log(1+UnvestedSensitivity)   (12)   0.10   0.11   0.02   0.08   0.04   -0.02   0.02   0.03   -0.01   0.10   0.35   1.00
  Appendix E: Distribution of Events in the Calendar Year


            VestingMonth   EAYearly   EAQuarterly   AGM     Board   GrantMonth


January        11.9%        16.7%         6.2%       1.8%   10.2%     12.1%
February       16.6%        45.4%        13.0%       2.2%   10.5%     23.2%
March          12.8%        16.5%         4.5%      2.0%     8.7%     13.7%
April           6.4%        1.5%         11.5%      14.9%    6.4%     5.5%
May             9.3%         2.8%        11.6%      48.3%   11.8%     8.7%
June            6.4%        2.2%          1.6%      16.0%   4.1%      4.8%
July           5.8%          1.8%        12.5%       2.6%    8.1%     4.3%
August          6.5%         3.9%        11.7%       3.1%    9.2%     5.5%
September       4.8%         1.6%         1.5%       2.2%    4.7%     3.8%
October        5.1%          1.9%        12.8%       1.9%   10.8%     4.2%
November        5.9%         3.8%        11.5%      3.1%     8.4%     5.9%
December       8.4%          1.8%         1.5%      1.9%     7.0%     8.2%
