                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SELF-REGULATION AND HEALTH

                                           Henry Saffer

                                       Working Paper 20483
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20483


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




Excellent research assistance was provided by Markus Gehrsitz. Michael Grossman provided many
helpful comments. The work on this project has been funded by grant R01 AA020464 from the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, NIH to the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
grant is supported by the Common Fund, which is managed by the OD/Office of Strategic Coordination
(OSC). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Henry Saffer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Self-regulation and Health
Henry Saffer
NBER Working Paper No. 20483
September 2014
JEL No. I1

                                              ABSTRACT

The purposes of this paper are to measure self-regulation, to investigate whether self-regulation differs
across different health related choices, to estimate its effect on health choices and to estimate the effect
of self-regulation on health-demographic gradients. The theory and empirical approach to self-regulation
employed in this paper relies on a broad literature which includes economics, psychology and experimental
studies. In addition, a novel empirical approach is employed to create a single measure of self-regulation
that can vary across domains. A single measure of self-regulation in place of a set of proxy variables
allows for the study of how self-regulation is correlated across different health choices. The results
show that there is a high correlation in self-regulation for smoking, drinking, drug use, crime and gambling,
but that self-regulation for BMI (body mass index) and obesity are different than self-regulation for
the other outcomes. The results show that self-regulation has a significant negative effect on all choices.
The results also show that self-regulation generally reduces the effect of education on health but education
retains a negative and significant relationship with all outcomes. The research presented in this paper
also raises questions about the effect of omitted individual heterogeneity in measuring the effects of
public policy.


Henry Saffer
NBER
5 Hanover Square, 16th Floor
Suite 1602
New York, NY 10004-2630
hsaffer@gc.cuny.edu
1. Introduction

        Recent studies by economists have examined what is known as noncognitive skills and

their effect on health. These noncognitive skills are also referred to as time preference,

personal efficacy, self-esteem, locus of control, organizational skills, self-regulation, motivation,

adventurousness, self-control, conscientiousness and socioemotional skills (Chiteji, 2010).1

One concern with these past studies is that they often take an ad hoc approach to noncognitive

skills.2 There is, however, a literature outside of economics which examines the effects of

noncognitive skills on health related outcomes and provides a theoretical and empirical

approach to the measurement of noncognitive skills. In this paper the noncognitive skill of

interest is the individual’s ability to defer an immediate reward for a future reward which will be

referred to as self-regulation (SR). Because an individual can exhibit a preference for a future

outcome (time preference) only to the degree that they can resist the desire for immediate

gratification (self-regulate) the concepts of time preference and SR are closely aligned.

        One advantage in studying SR rather than time preference is that it bypasses the

assumptions of time preference theory. Time preference theory is described by the discounted

utility (DU) model. The assumptions in the DU model are analytically convenient, but according

to Frederick, et al. (2002), are not consistent with empirical observation. A central assumption

of the DU model is that all of the motives underlying time preference can be represented by a

single discount rate and that utility from all sources is discounted at the same rate. Studies

have found that discount rates vary by outcome, gains are discounted more than losses, small

amounts discounted more than large amounts, and explicit sequences of multiple outcomes are

discounted differently than outcomes considered individually. Another concern with the DU



1
  The term non-cognitive skill is somewhat inaccurate in that the processes described involve a balance of
reasoning and emotion.
2
  A notable exception to this is Conti and Heckman (2010).
model is that observed discount rates appear to decline in future time periods. Discount rates

can be modeled with a hyperbolic discount function to account for this phenomenon. While this

approach provides an important mathematical restatement, it does not provide a theoretical

explanation of the phenomena. Frederick, et al. (2002) also report that the literature provides

no consensus for quantitative estimates of discount rates. These concerns generally do not

relate to SR. More detail on the theory of SR is provided in section 3.

       The purpose of this paper is to measure SR, to investigate whether it differs across

different health choices and to estimate its effect on health choices. The empirical work also

includes crime and gambling as outcomes because these outcomes are also thought to be

related to SR and provide additional empirical tests of the theory. The outcomes are commonly

referred to as domains. The theory and empirical approach to SR relies on a broad literature

including economics, psychology and experimental studies. In addition, a novel empirical

approach is employed to create a single latent variable measure of SR. This single measure of

SR is not restricted to the same value for all outcomes as is the case in all prior studies. A

single outcome specific measure of SR allows for the study of how SR is correlated across

different health choices. This study of SR is important because SR and public policy are

alternative mechanisms which can affect health. Public policy becomes more important for

choices in which SR is low. Also, public policies and incentives which improve health behavior

in one domain can enhance SR and may affect SR in closely related domains.



2. Prior studies

       There are several recent empirical studies in the economics literature that measure the

effect of noncognitive skills on health domains. The emphasis in these studies is on how

noncognitive skills moderate the health-education gradient. A recent and extensive study of the

health-education gradient was provided by Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010). They use data


                                                 2
from several surveys from two countries and find that income, health insurance, and family

background can account for about 30 percent of the gradient. Knowledge and measures of

cognitive ability explain an additional 30 percent. Social networks account for another 10

percent. Proxies for time discounting and risk aversion do not account for any of the education

gradient, and neither do personality factors such as a sense of control of oneself or over one's

life. A set of 16 questions on future health and financial domains are employed to measure time

discounting.

       Conti and Hansman (2013) reexamine the personality traits studied by Cutler and Lleras-

Muney (2010) and add the Rutter Behavior Scale and a number of syndrome scores from the

British Social Adjustment Guide (BSAG). The Rutter Scale measures behavioral difficulties and

was constructed by summing the responses to a series of questionnaire items, with a higher

score indicating behavioral problems. The BSAG was designed to describe a child's behavior in

particular settings. The questionnaire results in 12 different measures of social maladjustment.

Conti and Hansman (2013) conclude that personality contributes to the education-health

gradient to an extent nearly as large as that of cognition.

       Another study by Chiteji (2010) employs data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

(PSID) to ascertain the relationship between a number of different socio-emotional attributes

and drinking and exercising. The socio-emotional attributes analyzed are the degree to which an

individual is future-oriented, and self-efficacy. The measure of future-orientation comes from a

question that the PSID asked about the length of the individual’s time horizon, and self-efficacy

is an index of several questions relating to the evaluation of one’s ability to be effective

performing tasks that are necessary to realize an outcome. Chiteji (2010) finds that future-

orientation and self-efficacy have a negative effect on drinking and a positive effect on exercise.

       Conti, Heckman and Urzua (2010) estimate the effects of cognitive, noncognitive, and

early health endowments on later health outcomes using data from the British Cohort Study.


                                                  3
They find that not accounting for noncognitive ability results in overestimation of the importance

of cognitive ability in determining later health. They use six scales as measurements of

noncognitive ability: the child was asked the locus of control questions and five scales were

administered to the teacher (perseverance, cooperativeness, completeness, attentiveness, and

persistence). Selection on preexisting traits explains more than half of the observed differences

in poor health and obesity. They also find that not accounting for noncognitive ability

overestimates the importance of cognitive ability in determining later health.

        Kaestner and Callison, (2011) examine the effects of noncognitive traits measured at the

end of childhood on mental and physical health at age 41 using the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth 1979. They find that self-esteem has a significant association with health at

age 41 and some evidence that the internal locus of control is associated with better adult

health. The internal locus of control refers to the extent to which individuals believe that their

choices can affect outcomes in their life. They also conclude that differences in the

noncognitive factors they studied are not important explanations of gender or racial differences

in health.

        Savelyev (2014) investigates how education, cognitive skills and personality skills affects

health. The data employed are the 1922–91 Terman lifecycle sample of children with high

ability. Using factor analysis to create personality variables he estimates a model that uses

cognition, personality, and education as arguments of the production function for health. The

model also includes interaction between education and personality in producing health. Gender

specific models are estimated. For males, there are strong effects of personality, IQ, education

and the interaction of personality and education. For females the effects of education and

personality are not precisely determined.




                                                  4
         The literature outside of economics provides a number of empirical studies which have

investigated the effect of self-regulation proxies on negative health behaviors.3 Moffitt et al.

(2011) used data which followed a cohort of 1,000 children from birth to the age of 32 and found

that low self-regulation in childhood predicts low physical health, substance dependence,

problems with personal finances, and criminal behavior. Effects of the individual’s self-

regulation were differentiated from intelligence, social class and mistakes made in adolescence.

Moffitt et al. (2011) also investigated a cohort of 500 sibling-pairs. The sibling with lower self-

regulation had poorer outcomes, despite shared family background. A study by MacKillop and

Kahler (2009) examined the effect of low self-regulation on smoking behavior. They define low

self-regulation as an index of impulsivity that reflects a preference for smaller immediate

rewards over larger delayed rewards (i.e. a present orientation). Current smokers exhibit lower

self-regulation compared to nonsmokers but also exhibit lower self-regulation compared to ex-

smokers, suggesting that either self-regulation is positively associated with successful smoking

cessation or that smoking cessation itself increases self-regulation. Gubler and Pierce (2014)

examine the relationship between contributions to a 401(k) retirement plan and individual health

choices. Individuals in the study were provided with a physical health examination and some

discovered that they had abnormal blood test results. This health examination is a quasi-

exogenous information shock. The authors controlled for initial health, demographics, job type,

and income and found that individuals who contributed to a 401(k) plan were 27% more likely to

change their behavior to improve their health than non-contributors. These findings are

consistent with an underlying individual time discounting trait that is both difficult to change,

similar across domains and distinct from the trait known as conscientiousness.



3
 Studies of self-regulation outside of economics include: Gailliot and Baumeister, 2007; Wright et al., 2012; Belsky
and Beaver, 2011; Beaver, Ratchford and Ferguson, 2009; Stanovich and West, 2008; Vaughn et al., 2009; Miller,
Barnes and Beaver, 2011; Jensen-Campbell et al., 2007. These studies are discussed in more detail in section 3.



                                                          5
       An important issue highlighted in prior studies is the potential variation in SR across

different domains. That is, for a given individual, to what degree is SR the same across

domains? This issue is in contrast to the assumption in the DU model that utility from all

sources is discounted at the same rate. If SR differs significantly across domains then a SR

measure derived from one domain such as financial choice may not be relevant to other

domains such as health. Several prior studies have investigated the domain specificity of self-

regulation. Foxall et al. (2011) studied consumers making hypothetical decisions with respect to

financial returns, health domains and vacation alternatives. They find that self-regulation differs

across these broadly defined domains. Jimura et al. (2011) examined the relation between

discounting of hypothetical money and real liquid rewards in young adults and older adults. At

the individual level, the rates at which young and older participants discounted each reward type

were stable over a two to fifteen week interval. However, they find no correlation in self-

regulation across these broadly defined domains. These results suggest that, although similar

decision-making processes may underlie discounting in different domains, the rates at which

individuals discount money and consumable rewards are a domain specific process. Odum

(2011) reviews a number of studies and also finds that money is generally discounted less than

drugs, food, alcohol and cigarettes and that self-regulation is relatively stable over time, while

exhibiting developmental and experiential change. Odum (2011) also finds that self-regulation

is associated with activity in particular brain regions, certain genetic traits, and appears to be

heritable. Odum (2011) concludes that self-regulation is a stable and pervasive individual

characteristic and that it is strongly correlated across narrowly defined domains.

       Another related issue is the stability of SR for a given individual. Casey, Galvan and

Hare (2005) find that impulsivity peaks at about age 16 and that most individuals achieve adult

levels of self-regulation in their mid-20s. However, prior studies have suggested that

interventions can create long term changes in SR and that changes in SR in one health area


                                                  6
can also spillover to other health areas. Deckersbach et al. (2014) found that individuals in a

weight loss program for six months had a shift in brain activation on an MRI test in favor of low

calorie relative to high calorie foods. This study suggests that following a healthy diet may, in

time, result in an increased preference for healthy food. Charness and Gneezy (2009) study the

effect of financial incentives to attend a gym on future outcomes. In two experiments they paid

individuals to attend a gym. After the intervention ended they found that gym attendance

increased and also found improvements in health indicators. This study suggests that a period

of incentivized increase in SR can lead to an actual increase in SR. Baumeister et al., (2006)

review the research on energy intensive aspect of SR. Various activities including SR deplete

this energy making added SR more difficult. This is referred to as ego depletion. However, they

argue that if an individual chooses to exercise greater self-regulation or is incentivized by some

external factors then this can produce improvements in the ability to self-regulate similar to

strengthening a muscle. These findings are consistent with Becker and Mulligan’s (1997) theory

of endogenous time preference.



3. Estimation

       The empirical model is based on a demand equation which is derived by assuming that

a consumer maximizes a utility function subject to a budget constraint. Health and other goods

are arguments of the utility function. Income and full prices are represented by the income

constraint. Work by psychologists, behavioral economists and neuroeconomists provide a

theoretical basis for including SR in the decision process. SR is assumed to be an energy

intensive neurological activity which involves the conscious suppression of the desire for

immediate gratification (Fudenberg and Levine, 2006). Assume that the full price of health

includes the money price and the price of self-regulation. Individuals who are able to self-

regulate at a lower cost will have a lower full price for health. The maximization problem results


                                                 7
in an equation which shows that the demand for health is a function of its money price, income

and self-regulation. SR enters the demand for health with an expected positive sign. The

demand for a negative health good such as cigarettes is then derived from the demand for

health. The demand for this good is a function of its price, self-regulation skill, income and other

variables. Aggregating across consumers results in the market demand function. The demand

for the good C is specified as a function of prices, education, self-regulation, income and

demographic variables. Prices and public policies are controlled with year and state fixed

effects variables, ts. ED is defined as education, SR is defined as self-regulation, income and

demographic variables are included in Z, and ε is a random error term. The empirical equation

is:

                           Ci = π0 + π1ts + π2EDi + π3SRi + π4Zi + εi. (1)

        Equation (1) cannot be directly estimated because SR is a latent variable. One

approach when a latent variable is included in a regression is to include a set of proxy variables

in place of the latent variable. However, a single SR construct, is preferred to a set of proxies

because it is easier to interpret one coefficient than a set of coefficients of potentially collinear

variables. Two older approaches to creating a single construct are first principal component

analysis and factor analysis. These approaches extract a common component of all the proxy

variables to create a composite variable. However, these extracted components are redundant

and generally do not maximize the predictive power of the proxy variable set. Another approach

to creating a single construct is to add or average the proxy variables, possibly standardized by

their standard deviations. Proxy variables measure the latent variable but with an unknown

multiplicative and additive error structure. This error results in attenuation bias. When the proxy

variables are simply added together, more variables increase the potential information but also

increase the total error. For this approach to extract the largest possible information requires

the researcher to know the relative degree of measurement error in each proxy variable, as well


                                                   8
as the correlation in measurement error across the proxies. Unfortunately these measures are

not known.

          An alternative approach to constructing a single measure of a latent variable from a set

of proxies and which does not require knowledge of the measurement error is provided by

Lubotsky and Wittenberg (2006). They derive a set of weights which minimizes the

measurement error bias and which can be used to both estimate the coefficient of SR, π3, and

to construct a single measure of SR. This estimator is referred to as the post-hoc estimator

(PH). There are i individuals and j proxy variables and xji is a proxy variable for self-regulation.

The PH estimator of π3 is denoted as πPH and requires the estimation of:

                             Ci = π0 + π1ts + π2EDi + π3Zi + ∑bjxji + εi. (2)

                       πPH is computed as: πPH = ∑ [cov(y,xji) /cov(y,x1i)]bj. (3)

The choice of which variable to use as proxy 1 is arbitrary but provides the metric for the latent

variable. The PH estimator is a lower bound rather than a point estimate for the coefficient of

the latent variable. The single summary measure of SR (SRPHi) is calculated as:

                                        SRPHi =∑ (bjxji)/πPH (4)

SRPHi replaces SRi in equation (1) which results in:

                          Ci = π0 + π1ts + π2EDi + π3Zi + πPHSR PHi + εi. (5)

Because the latent variable, SRPH, is simply a weighted average of the proxy variables, the

coefficients π0, π1, π2 and π3 are the exactly the same in equation 2 as in equation 5. The

weights are based on the marginal effects of the proxies on the outcome, holding all the other

proxies and independent variables constant. The marginal effects of the proxies differ across

each domain which results in a different estimated SR variable for each domain. The

relationship between the SR latent variables for each domain is examined in section 5.



4. Data


                                                    9
        This study uses the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) data

to estimate the empirical model. The Add Health is a longitudinal, nationally representative

sample of individuals who were adolescents, in grades 7-12, in the United States, during the

1994-95 school year (wave 1). The in-home component included interviews with 20,745

adolescents. In 1996, (wave 2), 14,738 individuals were reinterviewed. In 2001-2002, (wave 3),

15,159 of the original wave 1 respondents were reinterviewed. In 2007-2008, (wave 4), 15,701

of the original wave 1 sample were reinterviewed. The working data set was created with data

from wave 3 and wave 4, with the exception of maternal attachment which ideally should be

measured at younger ages. The final working data set includes two observations on about

13,000 individuals. Add Health includes health domains such as tobacco and alcohol

consumption, demographic data, income and a number of potential proxies for SR. There are

11 domains in the areas of: 1) smoking, 2) alcohol consumption 3) illicit drug use 4) caloric

consumption 5) criminal behavior and 6) gambling. Minorities are oversampled and weights are

included in the data set to create correct sample means. All of the estimation models include

state clustered Huber standard errors based on pseudo-state variables that allow clustering by

state, although the state is not identified.

4.1 Domains

        The Add Health has a number of questions relating to tobacco use and alcohol use. A

tobacco use variable was constructed from two questions asked in each wave. The first

question is “During the past 30 days, on how many days did you smoke cigarettes?” This

question has 0-30 as response codes. The second question is “During the past 30 days, on the

days you smoked, how many cigarettes did you smoke each day?” This question has 1-100 as

response codes. These variables were multiplied together to form an estimate of monthly

tobacco consumption. Similarly, an alcohol use variable was constructed from two questions

asked in each wave. The first question is “During the past 30 days, on how many days did you


                                                10
drink?’ There are seven response codes from none to every day or almost every day. This was

recoded into a continuous variable from 0 to 30. The second question asks about the number of

drinks usually consumed each time on each drinking occasion in the past 30 days. The

response codes are from 1-18. These variables were multiplied to form an estimate of monthly

alcohol consumption.4 The Add Health also has a measure of binge drinking which is defined

as five or more drinks for a male and four or more drinks for a female. A dichotomous binge

drinking variable was defined as equal to one for individuals who reported that they engaged in

binge drinking 2 or more times per month.

        The Add Health also has questions relating to illicit drug use. Two illicit drug use

variables were defined. The first is the number of times the individual used marijuana in past 30

days. The second is the number of drug abuse symptoms which ranges from zero to four.

        The Add Health also has data on height and weight which can be used to compute BMI.

These data are measured by Add Health which eliminates error due to self-reporting bias. In

wave 3, height is reported in feet and inches and weight is reported in pounds. The formula

used to compute BMI for these three waves is weight (in pounds) / height2 (in inches) all times

703. BMI is directly reported in wave 4. An additional dichotomous variable, obesity, is defined

for a BMI equal to 30 or more.

        The Add Health also has questions relating to non-health behaviors relating to self-

regulation. These domains are criminal behavior and gambling. Two criminal behavior

variables were coded. The first is a dichotomous construct equal to one if the individual reports

that they have ever been arrested by the police. The second measures participation in various

criminal activities including burglarizing, minor theft, major theft, use of a weapon, selling drugs,



4
  A dichotomous drinking variable was not included because the majority of adults drink with no negative
health consequences and those who do not drink have been found, in some studies, to be less healthy
than drinkers.


                                                   11
gang fighting, property damage, causing serious injury, pulling a weapon on someone,

stabbing/shooting someone. Each of these questions were coded as dichotomous variables

and then they were added together to form a crime index which goes from zero to 10. The

gambling variable was defined as equal to one if the individual reported that they had ever had a

net loss from gambling of more than $500 in one year.

4.2 Proxy Variables

       The SRPHi variable created by (4) is an index of the effects of the proxy variables on the

domain variable. The choice of proxy variables was based on a theoretical and empirical

literature on SR which supports the assertion that these measures are proxies for self-

regulation. As noted above, SR is an energy intensive process of suppressing the desire for

immediate gratification in favor of a future reward. Cunha and Heckman (2008) employ a

production function to describe this process. Ideally, the proxy variables should be measures of

the production determinants which include the efficiency of the production process and the

inputs in the production process. The specific proxies were chosen based on prior studies

which made a theoretical argument or provided empirical evidence that the variable affected a

domain related to self-regulation. These studies are discussed in more detail below. Equation

(4) can be thought of as a production function where output in not observed but is estimated as

a linear transformation of the production determinants and correlates of production. The index

is labeled SRPHi because the evidence suggests that the proxies affect an individual’s ability to

delay gratification although there is no way to definitively prove that SRPHi actually measures

self-regulation.

       Unlike prior studies of the health gradient by economists, this paper takes a more

systematic approach to the choice of proxy variables. The proxy variables chosen are

measures of the efficiency and inputs in the process of producing self-regulation. The efficiency

of production process is related to the individual’s biological endowment and other variables.


                                                12
Any factor which alters production efficiency can affect the production of self-regulation. The

primary input in SR is energy which is a limited resource.5 Other processes requiring energy

can take priority over self-regulation reducing the energy available for self-regulation.6 Thus

proxy measures for competing processes which require energy also belong in equation (4). The

proxy variables and the evidence provided by prior studies which support the assertion that

these measures are proxies for the determinants of SR are discussed next. Some of these

empirical studies also use the Add Health data. More detailed information on the empirical

definitions of the proxy variables is provided in the Appendix 1.

        Wave 3 and wave 4 of the Add Health each provide good proxy variables for self-

regulation.7 All of these proxy variables have been shown in prior studies to affect self-

regulation. An important question is whether SR between these two waves can be assumed to

be constant. Past studies have concluded that individuals reach a stable adult levels of SR at

about age 25. Moffitt et al. (2011) measured self-regulation with data from five separate waves

of the Dunedin Study sample. They also compared self-regulation measured in childhood with a

measure derived more than 10 years later and found that the rank order in self-regulation did

not change. In the Dunedin sample, the measures of self-regulation from childhood predicted

health domains, wealth domains and criminal conviction history at age 32. These results also

parallel the results found by Mischel, Shoda and Peake (1988). Odum (2011) reviews a number

of studies and finds that self-regulation is associated with activity in particular brain regions,

certain genetic traits, and appears to be heritable. She concludes that self-regulation is a stable

and pervasive individual characteristic which can exhibit developmental and experiential



5
  Gailliot and Baumeister (2008) argue the energy is glucose.
6
  For example, any process required for survival.
7
  One exception is a retrospective parental variable from wave 1 which asks the individual to recall earlier
childhood experiences with their mother.




                                                    13
change. Developmental and experiential change will, to some degree, be controlled with

observable demographics such as marital status and parent status in the regressions.

According to Heckman (2008) non-cognitive traits such as self-regulation are largely determined

at young ages and do not change significantly after adolescence. The individuals in the Add

Health are on average about age 23 in wave 3 and about age 29 in wave 4. Based on the

evidence, it seems reasonable to assume that SR is sufficiently constant between waves 3 and

4 that a time invariant index of SR derived from wave 3 and wave 4 data will not introduce any

important bias.

       The Add Health has a question set designed to measure self-regulation independent of

any specific domain. The questions focus on impulsivity, feelings of decreased regulation and

instinctive rather than thoughtful decisions. This variable will be called the self-regulation proxy

and the results of equation (4) will be called the SR latent variable. The self-regulation proxy

variable is one of the proxy variables used to create the SR latent variable. The SR proxy

variable has been used to measure self-regulation by Beaver, Ratchford and Ferguson (2009)

and Vaughn et al. (2009). They report a value for Cronbach’s alpha of .80 which indicates a

high degree of correlation in the responses to the 20 questions. Miller, Barnes and Beaver

(2011) examine the link between low values from the self-regulation proxy during adolescence

and health problems in early adulthood. They use the Add Health self-regulation proxy and

examined the relationship between varying levels of self-regulation and the likelihood of being

diagnosed with a list of 10 physical and mental health conditions. They find that subjects with

lower levels of self-regulation had significantly higher odds of being diagnosed with 9 of 10

negative health domains. Because the self-regulation proxy variable is the same value for each

individual regardless of domains, it forces self-regulation to be a personality trait which is not

generally supported by prior studies (Foxall et al., 2011, Jimura et al., 2011, Odum 2011).

However, this measure is a good proxy variable for the self-regulation latent variable and


                                                 14
provides an option to examine the relative explanatory power of the self-regulation latent

variable.

       Production efficiency in self-regulation has an inherited component. Timberlake et al.

(2006) studied the association between smoking behavior and genes with wave 3 data from the

Add Health. One gene variant was inversely associated with smoking accounting for

approximately 1% of the variance in smoking prevalence. Never smokers and current

nonsmokers had an excess of another gene variant compared with regular smokers, suggesting

a protective effect. In another study by Hopfer et al. (2005) the association between drinking

behavior and a set of gene variants was investigated. They used Add Health data and

concluded that the gene variants accounted for from 3.1% to 2.0% of the variation in drinking

behavior. Vaughn et al. (2009) also used the Add Health data and found a relationship between

genetic variables and substance use.

       Another psychological variable relates to childhood. Wright et al. (2012), Belsky and

Beaver (2011) and Beaver, Ratchford and Ferguson (2009) show that some children exposed to

difficult family environments later manifest problem behavior associated with low self-regulation.

A maternal attachment scale was created from questions in wave1 of the Add Health. Because

these data are were collected in wave 1 they can be considered retrospective in wave 3 and

wave 4.

       According to Baumeister et al. (2006) the exercise of self-regulation can enhance the

individual’s ability to self-regulate. Thus variables associated with greater exercise of self-

regulation are likely to measure both greater levels of self-regulation and increased production

efficiency. The psychological trait known as conscientiousness is one such variable.

Conscientiousness is one of the big five personality traits and is defined as a tendency to show

self-discipline, act dutifully and aim for achievement. The trait correlates with a preference for

planned rather than spontaneous behavior. Jensen-Campbell et al. (2007) examined whether


                                                 15
this personality trait is associated with the ability to exhibit self-regulation and moderate the

anger–aggression link. Their results replicated previous findings that conscientiousness is

negatively associated with anger and relative left prefrontal asymmetry. Conscientiousness was

also found to moderate the link between anger and aggression. Individuals with higher scores

on Conscientiousness are also more likely to have higher levels of education and health. Also

individuals with ADHD are likely to score lower on conscientiousness.

        The diversion of energy from self-regulation to competing psychological processes will

also reduce self-regulation. That is, mental health issues can divert energy away from the

production of self-regulation. Saffer and Dave (2005) show that mental health issues increase

tobacco and alcohol use. Wave 4 of the Add Health includes three mental health variables

which could affect substance use. They are measures of stress, depression and anxiety.

        Religious adherence may also reflect the practice of self-regulation. All religions

encourage the individual to avoid various temptations. McCullough and Willoughby (2009)

review a number of studies which show that religious individuals are less likely to pursue

unhealthy behaviors and have lower mortality than their less religious counterparts.

        The production of self-regulation may also be affected by Attention Deficit Hyperactivity

Disorder (ADHD). Past studies have found that that ADHD is correlated with a lack of ability to

delay gratification. Wright et al. (2012) argue that ADHD, impulse regulation, the ability to delay

gratification, and response inhibition are all highly heritable. Thus it is difficult to isolate a causal

effect of ADHD that is independent of genetic measures. Parental socialization of children

provides another route for the intergenerational transmission of these traits. Wave 3 of the Add

Health contains 18 questions which measure retrospective hyperactivity. Following Vaughn et

al. (2009) these questions were summed to form a non-clinical ADHD index.

        Although behaviors associated with risk tolerance resemble behaviors associated with a

limited ability to self-regulate, risk tolerance is probably not a good proxy for self-regulation.


                                                   16
There is evidence that smokers are aware of the risks of smoking yet continue to smoke

(Viscusi, 1999 and Steptoe et al., 2002). In addition, studies have found that compared to

nonsmokers, smokers are more likely to partake in a variety of other risky behaviors. For

example, smokers tend to be more involved in traffic accidents (DiFranza et al. 1986), are less

likely to wear seatbelts (Dillow, et al., 1981 and Eiser et al., 1997), and are more likely to

engage in risky sexual behavior (Valois et al., 1999). These facts suggest that smokers are

more risk tolerant than non-smokers. However, Ert, Yechiam and Arshavsky (2013), report on

experimental studies which compared smokers to nonsmokers but do not find significant

differences between the two groups in risk preference. If this is true, why do smokers make

risky choices in various domains? Ert, Yechiam and Arshavsky (2013), using experimental data

derived with the Iowa Gambling Task, conclude that the reason is a limited ability to self-

regulate rather than risk preference. This makes risk preference and self-regulation distinctly

different phenomena.

4.3 Other variables

       Education is an important variable because it may be a proxy for health knowledge or

efficiency in health production. Education is also likely to be correlated with self-regulation since

individuals who have greater self-regulation have been shown to achieve higher levels of

educational success (Mischel, Shoda and Peake, 1988). Education has also been shown to de-

emphasize the role of emotion-based processes in decision making (Evans, Kemish and

Turnbull, 2004). Education is not included as a proxy for self-regulation so that the effect of self-

regulation on the education-health gradient can be measured and compared with results from

prior studies of non-cognitive skills and the health-education gradient. Education is measured

as years of schooling completed in wave 4.

       The Add Health also includes a large number of questions which were used to construct

demographic and economic variables. The Add Health demographic data includes gender, age,


                                                 17
race, Hispanic, income, marital status and number of children. These variables were defined as

either dichotomous or continuous. Table 1 includes the means and standard errors of all the

variables including all the proxy variables.



5. Results

       The first step in the empirical work is the estimation of equation (2) and the calculation of

the domain specific self-regulation variables for all 11 domains as described in equation (3) and

equation (4). The proxy variable coefficients from these regressions are presented in Appendix

table 1 and are the empirical versions of equation (2). These empirical models also include

education and demographic variables and fixed effects. The proxy variable coefficients are

presented in order to highlight the differences in these coefficients across the domains.

       Table 2 presents the bivariate correlations between the 11 domains. The reason for

presenting this table is to contrast the correlations in domains with the correlations in SR in each

domain. If the correlations across domains are high then it would be expected that the

correlations in SR across domains would also be high. However, the results indicate that the

correlations across domains are relatively small. These correlations are generally around .15.

The strongest correlations for domains are between crime and substance use which are about

.20. Table 2 also shows that the BMI and obesity variables have the smallest positive

correlations, insignificant correlations and negative correlations. These correlations suggest

that the choice of domains that individuals choose to engage in are not strongly related.

       Table 3 presents the bivariate correlations between the estimated self-regulation latent

variables calculated for each domain. Because each latent variable is a linear function of the

proxy variables, some degree of correlation is expected. High correlations will be defined as

over .75 and suggest that self-regulation in the pair of domains is similar. Table 3 shows, in

contrast to the correlations between the domains, that the correlations in self-regulation across


                                                18
the11 domains are high. These correlations are generally around .85 which suggests that SRPH

across domains, including non-health domains, are similar. The exception to this is for BMI and

obesity which have a low correlation with all the other domains. The correlations for the self-

regulation BMI and obesity variables with the other self-regulation variables are generally

around .30. The results from both table 2 and 3 show that excess eating is a unique domain

with little relation to the other domains.

        Table 4 presents the mean values for each of the estimated domain specific SR latent

variables. These SR variables are all computed with the same choice of proxy variable 1 which

gives them all the same metric. The table shows that BMI and obesity have the lowest levels of

SR, cigarette consumption (by smokers only) is not much higher. The highest levels of SR are

for marijuana use (for all individuals) and (for all individuals).

        The next empirical task is to measure effect of the inclusion of SRPH on health choices.

Three specifications of equation (5) were estimated for each of the 11 domains and are

presented in tables 5 through 9. The first specification does not include any proxy variables or

any self-regulation measures. This specification establishes baseline values for the effects of

demographics and the explanatory power of all the independent variables excluding SR. The

second specification includes all the baseline specification variables and in addition includes the

self-regulation proxy variable from the Add Health data set. This specification provides an

option to compare the effects of the simple self-regulation proxy measure with the latent variable

measure of self-regulation provided by the LW approach. The third specification includes all the

baseline variables and includes the latent variable measure of self-regulation. Tables 5 through

9 provide an opportunity to compare the education coefficients in the baseline specification with

the specification which includes the self-regulation latent variables. This comparison illustrates

the effect of self-regulation on the education gradients.




                                                   19
         Tables 5 through 9 show that self-regulation has a negative effect on all the domains

and that the self-regulation latent variables have larger coefficients than the corresponding self-

regulation proxy variables.8 The self-regulation latent variables also increase the explanatory

power of the empirical equation with respect to both the baseline specification and with respect

to the simple proxy self-regulation specification. These tables also show that the inclusion of

the self-regulation latent variable reduces the education gradient for smoking, drinking, drugs

and crime but not for eating and gambling. In general, the gradients for black, Hispanic and

female are not affected by the inclusion of the self-regulation latent variable except for eating

where the effect of being female increases when self-regulation is included. For crime and

gambling the inclusion of the self-regulation latent variable reduces the effect of being female.



6. Conclusions

         Although it is not possible to definitively state that the self-regulation latent variables

created in this study measure domain specific self-regulation, there is both theory and empirical

evidence which support this interpretation. These self-regulation latent variables are novel,

even though the proxy variables used to create these latent variables are familiar from prior

studies. These prior studies provide both theoretical and empirical evidence that the proxy

variables are related to self-regulation. The self-regulation latent variables are weighted

averages of these proxy variables. Also, the empirical results in this study show that the self-

regulation latent variables have significant and negative effects on domains which require self-

regulation.




8
 Another variant of self-regulation is presented in Appendix table 1. This is the effect of the proxy self-regulation
variable holding all the other proxies constant. These coefficients are similar to specification (2) of tables 5-9 but
generally smaller in magnitude.



                                                            20
       The empirical results suggest that there is a high correlation in self-regulation for

smoking, drinking, drug use, crime and gambling, but that self-regulation for BMI and obesity

are different from the other domains studied. That is, individuals with generally high self-

regulation in smoking, drinking, drug use, crime and gambling may have low self-regulation in

controlling their overeating. One possible explanation for this difference comes from

evolutionary theory (Burnham, 2013). From an evolutionary perspective, if food shortages were

the norm, then a preference for eating in excess, when possible, would favor survival. Thus,

natural selection would result in an inclination to overeat when possible. However, a preference

for all the other domains must be learned through experience. This could make self-regulation

in eating different than self-regulation in the learned domains. The very low levels of SR in BMI

and obesity highlight the need for increased public policies to reduce overeating.

       The inclusion of the self-regulation latent variable reduces the effect of education except

for marijuana use and eating. However, education is shown to retain a negative and significant

effect on the domains which implies that education has a positive effect on health. This result

supports the theory that education enhances efficiency in health production (Grossman, 2008).

       Finally, the research presented in this paper raises questions about the effects of public

policy on health related domains. Price, advertising and other policies may be moderated by

interaction with self-regulation. Future research on how individual variations in SR affects price

and advertising elasticities could be valuable in crafting new policies to promote health.




                                                21
References

Baumeister, Roy F., Matthew Gailliot, C. Nathan DeWall, and Megan Oaten. "Self‐Regulation
and Personality: How Interventions Increase Regulatory Success, and How Depletion
Moderates the Effects of Traits on Behavior." Journal of Personality 74, no. 6 (2006): 1773-
1802.

Beaver, Kevin M., Marie Ratchford, and Christopher J. Ferguson. "Evidence of genetic and
environmental effects on the development of low self-control." Criminal Justice and Behavior 36,
no. 11 (2009): 1158-1172.

Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan. "The endogenous determination of time
preference." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 3 (1997): 729-758.

Belsky, Jay, and Kevin M. Beaver. "Cumulative‐genetic plasticity, parenting and adolescent
self‐regulation." Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 52, no. 5 (2011): 619-626.

Burnham, Terence C. "Toward a neo-Darwinian synthesis of neoclassical and behavioral
economics." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 90 (2013): S113-S127.

Casey, B. J., Adriana Galvan, and Todd A. Hare. "Changes in cerebral functional organization
during cognitive development." Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, no. 2 (2005): 239-244.

Charness, Gary, and Uri Gneezy. "Incentives to exercise." Econometrica 77, no. 3 (2009): 909-
931.
Chiteji, Ngina. "Time-preference, Non-cognitive Skills and Well-being across the Life Course: Do
Non-cognitive Skills Encourage Healthy Behavior?" The American Economic Review 100, no. 2
(2010): 200.

Conti, Gabriella, and Christopher Hansman. "Personality and the education–health gradient: A
note on “Understanding differences in health behaviors by education”." Journal of Health
Economics 32, no. 2 (2013): 480-485.

Conti, Gabriella, and James J. Heckman. "Understanding the Early Origins of the Education–
Health Gradient A Framework That Can Also Be Applied to Analyze Gene–Environment
Interactions." Perspectives on Psychological Science 5, no. 5 (2010): 585-605.

Conti, Gabriella, James Heckman, and Sergio Urzua. "The education-health gradient." The
American Economic Review 100, no. 2 (2010): 234-238.




                                              22
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. "Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology
of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation." Journal of Human Resources 43, no. 4 (2008):
738-782.

Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. "Understanding differences in health behaviors by
education." Journal of Health Economics 29, no. 1 (2010): 1-28.

Deckersbach, T., S. K. Das, L. E. Urban, T. Salinardi, P. Batra, A. M. Rodman, A.
R. Arulpragasam, D. D. Dougherty and S. B. Roberts, “Pilot randomized trial demonstrating
reversal of obesity-related abnormalities in reward system responsivity to food cues with a
behavioral intervention”, Nutrition & Diabetes (2014), 4, e129; doi:10.1038/nutd.2014.26.

DiFranza JR, Winters TH, Goldberg RJ, Cirillio L, Bilioris T (1986) “The relationship of smoking
to motor vehicle accidents and traffic violations.” New York State J Med 86: 464–7.

Dillow I, Swann C, Cliff KS (1981), “A study of the effect of a health education programme in
promoting seat-belt wearing”, Health Education J 40: 14–8. doi:10.1177/001789698104000107.

Eiser JR, Sutton SR, Wober M (1997) Smoking, seatbelts, and beliefs about health. Addictive
Behavior 4: 331–8.

Ert, Eyal, Eldad Yechiam, and Olga Arshavsky. "Smokers’ Decision Making: More than Mere
Risk Taking." PloS one 8, no. 7 (2013): e68064.

Evans, Cathryn EY, Karen Kemish, and Oliver H. Turnbull. "Paradoxical effects of education on
the Iowa Gambling Task." Brain and Cognition 54, no. 3 (2004): 240-244.

Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O'donoghue. "Time discounting and time
preference: A critical review." Journal of Economic Literature 40, no. 2 (2002): 351-401.

Foxall, Gordon R., John R. Doyle, Mirella Yani-de-Soriano, and Victoria K. Wells. "Contexts and
individual differences as influences on consumers' delay discounting." Psychological Record 61,
no. 4 (2011).

Fudenberg, Drew, and David K. Levine. "A dual-self model of impulse control." The American
Economic Review (2006): 1449-1476.

Gailliot, Matthew T., and Roy F. Baumeister. "The physiology of willpower: Linking blood
glucose to self-control." Personality and Social Psychology Review 11, no. 4 (2007): 303-327.

Grossman, Michael. "The relationship between health and schooling." Eastern Economic
Journal 34, no. 3 (2008): 281-292.

Gubler, Timothy, and Lamar Pierce. "Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Retirement Planning Predicts
Employee Health Improvements." (2014) http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/faculty/pierce/401k-
paper_rev4.pdf

Heckman, James J. "The case for investing in disadvantaged young children." Big ideas for
children: Investing in our nation’s future. (2008): 49-58.


                                               23
Hopfer, Christian J., David Timberlake, Brett Haberstick, Jeffrey M. Lessem, Marissa A.
Ehringer, Andrew Smolen, and John K. Hewitt. "Genetic influences on quantity of alcohol
consumed by adolescents and young adults." Drug and Alcohol Dependence 78, no. 2 (2005):
187-193.

Jensen-Campbell, Lauri A., Jennifer M. Knack, Amy M. Waldrip, and Shaun D. Campbell. "Do
Big Five personality traits associated with self-control influence the regulation of anger and
aggression?" Journal of Research in Personality 41, no. 2 (2007): 403-424.

Jimura, Koji, Joel Myerson, Joseph Hilgard, Julia Keighley, Todd S. Braver, and Leonard Green.
"Domain independence and stability in young and older adults’ discounting of delayed
rewards." Behavioural Processes 87, no. 3 (2011): 253-259.

Kaestner Robert and Kevin Callison. “Adolescent Cognitive and Noncognitive Correlates of
Adult Health.”Journal of Human Capital , Vol. 5, No. 1 (Spring 2011), pp. 29-69

Lubotsky, Darren, and Martin Wittenberg. "Interpretation of regressions with multiple proxies."
The Review of Economics and Statistics 88, no. 3 (2006): 549-562.

MacKillop, James, and Christopher W. Kahler. "Delayed reward discounting predicts treatment
response for heavy drinkers receiving smoking cessation treatment." Drug and Alcohol
Dependence 104, no. 3 (2009): 197-203.

McCullough, Michael E., and Brian LB Willoughby. "Religion, self-regulation, and self-control:
Associations, explanations, and implications." Psychological Bulletin 135, no. 1 (2009): 69.

Miller, Holly Ventura, J. C. Barnes, and Kevin M. Beaver. "Self-control and health outcomes in a
nationally representative sample." American Journal of Health Behavior 35, no. 1 (2011): 15-27.

Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Philip K. Peake. "The nature of adolescent competencies
predicted by preschool delay of gratification." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54,
no. 4 (1988): 687.

Moffitt, Terrie E., Louise Arseneault, Daniel Belsky, Nigel Dickson, Robert J. Hancox, HonaLee
Harrington, Renate Houts et al. "A gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and
public safety." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 7 (2011): 2693-2698.

Odum, Amy L. "Delay discounting: Trait variable?" Behavioural Processes 87, no. 1 (2011): 1-9.

Saffer, Henry, and Dhaval Dave. "Mental illness and the demand for alcohol, cocaine, and
cigarettes." Economic Inquiry 43, no. 2 (2005): 229-246.

Savelyev, Peter A. "Psychological Skills, Education, and Longevity of High-Ability
Individuals." Unpublished manuscript, Vanderbilt University, Department of Economics (2014).

Stanovich, Keith E., and Richard F. West. "On the relative independence of thinking biases and
cognitive ability." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94, no. 4 (2008): 672.




                                                24
Steptoe A, Wardle J, Weiwei C, Baban A, Glass K, et al. (2002) An international comparison of
tobacco smoking, beliefs, and risk awareness in university students from 23 countries. Addiction
97: 1561–71.

Timberlake, David S., Brett C. Haberstick, Jeffrey M. Lessem, Andrew Smolen, Marissa
Ehringer, John K. Hewitt, and Christian Hopfer. "An association between the DAT1
polymorphism and smoking behavior in young adults from the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health." Health Psychology 25, no. 2 (2006): 190.

Valois RF, Oeltmann JE, Waller J, Hussey JR (1999) Relationship between number of sexual
intercourse partners and selected health risk behaviors among public high school adolescents. J
Adol Health 25: 328–35.

Vaughn, Michael G., Kevin M. Beaver, Matt DeLisi, Brian E. Perron, and Lisa Schelbe. "Gene-
environment interplay and the importance of self-control in predicting polydrug use and
substance-related problems." Addictive Behaviors 34, no. 1 (2009): 112-116.

Viscusi WK (1999). Do smokers underestimate risks? J Polit Econ 98: 1253–69.

Wright, John Paul, Rebecca Schnupp, Kevin M. Beaver, Matt Delisi, and Michael Vaughn.
"Genes, Maternal Negativity, and Self-Control Evidence of a Gene× Environment
Interaction." Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice 10, no. 3 (2012): 245-260.




                                              25
                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                          Mean    SD      Min   Max
Outcomes
  Smoker                                                  0.37     0.48     0      1
  Cigarette Consumption of Smokers per month            318.50   305.35     0   3000
  Alcohol Consumption of Drinkers per month              26.83    48.63     0    540
  Regular Binge Drinker                                   0.28     0.45     0      1
  Marijuana Use in Past 30 Days                           2.32     9.57     0    200
  Num of Drug Abuse Symptoms                              0.14     0.58     0      4
  Ever Been Arrested                                      0.21     0.41     0      1
  Index of Criminal Behavior and Violence                 0.39     0.96     0     10
  Gambler                                                 0.04     0.19     0      1
  Obese                                                   0.30     0.46     0      1
  BMI                                                    27.71     6.94    13     72

Self-Regulation Proxies
  Self-Regulation Index                                  65.71     7.92    38    96
  Genetic Index                                           1.59     0.91     0     4
  Maternal Attachment                                     9.20     1.18     2    10
  Conscientiousness Scale                                14.55     2.70     4    20
  Perceived Stress Scale                                  4.82     2.98     0    16
  CESD Depression Scale                                   2.46     2.58     0    15
  Anxious Personality Scale                              12.33     2.96     4    20
  Religious                                               0.50     0.50     0     1
  ADHD index                                             13.65     9.05     0    54

Demographic Characteristics
  White                                                   0.67     0.47     0      1
  Black                                                   0.16     0.37     0      1
  Hispanic                                                0.12     0.32     0      1
  Asian                                                   0.03     0.18     0      1
  Native American                                         0.01     0.09     0      1
  Other Race                                              0.01     0.09     0      1
  Female                                                  0.49     0.50     0      1
  Age                                                    25.09     3.77    18     34
  Age Squared                                           643.84   189.88   324   1156
  Years of Education (by W4)                             14.15     2.21     8     20
  Earnings in $10000                                      2.39     3.45     0    100
  Married                                                 0.29     0.45     0      1
  Number of Children in the HH                            0.57     0.96     0      7

Observations: 29122

                                           26
                                                        Table 2: Correlation Across Outcomes
                                                   Alcohol     Binge                    Drug                          Crime
                       Smoker       Cigarettes     Consum.     Drinker     Marijuana   Abuse             Arrested     Index     Gambler     Obese     BMI
  SMOKER                 1
  CIGARETTES                            1
  ALCOHOL                .197          .124         1
  BINGE DRINKER          .222          .049        .504          1
  MARIJUANA              .154          .064        .142         .145             1
  DRUG ABUSE             .173          .082        .124         .116            .123           1
  ARRESTED               .238          .070        .182         .182            .103          .200         1
  CRIME INDEX            .151          .046        .228         .195            .271          .190        .228           1
  GAMBLER                .075          .045        .103         .085            .046          .063        .094          .096      1
  OBESE                  .001          .006       -.027        -.044           -.042         -.030        .012         -.026     .032         1
  BMI                   -.018         -.013       -.028        -.048           -.058         -.039        .012         -.027     .038       .808        1
Description: All Pair wise correlations between outcomes of interest. All correlation coefficients are significant at the 5% level except for the
correlations between obese and smoker, obese and cigarettes, and BMI and cigarettes.

                                  Table 3: Correlation Across Self-Regulation Skill Latent Variable Measures
                                            Alcohol     Binge                  Drug                 Crime
                   Smoker      Cigarettes Consum.      Drinker   Marijuana     Abuse    Arrested     Index   Gambler                  Obese         BMI
 Smoker                1
 Cigarettes          .897           1
 Alcohol Con         .900         .758          1
 Binge Drinker       .903         .692        0.951         1
 Marijuana           .924         .700        0.924       .969           1
 Drug Abuse          .906         .846        0.868       .834         0.781          1
 Arrested            .944         .828        0.956       .915         0.907        .897            1
 Crime Index         .859         .773        0.913       .884         0.824        .939          .897         1
 Gambler             .788         .631        0.911       .846         0.836        .797          .814       .820          1
 Obese               .239         .381        0.254       .154         0.180        .345          .134       .382        .492            1
 BMI                 .250         .368        0.300       .179         0.203        .355          .160       .412        .537          .986           1
Description: All Pair wise correlations between the constructed self-regulation proxies. All of these correlations are statistically significant at the 5%
level.
                                                                            27
                 Table 4


SRSPH Latent Variable for:   Mean
Cigarette Consumption         4.737
Smoker                       24.503
Alcohol Consumption          40.078
Binge                        55.013
Marijuana                    64.906
Drug Abuse                   27.273
Obesity                      0.0816
BMI                          1.4939
Arrested                     27.945
Crime                        41.001
Gambler                      36.940




                   28
                                                        Table 5
                                        Effect of Self-Regulation on Smoking
                           SMOKER         SMOKER         SMOKER     CIGARETTES        CIGARETTES    CIGARETTES

BLACK                       -0.152***      -0.147***        -0.138***   -153.920***   -152.620***   -141.656***
                            (0.014)        (0.014)          (0.009)      (18.378)      (19.578)      (11.895)
HISPANIC                    -0.137***      -0.126***        -0.118***   -134.434***   -127.222***   -122.420***
                            (0.019)        (0.022)          (0.010)      (19.386)      (19.728)      (11.991)
ASIAN                       -0.052         -0.060*          -0.046***   -104.886***    -98.669***    -85.062***
                            (0.038)        (0.034)          (0.014)      (14.676)      (13.835)      (15.200)
NATIVE AMERICAN              0.041          0.028           -0.002       -19.918         4.136        14.148
                            (0.046)        (0.046)          (0.039)      (41.166)      (45.642)      (43.491)
OTHER                       -0.062         -0.064           -0.054       -47.379       -40.841       -30.251
                            (0.044)        (0.044)          (0.036)      (30.214)      (35.881)      (38.766)
FEMALE                      -0.049***      -0.025*          -0.021***    -58.379***    -51.514***    -60.723***
                            (0.010)        (0.013)          (0.007)       (5.556)       (6.347)       (7.008)
AGE                          0.029***       0.024*           0.016        32.322**      31.160**      22.428
                            (0.010)        (0.012)          (0.013)      (12.513)      (11.692)      (13.903)
AGE SQUARED                 -0.001***      -0.000*          -0.000        -0.541**      -0.498**      -0.342
                            (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.242)       (0.236)       (0.270)
EDUCATION (BY W4)           -0.054***      -0.052***        -0.046***    -26.126***    -26.902***    -22.608***
                            (0.003)        (0.004)          (0.002)       (2.065)       (2.208)       (2.054)
EARNINGS IN $10000          -0.002***      -0.002*          -0.001        -1.027        -1.018        -1.131
                            (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.723)       (0.786)       (0.818)
MARRIED                     -0.128***      -0.114***        -0.102***    -21.982**     -18.262*       -6.629
                            (0.007)        (0.008)          (0.008)       (9.869)       (9.816)       (8.748)
CHILDREN IN THE HH           0.011**        0.017**          0.018***     10.155**      11.463***      9.544**
                            (0.005)        (0.007)          (0.004)       (3.939)       (4.080)       (4.001)
SELF-REG. PROXY                            -0.008***                                    -2.052***
                                           (0.001)                                      (0.482)
SELF-REG. LATENT                                            -0.018***                                -13.090***
                                                           (0.001)                                    (1.203)
OBSERVATIONS               26,162          22,097          20,216        9,021         7,515           6,844
R-SQUARED                   0.119           0.137           0.153        0.123         0.128           0.142
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard Errors Clustered at the State
Level. State and Time Fixed Effects are included in all regressions.




                                                       29
                                                    Table 6
                                    Effect of Self-Regulation on Drinking
                               ALCOHOL       ALCOHOL        ALCOHOL      BINGE           BINGE         BINGE
                               CONSUMP-     CONSUMP-       CONSUMP-     DRINKER         DRINKER       DRINKER
                                 TION          TION           TION

BLACK                            -8.716***     -8.359***     -7.628***     -0.144***     -0.142***     -0.136***
                                  (1.271)      (1.267)        (1.172)       (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.008)
HISPANIC                         -7.582***     -6.556***     -5.754***     -0.068***     -0.056***     -0.055***
                                  (1.248)      (1.523)        (1.222)       (0.018)      (0.019)       (0.010)
ASIAN                           -11.493***    -11.950***    -12.113***     -0.108***     -0.116***     -0.112***
                                  (1.335)      (1.685)        (1.388)       (0.021)      (0.024)       (0.013)
NATIVE AMERICAN                    1.585        0.092          0.960         0.040       -0.001         0.009
                                  (3.183)      (3.904)        (4.809)       (0.032)      (0.036)       (0.038)
OTHER                            -9.834***     -8.640**       -8.944**     -0.115***     -0.099**      -0.092***
                                  (3.051)      (3.806)        (3.645)       (0.037)      (0.041)       (0.032)
FEMALE                          -19.510***    -17.552***    -17.280***     -0.136***     -0.119***     -0.116***
                                  (1.246)      (1.332)        (0.767)       (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.006)
AGE                               -1.842       -1.156         -1.825         0.000        0.011         0.007
                                  (1.602)      (1.515)        (1.706)       (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.013)
AGE SQUARED                        0.033        0.025          0.036        -0.000       -0.000        -0.000
                                  (0.030)      (0.028)        (0.033)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
YEARS OF EDUCATION (W4)          -1.732***     -1.678***     -1.239***     -0.007***     -0.007***     -0.004***
                                  (0.220)      (0.243)        (0.188)       (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)
EARNINGS IN $10000                -0.048       -0.021          0.004         0.002**      0.002**       0.002**
                                  (0.066)      (0.064)        (0.077)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
MARRIED                          -9.571***     -8.597***     -8.188***     -0.114***     -0.108***     -0.104***
                                  (0.906)      (1.085)        (0.845)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.007)
CHILDREN IN HH                   -2.102***     -1.862***     -1.871***     -0.017***     -0.012***     -0.010***
                                  (0.443)      (0.442)        (0.477)       (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)
SELF-REGULATION PROXY                          -0.761***                                 -0.007***
                                               (0.051)                                   (0.000)
SELF-REGULATION LATENT                                         -1.002***                              -0.008***
                                                                (0.065)                                (0.000)
OBSERVATIONS                    19,139         16,415          15,071      26,336       22,175         20,282
R-SQUARED                        0.080          0.093           0.100       0.088        0.106          0.111
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard Errors Clustered at the State
Level. State and Time Fixed Effects are included in all regressions.

                                                       30
                                                       Table 7
                                       Effect of Self-Regulation on Drug Use
                         MARIJUANA     MARIJUANA      MARIJUANA DRUG ABUSE DRUG ABUSE DRUG ABUSE

BLACK                       -0.062        0.110             0.214      -0.179***      -0.172***     -0.168***
                            (0.219)      (0.234)           (0.206)     (0.015)        (0.016)       (0.010)
HISPANIC                   -0.709***     -0.659**          -0.743***   -0.121***      -0.111***     -0.104***
                            (0.249)      (0.302)           (0.202)     (0.011)        (0.012)       (0.014)
ASIAN                      -1.251***     -1.400***         -1.312***   -0.135***      -0.134***     -0.125***
                            (0.213)      (0.213)           (0.281)     (0.018)        (0.017)       (0.017)
NATIVE AMERICAN             -0.614       -1.039**          -0.980*     -0.090         -0.084        -0.099*
                            (0.380)      (0.441)           (0.560)     (0.081)        (0.085)       (0.060)
OTHER                       -0.221       -0.037             0.345      -0.099         -0.083        -0.085*
                            (0.593)      (0.713)           (0.998)     (0.070)        (0.075)       (0.045)
FEMALE                     -1.423***     -1.166***         -0.973***   -0.039***      -0.016        -0.027***
                            (0.157)      (0.162)           (0.143)     (0.009)        (0.011)       (0.009)
AGE                        -0.803***     -0.733***         -0.694**     0.035***       0.030***      0.033*
                            (0.273)      (0.270)           (0.306)     (0.009)        (0.008)       (0.017)
AGE SQUARED                 0.013***      0.013***          0.012**    -0.001***      -0.000***     -0.001
                            (0.005)      (0.005)           (0.005)     (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)
EDUCATION (BY W4)          -0.293***     -0.326***         -0.284***   -0.022***      -0.021***     -0.016***
                            (0.036)      (0.043)           (0.035)     (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.002)
EARNINGS IN $10000          -0.018**     -0.017*           -0.013      -0.004***      -0.003***     -0.003***
                            (0.008)      (0.010)           (0.010)     (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
MARRIED                    -0.869***     -0.693***         -0.493***   -0.094***      -0.073***     -0.065***
                            (0.102)      (0.116)           (0.112)     (0.009)        (0.010)       (0.010)
CHILDREN IN HH              -0.106**     -0.098            -0.089      -0.003          0.001        -0.000
                            (0.049)      (0.062)           (0.059)     (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.005)
SELF-REG. PROXY                          -0.126***                                    -0.008***
                                         (0.014)                                      (0.001)
SELF-REG. LATENT                                          -0.138***                                  -0.015***
                                                          (0.010)                                    (0.001)
OBSERVATIONS               24,401         20,686          18,938       22,876        19,286          17,658
R-SQUARED                  0.049          0.060           0.062         0.037         0.051          0.061
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard Errors Clustered at the State
Level. State and Time Fixed Effects are included in all regressions.




                                                      31
                                                                          Table 8
                                             Effect of Self-Regulation on Criminal Behavior and Gambling
                             ARRESTED    ARRESTED       ARRESTED CRIME INDEX CRIME INDEX CRIME INDEX GAMBLER                     GAMBLER       GAMBLER
BLACK                          0.013         0.012         0.022***       0.072***       0.093***       0.091***      -0.006       -0.005        -0.004
                              (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.024)        (0.026)        (0.020)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.003)
HISPANIC                      -0.037***     -0.026**      -0.020**       -0.016          0.002          0.008         -0.008       -0.005        -0.002
                              (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.008)        (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.020)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.004)
ASIAN                         -0.064***     -0.063***     -0.056***       0.002         -0.012         -0.019       0.039***      0.039***      0.041***
                              (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.011)        (0.017)        (0.022)        (0.028)       (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.008)
NATIVE AMERICAN                0.077**       0.061         0.049          0.123          0.132          0.099        -0.018*       -0.019        -0.015
                              (0.038)       (0.041)       (0.033)        (0.073)        (0.079)        (0.083)       (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.013)
OTHER                         -0.035        -0.023        -0.008         -0.097*        -0.082         -0.054          0.018        0.015         0.026
                              (0.036)       (0.040)       (0.029)        (0.048)        (0.067)        (0.059)       (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.020)
FEMALE                        -0.186***     -0.162***     -0.161***      -0.355***      -0.308***      -0.328***    -0.049***    -0.044***     -0.040***
                              (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.017)        (0.015)        (0.013)       (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.003)
AGE                            0.013         0.013         0.014         -0.194***      -0.210***      -0.209***     0.008**      0.008**        0.007
                              (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.019)        (0.023)        (0.030)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.005)
AGE SQUARED                   -0.000        -0.000        -0.000          0.003***       0.003***       0.003***      -0.000       -0.000        -0.000
                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.001)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
EDUCATION (BY W4)             -0.030***     -0.029***     -0.025***      -0.031***      -0.030***      -0.020***    -0.004***    -0.004***     -0.003***
                              (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
EARNINGS IN $10000            -0.003***     -0.002**      -0.002**       -0.008***      -0.006***      -0.006***    0.001***      0.001***      0.001***
                              (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
MARRIED                       -0.100***     -0.088***     -0.078***      -0.156***      -0.116***      -0.092***    -0.011***    -0.009***     -0.010***
                              (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.013)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)
CHILDREN IN HH                 0.009***      0.010***      0.009**       -0.019***      -0.014*        -0.019***      0.000        0.000         0.001
                              (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.001)
SELF-REG. PROXY                             -0.006***                                 -0.019***                                  -0.001***
                                            (0.001)                                    (0.001)                                    (0.000)
SELF-REG. LATENT                                          -0.011***                                  -0.027***                                 -0.002***
                                                          (0.001)                                     (0.001)                                   (0.000)
OBSERVATIONS                  26,177       22,101        20,219         24,642         20,920         19,145         23,770        22,175        20,282
R-SQUARED                      0.150        0.157         0.166          0.086          0.115          0.129           0.037        0.041         0.041
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard Errors Clustered at the State Level. State and Time Fixed Effects are
included in all regressions.




                                                                           32
                                                       Table 9
                                        Effect of Self-Regulation on Obesity
                            OBESE         OBESE          OBESE         BMI              BMI            BMI

BLACK                        0.084***       0.080***         0.083***    1.672***       1.585***      1.593***
                            (0.011)        (0.013)          (0.010)     (0.200)        (0.207)       (0.152)
HISPANIC                     0.063***       0.071***         0.068***    1.179***       1.258***      1.259***
                            (0.013)        (0.018)          (0.010)     (0.119)        (0.177)       (0.151)
ASIAN                       -0.043         -0.043           -0.040***   -0.633         -0.577        -0.542***
                            (0.031)        (0.033)          (0.013)     (0.561)        (0.595)       (0.201)
NATIVE AMERICAN              0.135          0.137            0.135***    3.216*         3.286*        3.016***
                            (0.095)        (0.090)          (0.040)     (1.840)        (1.675)       (0.730)
OTHER                       -0.030         -0.014           -0.016      -0.258         -0.064        -0.094
                            (0.052)        (0.065)          (0.035)     (0.625)        (0.789)       (0.467)
FEMALE                       0.019*         0.024**          0.036***    0.106          0.227         0.432***
                            (0.010)        (0.011)          (0.007)     (0.165)        (0.152)       (0.102)
AGE                          0.039***       0.043***         0.047***    0.872***       0.969***      1.078***
                            (0.009)        (0.009)          (0.013)     (0.146)        (0.138)       (0.195)
AGE SQUARED                 -0.001***      -0.001***        -0.001***   -0.013***      -0.015***     -0.017***
                            (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)     (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.004)
EDUCATION (BY W4)           -0.021***      -0.021***        -0.019***   -0.322***      -0.331***     -0.306***
                            (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.048)        (0.048)       (0.023)
EARNINGS IN $10000          -0.002**       -0.003***        -0.002**    -0.034***      -0.045***     -0.046***
                            (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)     (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.012)
MARRIED                      0.021***       0.026***         0.029***    0.374***       0.410***      0.415***
                            (0.007)        (0.007)          (0.008)     (0.109)        (0.117)       (0.122)
CHILDREN IN HH               0.020***       0.017***         0.015***    0.248***       0.211***      0.185***
                            (0.004)        (0.004)          (0.004)     (0.063)        (0.075)       (0.064)
SELF-REG. PROXY                            -0.001**                                    -0.026**
                                           (0.000)                                     (0.010)
SELF-REG. LATENT                                           -1.526***                                  -1.039***
                                                           (0.111)                                    (0.065)
OBSERVATIONS               25,624          21,579          19,794       25,624         21,579         19,794
R-SQUARED                   0.057           0.061           0.070        0.075          0.081          0.092
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard Errors Clustered at the State
Level. State and Time Fixed Effects are included in all regressions.




                                                       33
Appendix 1: Detailed empirical definition of the self–regulation proxy variables
1) Self-regulation proxy; Data from wave 3; Definition: 20 questions relating to self-regulation, 17 of the
questions employ a five point response scale (1-5) and three questions employ a four point (1-4) response
scale. The four point response scale was rescaled to a five point range by recoding two as 2.25 and three as
3.75 and four as five. All of the responses were coded such that higher values correspond to high self-
regulation. The self-regulation proxy ranges from 20 to 100 with higher values representing more self-
regulation.

2) Genetic proxy; Data wave 4; Definition: the presence of the 0R allele of DAT1, the 7R allele of DRD4, the
short allele of 5HTTLPR, and the 2R/3R alleles of MAOA. (The A1 allele of DRD2 is not included in the Wave
4 DNA data.) This index ranges from 0 to 4 with higher values indicating a lesser likelihood that genetic factors
will influence the individual’s behavior i.e. more self-regulation.

3) Maternal Attachment Proxy; Data from wave 1; Definition: Maternal Attachment and is based on two
questions on the respondents feelings about their mother. The data has response codes from 1 to 5 creating a
scale equal to 2 to 10 with higher values indicating more attachment.

4) Conscientiousness; Data from wave 4; Definition: Four questions which relate to orderliness scale from 4 to
20 with 4 the least conscientious and 20 the most conscientious. Add Health constructed variable: C4VAR007.

5) Stress; Data from wave 4; Definition: Cohen Perceived Stress Scale outcomes between 0 and 16 with
higher values indicating more perceived stress. Add Health constructed variable: C4VAR001.

6) Depression; Data from wave 4; Definition: Center for Epidemiological Studies depression (CESD). A five
question version of this scale has outcomes between 0 and 15 with higher values indicating greater
depression. Add Health constructed variable: C4VAR002.

7) Anxiety; Data from wave 4; Definition: Anxious Personality Scale which has outcomes from 0-20 higher
values indicating greater anxiousness. Add Health constructed variable: C4VAR009.

8) Religiosity; Data from wave 3; Definition: How often the respondent has attended a religious service in the
past 12 months. Defined as a dichotomous variable equal to one if the respondent indicates that they attended
religious services two or three times a month or more.

9) Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD); Data from wave 3; Definition: Based on 18 questions which
measure retrospective hyperactivity. The response code for the questions is 0 through 3 which creates a proxy
ranging from 0 to 54. The value of 0 represents the lowest probability of ADHD and 54 represents the highest
probability of ADHD. This is a probabilistic non-clinical measure of ADHD.

Appendix 2:
         Differences in the effects of the proxy variables for each outcome provide some insight into differences
in self-regulation by outcome. The proxy coefficients presented in Appendix table 1 are described as negative
or positive if they are significant. The self-regulation proxy variable is negative for all outcomes except eating.
The genetic index variable is negative for obesity but and positive for drug abuse and the crime index. The
maternal attachment index follows a similar pattern to the genetic proxy by being positive for eating and
negative for crime. Conscientiousness is negative for eating and crime outcome but positive for the probability
of arrest. Stress is positive for smoking, binge drinking, and drug use. Depression is positive for smoking,
drinking, and crime. Anxiety does not follow any obvious pattern. Religiosity is negative except for eating
where it is positive and it is insignificant for one crime outcome and for gambling. ADHD is positive for all
outcomes. One important pattern in these results is that the effects of the proxies on the eating outcomes,
obesity and BMI, are generally different from the other outcomes. Because the proxies are used to create the
self-regulation variables, these results suggest that the process of self-regulation in eating is different than it is
for the other outcomes.

                                                          34
                                                               Appendix Table 1
                                                    Coefficients of the Proxy Variables Only

                                           SMOKER         CIGARETTES       ALCOHOL        BINGE DRINKER      MARIJUANA       DRUG ABUSE
                                                                         CONSUMPTION

        SELF-REGULATION PROXY                 -0.007***        -1.001*          -0.674***        -0.007***          -0.114*** -0.007***
                                              (0.001)          (0.527)           (0.063)         (0.001)            (0.017)   (0.001)
         GENETIC INDEX                         0.003           -4.262            -0.579*          0.001              0.004     0.008*
                                              (0.003)          (3.908)           (0.308)         (0.004)            (0.070)   (0.004)
         MATERNAL ATTACHMENT                  -0.002           -1.401             -0.219         -0.002             -0.028    -0.009
                                              (0.003)          (2.675)           (0.374)         (0.002)            (0.059)   (0.006)
         CONSCIENTIOUSNESS SCALE              -0.001           -1.882            0.362**          0.001              0.001    -0.003
                                              (0.002)          (1.228)           (0.140)         (0.001)            (0.033)   (0.002)
         PERCEIVED STRESS SCALE                0.009***         3.599**            0.131         -0.001              0.035     0.008***
                                              (0.001)          (1.333)           (0.180)         (0.001)            (0.025)   (0.003)
         CESD DEPRESSION SCALE                 0.003*           2.884***         0.566***         0.005***           0.064     0.003
                                              (0.002)          (1.026)           (0.209)         (0.001)            (0.042)   (0.002)
         ANXIOUS PERSONALITY SCALE            -0.001            1.220             -0.206         -0.000             -0.096***  0.006***
                                              (0.001)          (1.308)           (0.180)         (0.001)            (0.027)   (0.002)
         RELIGIOUS                            -0.091***       -38.221***        -3.094***        -0.046***          -1.080*** -0.025**
                                              (0.009)          (8.325)           (0.836)         (0.008)            (0.193)   (0.011)
         ADHD INDEX                            0.003***         2.387***         0.297***         0.001*             0.016**   0.003***
                                              (0.001)          (0.368)           (0.063)         (0.000)            (0.007)   (0.001)
         OBSERVATIONS                          20,216           6,844             15,071          20,282             18,898    17,658
         R-SQUARED                              0.153           0.142              0.100           0.111              0.062     0.061
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the state level. Education and demographic variables listed in table 4 are also
included in all regressions. State and time fixed effects are included in all regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                        35
                                                          Appendix Table 1 continued

                                         Arrested                     Crime Index         Gambler                     Obese             BMI
SELF-REGULATION PROXY                        -0.005***                -0.016***             -0.001***              -0.000         -0.012
                                             (0.001)                  (0.001)               (0.000)                (0.001)        (0.011)
GENETIC INDEX                                 0.003                    0.010                 0.001                 -0.006**       -0.111**
                                             (0.002)                  (0.006)               (0.001)                (0.003)        (0.045)
MATERNAL ATTACHMENT                          -0.010***                -0.012**               0.001                  0.009***        0.226***
                                             (0.003)                  (0.005)               (0.001)                (0.003)        (0.044)
CONSCIENTIOUSNESS SCALE                       0.004***                -0.006**              -0.000                 -0.013***      -0.199***
                                             (0.001)                  (0.003)               (0.001)                (0.002)        (0.024)
PERCEIVED STRESS SCALE                        0.004***                 0.005**              -0.000                 -0.001         -0.001
                                             (0.001)                  (0.002)               (0.001)                (0.002)        (0.029)
CESD DEPRESSION SCALE                         0.005***                 0.031***             -0.000                  0.001           0.032
                                             (0.001)                  (0.003)               (0.001)                (0.001)        (0.023)
ANXIOUS PERSONALITY SCALE                    -0.002                    0.001                -0.000                 -0.002         -0.051**
                                             (0.001)                  (0.003)               (0.001)                (0.001)        (0.020)
RELIGIOUS                                    -0.040***                -0.025                -0.001                  0.024**         0.516***
                                             (0.007)                  (0.019)               (0.003)                (0.010)        (0.147)
ADHD INDEX                                    0.002***                 0.004***              0.001**                0.002***        0.039***
                                             (0.000)                  (0.001)               (0.000)                (0.001)        (0.008)
OBSERVATIONS                                     20,219                  19,145                 20,282                19,794          19,794
R-SQUARED                                         0.166                   0.129                  0.041                 0.070           0.092
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the state level. Education and demographic variables listed in table 4 are
also included in all regressions. State and time fixed effects are included in all regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                       36
