                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE INTRA-DAILY EXCHANGE RATE
                  DYNAMICS AND MONETARY POLICIES
                      AFTER THE 65 AGREEMENT




                          Takatoshi Ito




                     Working Paper No. 2048




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 1986




The author is grateful to Geoffrey Carliner, Richard Clarida,
Christine Cumming, Jeffrey Frankel and Robert Mundell for their
helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. He also bene-
fited from comments and discussions in the United States-Japan
Consultative Group on International Monetary Affairs, in Oiso,
Japan, in July 1986; Summer Institute, National Bureau of Economic
Research, in August 1986; and Japan Economic Seminar at Columbia
University, in September 1986. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics and International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2048
                                                  October 1986

             The Intra-Daily Exchange Rate Dynamics and Monetary
                       Policies After the G5 Agreement

                                      ABSTRACT

     This paper investigates determinants of yen appreciation from the G5

agreement of September 1985 to the end of May, 1986. During that period, four

waves of appreciation separated by calm periods are identified. For each wave

and calm period, the changes in the yen/dollar exchange rate are decomposed in

those taken place in the Tokyo, Europe and New York markets. In addition,

correlations among the yen, mark, and pound for each market for each wave are

studied.

     The surprisingly strong effect of the G5 agreement on the exchange rate

was due to the signaled U.S. policy change.      The role of direct intervention

by the Bank of Japan was rather limited at that point.      The Bank of Japan,

adopted the Thigh interest policy" in October 1985. By narrowing the interest

rate gap between Japan and the United States, the Bank of Japan successfully

led to another round of appreciation.

     A major cause of the third wave of yen appreciation starting January 2,

1986 was the decline in oil prices.      After the third wave was over, the Bank

of Japan started intervening the market in support of the dollar —— a reversal

of direction. However, the effort was not successful to stop another round of

yen appreciation.   The fourth wave of appreciation in the middle of April was

due to a mix of prospects of reducing the U.S. federal deficits and a further

decline in oil prices.

     These findings are consistent with a view that the exchange rates respond

mainly to news of fundamentals and that the exchange rates are not manageable

by coordinated interventions alone.               Takatoshi Ito
                                                  NBER
                                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
L INTRODUCTION
        This paper examines exchange rate dynamics after the much—hailed

Group of Five (G5) Meeting of September 22, 1985, held in Mew York. Just

before the G5 meeting, many policy makers as well as economists would have

agreed that the U.S. dollar was overvalued.      The only remaining question

was how to bring about the dollar depreciation and how quickly it should

be done.

        A dramatic announcement at the end of G5 meeting, coupled with direct

intervention and other measures taken by central banks, brought down the

value of U.S. dollar very quickly.          In the six months after the G5

meeting, the trade—weighted dollar depreciated more than 15%: the dollar

depreciated more than 25% against the yen, about 20% against the German

Mark, and 10% against the British pound.      Figure 1 shows the daily yen/$

exchange rate dynamics from September 19,       1985 to May 30,   1986.   By

December 1986 it appeared that coordinated interventions seemed to have

worked very well, although there was no agreement to why it was so

successful.

        Some consider that the episode shows how effectively the government

can manage the exchange rate by interventions and other (monetary)

policies.       Others, however, believe that the rapid depreciation of the

dollar was essentially driven by market forces, pointing out that the

dollar had been gradually slipping for seven months prior to the G5 big

push.      They contend that the government intervention was effective only

because it was "leaning with the wind." But even if' we suppose that

government actions made a big difference, there still are questions.

During the first three months after the G5 meeting, was it the Japanese

side (the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Japan) which should be given


                                        1
responsibility, since the yen appreciated the most? Or, was it the United

States team (the Treasury arid the Fed) which made the difference this

time?

        After the first three months of quick dollar depreciations, Japan

became more and more hesitant to support further yen appreciation. As the

yen appreciated to 175 yen/$ in the middle of March, the Bank of Japan

started intervening again, but this time by selling dollars in order to

prevent further yen appreciation.     In Japan, this operation was nicknamed

"reverse interventions." However, the Tokyo summit in May did not yield

any agreement on an international monetary reform or a target zone for the

exchange rates.     It seems that international coordination on the exchange

rate management is once again in disarray. Major countries seem unable to

agree on whether or not the dollar should further depreciate (yen should

further appreciate).

        First of all, let us review Figure 1, the yen/$ exchange rate

dynamics from September 1985 to May 1986.       We clearly see that the
exchange rate changes came in "waves." In a given wave, the yen appre-

ciates by 10 or more yen in a matter of one week or two, then the exchange

rate    stays relatively calm for two weeks to two months until the next
wave.     This kind of alternating pattern of volatility is a common feature
of exchange rate movements. (See Mussa (1979).)
        Since the foreign exchange market is a well—organized, highly effi-

cient asset market, relevant information is processed and reflected upon

exchange rates within minutes.      !Yoreover, unlike the country-specific

stock market or bond market, the foreign exchange market is practically

open 21 hours Monday through Friday, somewhere in the world.      A wave of



                                       2
appreciation should coincide with the arrival of a major news about the

determinants (fundamentals) of the exchange rate.      By matching economic

and political news with a wave of appreciation, we will be able to iden-

tify sources of exchange rate changes.      However, for this purpose, daily

exchange rate data are not "fine" enough.     The exchange rate responds to

news in a matter of minutes.    For example, if relevant news, say Baker's

testimony before a Congressional committee, originates in the United

States, the exchange rate should change during the New York market ses-

sions. By the time the New York market closes, the exchange rate is fully

adjusted to news that became available during the day.

     Time differences make it possible to identify the origin of news by

looking at changes in respective markets.     Since New York is 11 hours (13

hours during daylight saving time) behind Tokyo, business hours of the two

countries do not overlap. Thus, it is safe to assume that exchange rate

changes in the New York market primarily reflect U.S. news, while changes

in the Tokyo market are primarily caused by the Japanese political and

economic news. In sum, by looking at intra—daily movements of the exchange

rate in different countries, good inferences on determinants of the

exchange rate can be made."1"

    When the Tokyo market opens two and half (three and half, during the

summer) hours after the New York closing, the Tokyo opening exchange rate

reflects all the news up to that point.     Any exchange rate changes during

the Tokyo market reflect relevant news that becomes available during the

Tokyo market hours.   For example, if the Bank of Japan's policy change is

responsible for the exchange rate movement, then the exchange rate changes

in the Tokyo market where the Japanese monetary policy is revealed.

    Economists, who do not know exactly what are relevant fundamentals


                                     3
(determinants), can look at the exchange rate changes in various markets

within the day, and match them with the arrival of news, in order to

obtain an important Insight on the exchange rate dynamics.

     In this paper, the daily exchange rate change Is decomposed into the

changes In the Tokyo market, the European market, and the New York market.

     Figure 2 depicts how major markets In the world overlap each other.

We divide changes in the exchange rate during a 2k—hour period, day (t),

into three representative market with the following definitions:


     Definitions of "Changes in the market" \2\


     Tokyo (t)    [Tokyo closing (t)] — [New York closing (t—1)]

     Europe (t)    [New York opening (t)] —   [Tokyo closing (t))
     New York (t) = [New York closing Ct)] — [New York opening (t)]


     The above definitions are not as precise as one could hope for.

First, because of the overlap of the afternoon hours of' the European

market and the early morning hours of the New York market, anything that

happens in the London market after 3 pm Is attributed to U.S. news, while

anything that occurs in the New York market before 9 am is attributed to

European news. In particular, some U.S. economic indicator announcements,

including the producer price and industrial production indices occur at

8:30 am, before the New York foreign exchange market opens.         Second,

occasional political developments take place after the foreign exchange

market closes in that country.      President Reagan or Prime Minister

Nakasone may conduct a press conference or make a TV apprearance after

market hours. Hence the correspondence between the timing of news announ-

cements and market hours is not always perfect.       However, as a first


                                     Il
approximation, this market decomposition of the exchange rate movements

gives us an initial important sign of the origins of exchange rate distur-

bances.   If there are notable exceptions, I will mention in the text. An

investigation of market—specific changes will provide us with a foundation

for exploring determination of the exchange rates.

     In addition, we will look at correlations between the Japanese yen,

the German mark and the British pound.    Since various types of economic

news might affect the three currencies differently, correlations between

them would provide an additional evidence of what was a major disturbances

in the foreign exchange markets.     For example, if the yen appreciates

because of the U.S. policy changes, then yen movements would be closely

correlated with German mark and British pound movements.   However, if oil

is the major source of disturbances, the correlation between yen and pound

would be negative, because the pound, the currency of a major oil producer

should depreciate while yen, the currency of a major oil importer should

appreciate.

     The flext section analyzes exchange rate movements, in particular

causes behind four waves of yen appreciations from the G5 meeting of

September 1985 to the end of May 1986.   We will find that each apprecia-

tion wave is explained as the exchange rate responses to changes, or

signals of upcoming changes, in "fundamentals." Implications of these

findings will be discussed in the concluding remarks.




                                     5
2 i!.r            X.n   Apr
     As shown in Figure 1, the eight—month period after the G5 meeting can

be divided into four waves of yen appreciations with quiet periods separa-

ting the waves.     Figure   1   also reports the important economic and

political developments since the G5 meeting.

     Table 1 shows the decomposition of changes in the yen/$ exchange rate

into the Tokyo, European and New York markets for each wave and for the

periods in between.     Table 2 shows correlation coefficients among the

three currencies in each market for each subperiod.


A. The G5 weekend

     The G5 emergency meeting was hastily put together on the weekend of

September 21.   At the time of closing in the New York market on September

20, Friday, it was known that the meeting would take place but there was

no suspicion that anything big would come out of it.      The yen/$ rate was

239 yen/$ at the New York closing on the Friday.

     The G5 agreement, also known as the Plaza agreement, that the parti-

cipants will take coordinated actions to depreciate the U.S. dollar was

announced during the weekend.        When the first market, New Zealand's

Wellington market, opened on September 23, Monday, the yen appreciated by

5 yen to 2314 yen/$."3' The Tokyo market, which would have opened next,

was closed for a national holiday.     The London market put 232 yen/$, and

appreciation continued during the New York market session, opening at 231

and closing at 225.5 yen/.        By the time the Tokyo market opened on

September 211, yen had already appreciated by more than 10 yen. The Tokyo

market opened at 229.7 and closed at 230.1, while the Bank of Japan

reportedly sold 1.3 billion dollars.       It was only after the big jump had



                                       6
already taken place that the Bank of Japan started a heavy intervention,

and the intervention did not seem to cause yen appreciation.             (It,

however, is possible to say that it prevented a sharp rebound.) Thus, the

Bank of Japan's role in the yen appreciation should be minimal at this

stage.      It is safe to say that the initial jump was caused by the G5

announcement itself.

          What was new in the announcement then? In answering this question,

it is useful to investigate what happened one week following the announce-

ment.


B. First Wave: September 23 to September 30, 1985

        Reading statistics of' the first wave (September 23— September 30) in

Table 1 (row I), we notice that 85 (12.675/11I.95) of the yen apprecia—

tion during the week took place in the New York market.     During the week,

central banks of the G5 countries sold U.s. dollars, as agreed upon in the

G5 meeting. It is reported that the amount of intervention accumulated in

this week by the Bank of Japan surpassed that of' the Federal Reserve Bank

of New York. However, the fact that the yen appreciation was concentrated

in the New York market rather than the Tokyo market suggests that the most

important factor for the appreciation was not the Bank of Japan's

intervention but news in the New York market.       (There is no evidence I

could detect for an intervention by Bank of Japan in the New York market

in these weeks.)

        In Table 2 (row I), we see that correlations among the yen, mark and

pound in the New York market during the week of first wave are uniformly

very high.       This also suggests that the dollar was the major source of

disturbances     and the rest of the currencies moved together against the



                                        7
dollar.

     This   is   consistent with a view that a most important aspect of the G5

meeting was the change in the U.S. position from benign neglect to inter-

national coordination.       During the Regan—Sprinkel regime, the Treasury

Department took a position that the dollar was strong because of the

strong U.S. economy.       They denied a link between the U.S. fiscal deficit

and high interest rates or a link between high U.S. interest rates and the

strong dollar.      Under the Baker regime, a need for greater international

coordination was expressed and manifested itself in to the G5 agreement.

It was a "surprise" (news) for the market that the Fed intervened in

cooperation with other central banks, although the amount of Fed interven-

tion was less then the Bank of Japan's at this point.

     The market must have been more and more conviced of the U.S. policy

change In the New York market everyday.


C. Second Wave:

     During the first three weeks of October, the yen was stabilized at

the 211 — 218 range.      In fact, from TABLE 1,   (the Q row between waves I

and II) we know that the yen slightly depreciated, with all the deprecia-

tion taking place in Tokyo, while it appreciated in the other markets.

     At this point, many market participants were expecting that the

dollar might become strong again.       Especially when the Seoul Meeting of

Finance ministers at the occasion of the IMF meeting (weekend of October

5) did not produce any follow—up to the G5, some market participants

expressed an opinion that the dollar had hit bottom. However, the Japanese

authorities decided that the amount of appreciation was not enough and

feared that the dollar might creep up to its previous level.



                                        8
     The Bank of Japan announced a major policy change on October 2,

Thursday.   Governor Sumita in a regular press conference announced that

the Bank would adopt a high short—term interest rate policy.     The presum-

ption was that narrowing the interest rate gap between the U.S. and Japan

would create another round of yen appreciation.

     The market, however, did not respond immediately. During the day of

Sumita's announcement, the exchange rate hardly changed in the Tokyo

market or in the New York market: the Tokyo market opening was 215.85 and

its closing was 215.65; then the New York market opening was 216.90 and

its closing was 216.37. On October 25, the Tokyo market opened at 216.55.

Yen appreciation took off from there.     As the short—term interest rate

soared in the morning trading, the yen appreciated sharply.       The Tokyo

closing rate of the day was 21ZL90.

     It is quite interesting from the scholarly point of view that the

market missed the "cue" and did not act for more than 18 hours after

Sumita's announcement. This shows that either the Bank of Japan's announ-

cement was not credible or market participants were not rational enough.

     Yen appreciation continued for two weeks, as more and more market

participants became convinced about the new monetary policy.     During this

wave, most of the yen appreciation occured in the Tokyo market ——         in
contrast to the first wave. TABLE 1 (row II) shows that 72% (=7.7/1O.V15)

of the appreciation took place in Tokyo. This suggests that new informa-

tion became available in the Tokyo market.        As the short—term interest

rate rises in Tokyo, yen became appreciated in the Tokyo market.

     The Tokyo market in the second wave in TABLE 2 shows that the corre-

lation between the yen and the mark was low and so was the correlation

between the yen and the pound.    In contrast, the mark—pound correlation


                                      9
was higher, implying that the relative values between mark and pound

stayed constant.      The correlation table is an evidence that a major dis-

turbance occured with regard to yen against the other currencies in the

second wave of yen appreciation.

     These facts suggest a senario that the second wave was caused by the

Bank of' Japan's monetary policy alone.


D. The regime of 200 yen/$

     After the second wave of yen appreciation, the yen hovered just above

200 for more than two and half months.     Was it so calm because of a lack

of major news?

     It seemed that there was as much potential news as in any other

periods. The high interest rate policy, which caused the second wave, was

gradually eased and formally abandoned on December 17.     (The three—month

Tegata interest rate peaked on November 19, the one-month Tegata rate

peaked on December 13.) The discount rate cut by the Bank of' Japan, which

did not take place until January 30, was rumored as early as December 20.

These developments might have put pressure on the yen to depreciate,

especially after the middle of December.

     The OPEC countries announced after the December 8 meeting that it had

decided to defend their market shares even if it meant lower oil prices.

The German mark appreciated about 7.3% from November 7 to January 2,

while the British pound depreciated about 1.3 %    during the same period.
The pound depreciation seemed to have been caused by the decline in crude

oil prices.      As Japan is a major oil importer, it would not have been

surprising if yen had appreciated during the same period. In other words,

it looked rather "artificial" that the yen/$ value is fixed, while German


                                     10
mark and British pound against dollar moved around. (In TABLE 2, the same

point can also be seen as very low correlations between the yen and the

mark, and between the yen and the pound in the Tokyo market for the period

between November 8 to January 23.)

        There are two possible explanations for the apparent stability of the

yen/$ exchange rate from the beginning of November to the end of January.

The first hypothesis is that as the high interest rate policy was gradual-

ly lifted, the yen received pressure to depreciate, while the oil price

decline worked in the opposite direction.       The two conflicting pressures

may have happened to have an equal magnitude.

        The second hypothesis is that the Japanese monetary authorities made

an attempt to stabilize the yen at around 200. The decision might have

been made in early November.       The interest rate policy was adjusted so

that the exchange rate level could be sustained. That is why the interest

rate continued to climb until late November and then turned around and

slid steadily until late January, while the exchange rate was essentially

constant.     There must have been a constant pressure on the yen to appre-

ciate since the OPEC meeting of December 8, which was only mitigated by

the interest rate decline. (One-month Tegata rate was 8.1875% on December

17 and 7.000% on January 23.) However, by January 2L, the Japanese mone-

tary authorities must have been decided that it would be difficult to

maintain the 200 yen/$ rate (without a drastic out in the interest rate).

        I thInk that the latter explanation, i.e., the policy target explana-

tion, is more plausible.        There were two episodes which reinforce this

view.      First, during the Japanese New Years holidays (the Tokyo market

closes from the January 1 to January 3), the yen sneaked to appreciate in



                                       11
the New York market.      On January 2, the yen closed at 198.55 in the New

York market, breaking the 200 target level.         Then news came from Japan.

Governor Surnita of the Bank of Japan gave a New Years press interview that

the yen should be kept around at 200.        As soon as the news is relayed to

the New York market on January 3,     the    yen level went back above the 200

level.

     Second, what happened on January 21 is another proof for a hypothesis

that the Japanese authorities tried to keep a target for the yen/dollar

exchange rate.     Finance Minister Takeshita was in Washington D.C. on his

way home from the London G5 meeting of January 18 and 19.         At a press
conference in the United States, he reportedly said that he would allow

the yen to go below the 200 level.          The Tokyo market was informed of

Takeshita's remark by a news wire at around 3pm, thirty minutes to the

closing of the market. The yen jumped from 201 to 198 in the matter of 20

minutes, then profit taking brought it back to 199.50 at the closing

(3:30pm).    Finance Minister Takeshita came home that evening, long after

the Tokyo market was closed, and gave another news conference in Tokyo.

He said "if the exchange rate becomes in the 190s as a natural result of

the market movement, it should not be artificially brought back (to more

than 200).       Though it varies depending on sebtors, the 190s would be

acceptable by the industries." (Literal translation from Mihon Keizai

Shinbun, January 25, 1986.) This news conference in Tokyo was in turn

reported in the European and New York markets which were still open.'

The yen jumped to 198 in the London market and then 196.60 by the closing

of the New York market.

F. Third Wave (January 211 —   February    19)

     A steep yen appreciation of 21 yen (10%) followed within four weeks


                                      12
after the Takeshita announcement. A long—expected discount rate cut by the

Bank of Japan effective on January 30 (which was announced on January 29)

did not stop the strength of the appreciation.

     A major cause of the yen appreciation in this wave was the rapid oil

price decline.   A minor role was played by the decline in the U.S. long-

term interest rate which reflected a U.S. fiscal policy switch.     I have

two kinds of evidence for this view.

     First, Table 1 (row III) reveals that yen appreciation in this period

took place almost equally in the three markets.     What is interesting is

that the contribution of the European market in this wave is very large

compared to the other periods. Recall that the first wave of appreciation

was attributed to the U.S. policy shift in favor of international coordi-

nation and the second wave was to Japanese monetary policy.    What is new

about the third wave is that the yen is appreciated in the European

market, too. Why would the yen, which is a third—country currency, appre-

ciate in the European market?    The answer becomes evident if one recog-

nizes that significant developments on oil prices occur after the Tokyo

market closes and before the New York market opens.     Major news on oil

include decisions on oil production and pricing by the OPEC countries, and

the important spot market prices in Netherlands and London.

     Second, Table 2 (row III) reveals the correlation between the yen and

the pound became very low in this period.        Great Britain as a major

exporter of oil, suffers from oil price declines so that its currency

tends to decline in value.      While Japan, as the largest oil importer,

benefits so its currency tends to appreciate. Therefore, the low correla-

tion between the two currencies makes us suspect that oil prices were a



                                       13
big factor, but not the only factor. (If oil is the only cause, then the

correlation between yen and pound should be negative and close to —1.)

Hence, we need to closely investigate the relation between the oil

prices, yen and pound.      TABLE 3 compares oil prices (London, spot, blend

crude), the yen/dollar rate (New York opening) and the dollar/pound rate

(New York opening) from January 21 to April 18.

     The yen continuously appreciated, while oil prices steadily declined.

Although the pound appreciated over the period in question, its movement

was not consistent.      It seems that there was a mix of pound depreciation

news (oil price decline) and appreciation news (something else). In this

period, what might make the dollar depreciate (the pound to appreciate)?

     One possible source of pound appreciation (dollar depreciation)

pressure was a gradual change in the market's perception of the chance of

reducing the U.S. government budget deficit. The huge budget deficits in

the past several years are often blamed for creating U.S. high interest

rates and, in turn, a strong dollar.        In the first four months of 1986,

perceptions about future deficits seem to have changed drastically."5" In

order to document this, the U.S. long-term (10-year government bond)

interest rate is shown in the last column of TABLE 3.      It is evident that

the decline in the long term interest rate was drastic from January to

April. By the beginning of April, Japanese security firms, which had been

purchasing U.S.    long—term bonds,        were reported to have cut back

dramatically on security investments."6"

F. "Reverse Intervention" by the Bank of Japan

     As the third wave brought the yen into the 180's, the Japanese

monetary authorities became resistant to further yen appreciation.        The

Bank of Japan started mentioning the possibility of' intervention in


                                      11
support of the dollar (sell yen and buy dollars), a total reversal of the

direction.       Thus it is dubbed as a "reverse intervention" (Gyaku Kainyu)

in Japan.        (The earliest headline about its possibility appeared on

February 14, when the yen was about to go under 190.) The actual reverse

intervention did not come until March 18 when yen hit below the 175 yen/$

level.

       During the interval between the third and fourth wave, there was a

notable development.       On March 6 and 7, France, Germany, Japan, and the

United States cut their discount rates by 0.5%. This was the first "coor-

dinated" discount rate cut, which would theoretically achieve aggregate

demand expansions, with a neutral impact on international capital flows

(by keeping the interest rate differential intact)."7'         However, right

after the coordinated interest rate cut, the yen appreciated suddenly,

which led to the reverse intervention of March 18 by the Bank of Japan.

The yen appreciated from 179 (on the day of the discount rate cut announ-

cement) to 1714.90 eleven days later, which was turned around quickly and

returned to the 180 level In a week.           In that sense, a coordinated

interest rate cut was successful in keeping the exchange rate stable,

although with a quick fall and rise immediately following the rate cut.


G. Fourth Wave (April 16 —      April   28)

       The fourth wave started when the (second) Internationally—coordinated

discount rate cut became a oertainty.'8' From April 16 to April 28, the

yen appreciated by more than 10 yen, breaking the all—time high on April

21 in Tokyo.         The monetary authorities in Japan did not want to cause

further appreciation of yen.       Short—term interest rates went down quickly

and   reverse   intervention continued.


                                          15
     Table 1 (row IV) indicates that most appreciation took place in Tokyo

and New York. Looking at Table 2 (row IV), we see that correlations

between the three currencies were quite high.   Not only the yen, but the

pound and mark appreciated at the same time.     In fact, at the peak of

appreciation, April 28, the German central bank joined the Bank of Japan

in intervening the market in order to support the dollar.

     This evidence points to United States monetary policy as a main cause

of the fourth wave of yen appreciation.    The fact that the United States

was a leading advocate of the discount cut this time reinforces this view.

The market participants must have figured out that despite the appearance

of a "coordinated" discount rate cut, it is more likely to have a larger

impact on U.S. (long—term) interest rates than on rates in other

countries.

     What about other factors?      Since the decline of oil prices had

stopped by the middle of April, oil is not the main factor.       This is

confirmed by relatively high correlations between the pound and yen (at

least in Tokyo), and the pound and mark.    There may have been some poli-

tical speculation about a major International monetary reform to be

discussed at the coming Tokyo summit.      However, it would be hard to

quantify what dealers expected about the monetary reform and how the

outcome (no explicit agreement on a monetary reform) affected the foreign

exchange market.

H. The Tokyo Summit and its aftermath

     The Tokyo Summit, held from May 4 to 6, yielded little progress on

the front of international monetary coordination. Japan reportedly sought

coordinated intervention to prevent the yen from further appreciation,



                                   16
which was rejected by the United States. Instead, a multilateral surveil-

lance of macroeconomic indicators was proposed by the United States.        The

final agreement states that Ci) G5 will be expanded to G7 to include

Canada and Italy; (ii) Finance ministers and central bankers of the G7

countries will conduct "multilateral surveilance to make their best

efforts to reach an understanding on appropriate remedial measures

whenever there are significant deviations from an intended course and

recommend that remedial efforts focus first and foremost on underlying

policy fundamentals, while reaffirming the 1983 Williamsburg commitment to

intervene in exchange markets when to do so would be helpful."

        In Tokyo, this agreement was perceived as a measure not particularly

helpful in relieving the pressure on the yen to appreciate. The agreement

gave the impression that Japan's wish to stop further yen appreciation was

uriwelcomed by others,         and that Japan had become "isolated."        In

particular, the Bank of Japan, which was almost alone in intervening in

support of the dollar (selling yen), became more vulnerable to speculative

attacks.      The yen appreciated by about 10 yen (or 5.9%), to 160 in one

week following the summit.        However, the yen quickly turned around and

depreciated to its level before the summit (i.e., after the fourth wave).

Some people attribute the turnaround to the Treasury Secretary Baker's

testimony in Congress on May 13 to the effect that he thought the yen had

appreciated enough.

        This short spell of quick appreciation and depreciation following the

summit    might   have been a rare occasion of a speculative bubble forming and

popping.      First, there was no major economic news.        Oil prices were

stable, and major currencies were moving together (see TABLE 2, the last

row.)      Second, although the correlations with the yen were high, the


                                         17
amount of appreciation in the mark and pound in the week after the sununit

was much smaller than the yen:    1.8% for the mark and pound.   Third, the

depreciation was as quick as the appreciation and the yen came back to

where it was.      If it was a bubble, it would not be surprising that the

bubble was burst by the Treasury Secretary Baker's testimony.

     The summit agreement could be seen as a step toward international

coordination of macroeconomic policies.     Of course, how much can be
achieved by "surveillance" remains to be seen.     It is ironic that Japan

and Germany, which in the past few years have sought macroeconomic coordi-

nation (i.e., lowering the U.S. interest rates) wanted to set an exchange

target zone and coordinated intervention; and the United States, which had

been unsympathetic toward policy coordination in the past summit meetings,

turned around and proposed coordination. If one recognizes that interven-

tion without fundamental policy changes is destined to fail, it IS

difficult to understand why Japan wanted coordinated intervention.

     Even more ironic in March was that the coordinated discount rate cut

was not put forward by Japan but by the United States.   It was the United

States that almost attempted an unilateral discount rate cut (thanks to a

power struggle),     while Japan which theoretically would prefer       an

unilateral interest rate cut to prevent further yen appreciation, did not

initiate an interest cut or go for a larger cut. Instead, Japan pursued

unsuccessful intervention.




                                    18
3 Concluding Remarksi kssons fr th
     The success of quick depreciation of the U.S. dollar during the week

following the G5 agreement gave to some observers the impression that if

coordinated interventions are made, it is possible to manage the exchange

rate."9 However, as argued in this paper, intervention itself has played

only a minor role in a period immediately following the G5 meeting.   The

U.S. policy changes signaled by Fed interventions were more important in

changing market participants' perceptions about the fundamentals in the

future. Interventions do not seem to cause a large change in the exchange

rate levels, unless they are also signals of policy switch or a change in

domestic policies. Especially the so-called "reverse intervention" by the

Bank of Japan intended to stop "too much" yen appreciation after March

1986 was not successful, because it was not accompanied by the change in

unilateral discount rate change or in stimulating the Japanese domestic

economy.   However, this conclusion does not rule out the possibility of

"smoothing out" fluctuations by interventions.

     Time to time, the exchange rate appears to respond to what Chairman

Volker or the Finance Minister Takeshita says. There were three good

examples cited in section 2 of this paper. These episodes might give an

impression that a mere talk could "manage" or mismanage the foreign

exchange market."10       As discussed in Section 2, Governor Sumita's

press interview and Finance Minister Takeshita's remark were effective

only because Japanese authorities consciously pursued a        policy of

targeting the 200 yen/dollar, the former confirming the policy and the

latter signaling Its abondanment.        In fact, by late January when
Takeshita's remark was made, it was about the time for the yen to appre—

elate because of falling oil prices and relatively high Japanese Interest


                                    19
rates. Treasury secretary Baker's remark might have coincidentally been a

place when the market was looking for an excuse to burst a bubble.

        It turns out that the above three examples are exceptions.     Other

political remarks, such as one from President Reagan and the Minister of

International Trade and Industry in Japan play much lesser roles.

Although those remarks had been frequently reported and the market is said

to be "sentitive" to them, close investigations would reveal that they did

not change the exchange rate by more than one yen at a time and did not

have a lasting effect.

        Detailed Investigations in this paper using intra—daily data reveal

that the large changes in the yen/dollar exchange rate levels after the G5

agreement were not "managed" by the U.S. and Japanese monetary authori-

ties.     This paper found that four waves of yen appreciation were, respec-

tively, cause by the U.S. policy switch, the high interest rate policy by

the Bank of Japan, the decline in oil prices, and a mix of prospects of

U.S. fiscal deficit reduction and a further decline in oil prices.       In

other words, the exchange rates respond to news on what we consider

"fundamentals" and not to mere interventions of the monetary authorities.




                                     20
Footnotes

1. The news analysis has been applied to the exchange rate movement in

F.ngel and Frankel (19814) and Frankel (19814; ch.7).    The news analysis

with the intra—daily exchange rate data was first done by Ito and Roley

(1986), which analyzed the movement from 1980 up to the G5 meeting In

Septermber 1985.     This paper is a direct sequel of Ito and Roley (1986).


2. It Is possible to define changes in the "Pacific" market (from the

closing of the New York to the opening of the Tokyo market) and changes in

the strict Tokyo market (from the opening to the closing of the Tokyo

market) separately, in place of the Tokyo market as defined here.

However, Ito and Roley (1986) convincingly showed that there is very

little news happening to cause exchange rate changes in the "Pacific"

market.     Practically the New York closing is used as the Tokyo opening.

Aggregating the "Pacific" and strict Tokyo market does not do any harm to

our analysis.


3.    In fact, the Bahrain market, which is open on Sundays, was the first

market after the G5 agreement.         It was reported that American banks

started selling the dollars in the Bahrain market on Sunday, September 22,

but no quotes were reported.


14•   This same quote was translated as "Nations industry could live with

the dollar valued at 190 yen" (Wall Street Journal, January 27, 1986.)

Note that the Japanese version states the broadly—defined 190s, with a

connotation that it does not go too far below 200, while the English

version states 190 as the level.       The development in the Europe and New

York later in the same day was closer to the English version.     The point,



                         FOOTNOTES 1
however, was that it signaled the switch of the policy.



5.   Although the Gramm—Rudman Act was found "unconstitutional" in a

Federal Court on February 7, the Congress made efforts to trim federal

deficits in the budgeting process.      The market must have become more and

more convinced during the spring of 1986 that efforts for reducing federal

deficits would be more intensified in the near future whether or not the

Gramm—Rudman Act is constitutional.       However, I could not pinpoint

specific events which would prove this conjectures.


6.   Nihon Keizai Shinbun carried a story on April 25 about how Japanese

investments became "diversified" into European securities.      However, a

security company source indicated that the "diversification" started in

the beginning of April.


7. Later we learned that there was a split of opinions (and a power

struggle) within the Federal Reserve Board of Governors.     An anti—Volker

faction was said to have outvoted Chaiman Volker on February 21 in an

attempt to cut the discount rate (without international coordination).

However, one member changed position and delayed the rate cut until March

7.   (See for example the Wall Street Journal, Editorial, on March 20 for

details.)   On March 21, the leader of anti—Volker group, Vice Chairman

Preston Martin resigned.       Since even with coordination, the dollar

depreciated heavily after the rate cut, it was a wise decision, at least

as afterthought, to delay it, from the viewpoint of the exchange rate

stabilization.


8.   The discount rates in Japan, the United States and Great Britain were



                          FOOTNOTES 2
cut by 0.5% on Monday, April 21.     The rumor had been around for a few

weeks.   But information about the decision became known (leaked?) to the

market on April 16 or 17. The decision was formally made and announced on

April 18 in the United States and in Great Britain and on April 19 in

Japan.


9.   The Japanese monetary authorities might have believed in the power of

the coordinated interventions, since they reportedly sought after a pledge

from other countries to coordinated interventions in the Tokyo summit.


10. The foreign exchange market which is sensitive to what cabinet members

and central bankers sayhas been dubbed in Japan as a "political market"

(Seiji souba).   A column was written about a "political market" in Nihon

Keizai Shinbun on as early as February 2.   When monetary authorities are

talking about the target level of the exchange rate without real interven—

tions, it is dubbed as "all-talk interventions" (Kuchisaki kainyu) in

Japan.




                       FOOTNOTES 3
                                  REFERENCES


Engel, C. and J. Frankel., "Why Interest Rates React to Money

     Announcements:      An      Explanation from the Foreign Exchange

    Market," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 13, January 1981$,

    pp. 31—39.


Frankel, J. "The Yen/Dollar Agreement: Liberalizing Japanese Capital

    Markets," Institute for International Economics, 1981$.


Ito, T. and V. Vance Roley, "News From the U.S. and Japan: Which

    Moves the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rates?", National Bureau of

    Economic Research, working paper no. 1853, March 1986.


Mussa, Michael L. "Empirical regularities in the behavior of

    exchange rates and theories of the foreign exchange market,

    in Policies         employment Drices .nd exchange      rates.

    K.Brunner      j.   IL      Meltzer.   Carnegie—Rochester Conference

    Series. vol.   1L   1979.
                             Data Appendix


The definition of data used in the paper is summarized as follows:


      TKO (t)     the openning (9am) yen/$ in Tokyo at date t.

      TKC (t)     the closing (3:30pm) yen/$ in Tokyo at date t.

      NYO (t)     the openning (gain) yen/$ in New   York at date t.

      NYC (t) =   the closing (1:30pm, or later if market is active)
                  yen/ in New York at date t.


In Tokyo, the interbarik foreign exchange market is restricted to start at

9am   and   end at 3:30 with a lunch break from 12 noon to 1:30 pm.      The

screen goes blank right at the end of morning session and afternoon

session.    Thus, the openning and closing rates are well defined in Tokyo.

In New York, the market hours are not well—defined, but the openning and

closing time are defined from convention.            The Tokyo rates are the

transactions rate, while the New York rates are the simple average of bid

and ask rates.      The data in Tokyo are daily collected from Nihon Kelzai

Shinbun.    The data in New York are given by the Federal Researve Bank of

New York.
                                    TABLE 1
                         Decomposition of     the Yen/S Changes
                                                 Accumulated   Yen Changes
                                Total     :
Regime    Dates                :change           Decompositions into market of
                                                Tokyo     Europe    New York

G5     Sep. 20 - Sep. 23         -7.75        (Tokyo closed)         -7.75

I      Sep. 23 — Sep. 30        —14.95         —0.85      —1.425     -12.675

Q      Oct.   1 - Oct.    24      0.12          4.225     —1.525     —2.005
II     Oct. 25 — Nov.      7    —10.745        —7.70      -1.80       0.055
Q      Nov. 8 - Dec. 17          —3.675        —0.12      -0.305     —430
Q      Dec. 18 — Jan. 23         -0.30          —0.41     —0.78       -0.825

III    Jan.   24 — Feb. 19      —21.10         —7.775     -6.84      —7.415

Q      Feb. 20 - Apr. 15         —2.40          0.64      —4.125       1.21
IV     Apr. 16 — Apr. 28        —10.90          —5.00     -1.415      —4.485
Q      Apr. 29 — Jun 13           —2.00         —1.185     1.28        0.935

Note:  (1) Total change is defined as the change from the N.Y.
closing of the last day of the preceding regime to the last day of
the current regime with two exceptions.  Exceptions: G5 regime is
the change from the N.Y. closing on September 20, Friday, to the
N.Y. opening of September 23, Monday. Note that the Tokyo market
                                                   The total
was closed on September 23, due to a banking holiday.
change in the first regime is defined as the chnage from the
opening of N.Y. market on September 23 to the N.Y. close of
September     30.
(ii) The daily change in the Tokyo market is defined as the yen/S
change from the N.Y. close of the preceding business day to the
Tokyo close of the day. The daily change in the European market is
defined as the yen/$ change from the Tokyo close to the New York
opening of the day. The daily change in the New York market is
defined as the yen/S change from the New York opening to the New
York   close of the day.

The accumulated changes in a regime is the sum of the daily changes
in   the respective regime.      Due to country-specific banking
holidays, the four market changes do not add up to the total change
of the regime.
(iii) The regime names, I, II, III, and IV stand for waves of yen
appreciation,       and Q for a relatively calm spell.
                                  TABLE 2

Contemporaneous    Correlation of Exchange Rate Intra—day Changes
                            Yen, DM, UK,

                         Tokyo                Europe     New York

                        Yen      Dli        Yen    Dli    Yen Dli
I 9/23 —   9/30   Dli   .84                  .93         .72
                  UK    .36 .55             —.51 —.33    .74     .97

Q 10/1-10/24      Dli   .75                  .61         .96
                  UK    .65 .80              .27   .65   .56     .63

II 10/25—11/7     Dli   .52                  .69         .92
                  UK    .20      .70         .63   .72   .85     .94

Q 11/8-12/17      Dli   .42                  .59         .76
                  UK    .41      .32         .48   .57   .70     .83

Q 12/18—1/23      Dli   .44                  .63         .93
                  UK    .34      .69         .34   .27   .74      .87

III 1/24—2/19     Dli   .81                  .71         .78
                  UK    .28      .07         .06   .32   .31      .43

Q 2/20—4/15       Dli   .40                  .76         .50
                  UK    .29      .33         .52   .53   .40      .50

IV 4/16—4/28      Dli   .75                  .77         .80
                  UK    .79      .82         .39   .78   .44      .71

Q 4/29—6/13       Dli   .81                  .81         .89
                  UK    .49      .74         .72   .90   .79      .87




Notes:     Appreciation waves are defined in Table 1.          Changes in
Yen/$, Dli/$ and UK/$    in the specific market everyday are
measured in the same manner as Table 1.  Then the correlation
matrix is calculated.
                                       TABLE 3

                  Weekly Changes in Oil Prices and Currencies



                        oil   prices    yen/S       S/pound    US long-term
                                                               interest rate
1985: September 20 27.53                 241.05     1.3640     10.32

1986:January 24           18.60          196.675    1. 39525   9.17

    January 31            18.40          192.855    1. 41375   9.06

    February 7            17.25          190.95     1. 40325   9.07

    February 14           17.10          182.35     1.4165     8.69

    February       21     16.35          183.725    1. 44185   8.46

    February 28           16.55          179. 775   1. 46645   8.14

    March 7               15.35          179.325    1. 4585    7.96

    March 14              13.35          176.25     1.46725    7.72
        March 21          13.50          176.00     1. 5020    7.79
        March 28          11.55          179.50     1. 47875   7.47

        April 4           12.00          180.05     1. 45545    7.44
        April 11          12.75          178.05     1. 4765     7.29
        April 18          11.50          174.32     1. 5145     7.08



Note:     (1) The oil price is the London blend spot price, S/barrel.
     (ii) The yen/S rate and the S/pound are both the average of the
bidand offer rates eat the opening of the New York market.

        (iii) The U.S. long-term interest is for the 10-year governemtn
bond.

Source: Nihon Keizai Shinbun (Dailyl), various issues.
          FIGURE •2
                       'VNf$ (Tt) nrin 05
250.
                                                         Liicc         —I

230.—


230.-


190.—



170.—


350.
          9/t'l   q/i5 Ii/   '214   (2/30   1/.23   Z/r 3/14     4/cl 5/S '?
                      19S                              1986
       1. 9/22 65
          9/23    Tokyo market closed due to bankina holiday
                  New York, opening at 231.30; closing 225.55.
                  New York Fed intervened, selling $250 mill ion
       2. 9/24    Tokyo, opennirsg at 229.70; closing at 230.10.
                  Bank of Japan intervened, selling $1.3 billion.
       3. 9/26—30 Central banks of 65 heavily intervened: sell dollars.
       4.  10/5   IMF meeting in Seoul.
       5.  10/24 Bank of Japan, initiating 'high interest policy'.
       6.  12/8   OPEC agreed to keep market shares; oil price decrease.
       7.  12/17 Bank of Japan, quit 'high interest policy.'
       8.  1/18   65 in London. No agreement on interest rate cut.
       9.  1/24   Finance Minister's interview on Yen rate.
       10. 1/29   Bank of Japan, Discount rate cut *1 (announcement).
       11. 3/7    Bank of Japan, Discount rate cut *2 (announcement).
                  Coordinated interest rate cut with Germany and U.S.
       12. 3/18   Bank of Japan, Intervened in N.Y.: Buy dollars.
       13. 4/6    EMS realignment
       14. 4/18   Bank of Japan, discount rate cut *3 (announcement).
                  Coordinated interest rate cut with Germany and U.S.
       15, 5/4-6 Tokyo summit
                                 FIGURE 1
          Major Market Hours in 24—hour Clock (ToV.c' time)

                                                          V
                     V 4.
—                                           -.      -
        -r   New York
              9:00 am
                                                  New York
-                                                  noon




Note:   Dayl iht   saving time
                             is ohsered -from the end of pril to the
end of October in New York.    Durinq that time, the New York market
hours should he shifted by ore hour courter—clcckijse
