NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF DYNAMIC RENEGOTIATION AND ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION
IN FINANCIAL CONTRACTING
Michael R. Roberts
Working Paper 20484
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20484

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

I thank Bill Schwert (editor), two anonymous referees, Franklin Allen, Patrick Bolton, Peter DeMarzo,
Nicolae Garleanu, Todd Gormley, Victoria Ivashina, Mark Leary, Mike Lemmon, Pricila Maziero,
Martin Oehmke, Nick Roussanov, Luke Taylor, Toni Whited, Amir Yaron, Jeffrey Zwiebel for helpful
comments; seminar participants at Columbia University, Michigan State University, New York Federal
Reserve Bank, University of Chicago GSB, University of Pennsylvania; conference participants at
SITE 2011; and, William Mann and Peter Maa for excellent research assistance. Roberts gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative
Financial Research and the Greener Family Research Fellowship. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Michael R. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Role of Dynamic Renegotiation and Asymmetric Information in Financial Contracting
Michael R. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 20484
September 2014
JEL No. D82,G21,G23,G32,K12
ABSTRACT
Using data from SEC filings, I show that the typical bank loan is renegotiated five times, or every
nine months. The pricing, maturity, amount, and covenants are all significantly modified during each
renegotiation, whose timing is governed by the financial health of the contracting parties and uncertainty
regarding the borrowers' credit quality. The relative importance of these factors depends on the duration
of the lending relationship. I interpret these results in light of financial contracting theories and emphasize
that renegotiation is an important mechanism for dynamically completing contracts and for allocating
control rights ex post.

Michael R. Roberts
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk, #2319
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu

1.

Introduction
Privately placed debt is by far the most important source of external financing for firms in

OECD countries (Gorton and Winton, 2003). Unsurprisingly, a large literature has developed
which examines this form of financing and its implications for corporate behavior.1 Despite
this attention, there are few studies examining the renegotiation of privately placed debt
outside of financial distress. This void is troubling because a large number of theoretical
studies show that the possibility of renegotiation can have a significant impact on security
design, incentives, and welfare.2
This paper helps fill that void using a novel, hand-collected dataset of “loan paths” for
a random sample of bank borrowers. A loan path is a sequence of events beginning with
an origination and ending with a terminal event, such as maturity or early termination.
In between these two termini I record any and all renegotiations that occur, as well as
information on the modifications made to the loan. This data enables me to address two
broad questions: What happens in renegotiation? And, when does renegotiation occur? For
both questions, I focus on how the answer varies as a function of the duration of the lending
relationship and the number of renegotiations, or renegotiation round.
My primary findings can be summarized as follow. First, renegotiations are initiated by
borrowers primarily in response to changing conditions, as opposed to lender interventions
due to default. Fewer than 28% of the sample renegotiations are due to a covenant violation
or in anticipation of a covenant violation. Yet, more than 75% of all covenant violations lead
to a renegotiation. Thus, renegotiations caused by contractual breaches occur infrequently,
though when a contractual breach occurs it frequently leads to renegotiation.3
1

Empirical studies of privately placed debt have examined: debt maturity (e.g., Scherr and Hulburt,
2001; Ortiz-Molina and Penas, 2004; Berger et al., 2005), pricing (Chava, Livdan and Purnanandam, 2009;
Altman, Gande and Saunders, 2010); and covenants (Bradley and Roberts, 2003; Chava and Roberts, 2008;
Roberts and Sufi, 2009a).
2
See Section 3 for a discussion of the relevant theories.
3
A number of studies examine the implications of covenant violation including Smith and Warner (1979),
Beneish and Press (1993, 1995), Chen and Wei (1993), Smith (1993), Sweeny (1994), Chava and Roberts
(2008), Roberts and Sufi (2009a), and Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2009).

1

Second, most loans are renegotiated multiple times over relatively short horizons, with
each renegotiation leading to significant changes to the contract. Ignoring the few short-term
loans that are not renegotiated, the typical loan has a maturity at origination of four and a
half years but is renegotiated almost five times, or every 9 months. This finding is not an
artifact of maturity extensions, which occur in less than 20% of renegotiations and typically
with modifications to other features of the contract.
Specifically, renegotiations produce average increases (decreases) in the pricing, amount,
and maturity of the loan equal to 73 (74) basis points, 103 (100) million dollars, and 23 (12)
months, respectively. Relative to an average interest rate spread of 205 basis points, loan
amount of 200 million dollars, and maturity of 5.5 years, these changes are economically
large. They are also largely independent of the renegotiation round, or the duration of
the contractual relationship. In addition to modifications of the contract terms, I observe
changes to the tranche structure and loan type. Borrowers and lenders frequently repackage
loans into more or fewer tranches during renegotiations, while also changing the nature of
lenders’ commitments from term loans to revolving lines of credit and vice versa.
Third, the plurality of renegotiations (46%) modify only the covenant package. In fact,
covenants are more likely to be modified than other loan term throughout the life of the
loan. These modifications are driven largely by borrowers desires to alter their investment,
operating, or financing policies and, to a lesser extent, by borrowers’ financial distress. In
light of a growing number of contingencies tied to the interest rate (performance pricing grid),
amount (borrowing base), and maturity (evergreen provisions), it may not be surprising that
covenant modifications are responsible for many renegotiations.4 Yet, despite the presence of
these contingencies, the majority (54%) of renegotiations modify the interest rate, amount,
or maturity; and over 35% of renegotiations modify an interest rate spread linked to a pricing
4

Some covenants do come with contingencies. For example, maintenance covenant thresholds often vary
over time in a manner determined by the performance of the company. For example, net worth covenants often include buildup provisions that increase the threshold with a fraction of positive net income. Restrictions
on capital expenditures often include carryovers, which define the amount of unused investment capacity in
a given period that may be carried forward into future periods.

2

grid. Thus, while contractual contingencies likely mitigate the transaction costs associated
with ex post renegotiation, an important role appears to be in allocating bargaining power
in renegotiation (Roberts and Sufi, 2009b), which occurs frequently and in spite of the large
number of contractual contingencies.
Finally, the timing of renegotiations is governed by three factors: the financial health
of the parties to the loan, the uncertainty regarding borrowers’ future profitability, and the
outcome of renegotiation. More specifically, financially weak borrowers and borrowers with
more uncertain future prospects accelerate the onset of renegotiation. I also find significant
temporal heterogeneity in the impact of these factors on the duration to renegotiation. The
timing of initial renegotiations occurs independently of macroeconomic conditions or the
outcome of renegotiation. In fact, borrower leverage is the only relevant determinant of
the initial renegotiation duration. In contrast, subsequent renegotiations are driven by a
combination of factors.
In sum, my evidence highlights the dynamic, state-contingent nature of loan contracts
in which renegotiation fills the void left by contractual incompleteness. Alternatively, one
can view renegotiation as a means to dynamically complete contracts. While my study is
primarily descriptive, my results provide a unique opportunity to comment on theories of
financial contracting, as well as providing guidance for future research.
The frequency of renegotiation despite the presence of numerous contractual contingencies emphasizes the fundamental incompleteness of loan contracts (Grossman and Hart,
1986; Hart and Moore, 1988). The focus of most renegotiations on covenant modifications
emphasizes that renegotiation is an important mechanism for the allocation of control rights
across states (Garleanu and Zwiebel, 2009). Thus, while contracts, via covenants and other
contractual contingencies, allocate control rights ex ante (e.g., Aghion and Bolton, 1992;
Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994), renegotiation allocates control rights ex post.
The finding that borrowers grant creditors strong control rights suggests that information
asymmetry in conjunction with agency problems is an important element of the contracting

3

environment (e.g., Dessein, 2005; Garleanu and Zwiebel, 2009). This finding presents a challenge for theories predicated on symmetric information and hold-up (Hart and Moore, 1998),
where the relative importance of borrower effort for the success of the funded investment
dictates that the borrower should retain strong control rights. Further, the persistence of
strong creditor control rights throughout the lending relationship suggests that information
asymmetry about the investments, if not the borrower, is persistent.
I find that increasing borrower uncertainty accelerates the onset of renegotiation. This
fact is consistent with the fundamental tradeoff between costly, early information acquisition
and the potential for future transfers in Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009). When information
asymmetry is large and the potential for future transfers high — when borrower uncertainty
is high — information acquisition via renegotiation occurs sooner.
Finally, I find little evidence supporting the prediction that that ex post moral hazard
is mitigated through changes in the interest rate in renegotiation (Gorton and Kahn, 2000).
Interest rate changes in renegotiation are monotonically negatively related to the type of
news — good or bad — about the investment project. Thus, price modifications occurring
in renegotiation appear to primarily reflect changes in credit risk, suggesting that moral
hazard concerns may be reflected in the fees or the nonprice terms of the contract.
My paper is most closely related to Roberts and Sufi (2009b), which examines a sample of
loans and the first, if any, renegotiation of those loans. Their study is largely a cross-sectional
comparison of loans that are and are not renegotiated. In contrast, I take a dynamic view by
examining the entire life of loan contracts from origination to termination. This perspective
enables me to provide new evidence on contract renegotiation and its determinants, as well as
a novel economic message that emphasizes the role of renegotiation as a means to dynamically
complete contracts and allocate control rights ex post.5
5

Ivashina and Sun (2011) look at the role of institutional traders in a subsample of renegotiations in
which loan pricing changed. A recent working paper by Mian and Santos (2012) examines the role of loan
maturity extensions in mitigating liquidity concerns. More broadly, my study is related to a number of papers
examining renegotiation in technical default (see studies mentioned in footnote 2 above) and payment default
(e.g., Asquith, Gertner, and Scharfstein, 1994; Benmelech and Bergman, 2008).

4

My paper also builds on a number of studies examining specific features of loan contracts. For example, Bradley and Roberts (2003), Dichev and Skinner (2002), and Chava
and Roberts (2008) show that loan contract terms are set tightly, significantly restricting
the behavior of borrowers. I show that ex post renegotiation enables borrowers to loosen
these constraints throughout the contracting relationship as new information becomes available. I also show that ex ante measures of relative control rights are not equivalent to ex
post measures. Covenants that are set tightly at origination need not lead to more ex post
renegotiation, consistent with an equilibrium view of security design.
Related, Asquith, Beatty, and Weber (2005) show that loan contracts often contain a
number of contingencies that alter the terms of the agreement in response to changes to the
credit quality of the borrower. I show that these contingencies do not prevent renegotiation.
Rather, they merely delay it. Thus, contingencies should be viewed in part as a mechanism
to allocate bargaining power (Roberts and Sufi, 2009b), as opposed to just avoiding costly
ex post renegotiation.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents
summary statistics. Section 3 provides the theoretical motivation for my analysis. Sections
4 and 5 present the empirical results. Section 6 concludes.

2.

Data and Sample Statistics
I begin with a random sample of 114 firms in the intersection of Standard and Poor’s Com-

pustat database and a 2010 extract of Thomson Reuters Dealscan database.6 The decision
to sample 114 firms is based on two considerations: power and cost. Power considerations
necessitate a certain sample size to statistically identify various relations. The unit of observation is a renegotiation event, not a firm. As such, the number of observations used in my
analysis is much greater than 114, though the observations are not independent. The cost
of drawing this sample is governed by the need to read several thousand SEC filings in order
6

I use the link file discussed in Chava and Roberts (2008) to merge these two data sets.

5

to accurately identify renegotiations events and the changes taking place in renegotiation.
Admittedly, cost considerations are perhaps the more important of the two for determining
the sample size.
For these firms, I extract all available loan (a.k.a., tranche or facility) information from
Dealscan. I exclude all publicly traded and Rule 144a debt from the sample because coordination and free-rider problems stemming from dispersed ownership limit the scope for
renegotiation in these issues. Additionally, institutional differences can confound comparisons with intermediated debt.
I identify originations and renegotiations for each of these firms by examining the SEC
filings available in electronic form on EDGAR. Through a variety of regulations, the SEC
requires that firms detail material debt agreements, sources of liquidity, and long-term debt
schedules (e.g., Johnson (1997) and Kaplan and Zingales (1997)). Further, the SEC requires
disclosure of any material changes to these debt agreements. Consequently, I am able to
collect contracts and amendments (i.e., renegotiations), both of which are attached to the
filings as exhibits. A limitation of this collection procedure is that electronic filings are
available from the SEC only beginning in 1994. However, I am able to extend the sample to
pre-1994 periods for loans in which there is a discussion of earlier events.
Figure 1 presents the distribution of loan originations and renegotiations over the sample
period. The cyclical behavior of originations and, to a lesser extent, renegotiations is apparent. The figure also shows the data limitations towards the beginning and end of the sample
horizon in which both originations and renegotiations drop off substantially, the latter due
to censoring.

2.1.

Loan Paths

The data collection process enables me to construct “loan paths.” Each loan path begins
with an origination, includes any and all renegotiations, and ends with one of four possible
terminal events.
6

There are three types of renegotiations: amendments, amended and restated agreements,
and rollovers. These renegotiation types differ primarily in their implications for the filings.
Amendments spell out only the modifications to the loan — i.e., the terms that change as a
result of the renegotiation. Amended and restated agreements result in a new, stand-alone
contract that replaces the previous contract and incorporates all amendments up to that
point. Rollovers are similar to amended and restated agreements in that they represent a
new credit agreement with existing lenders.7 However, they are identified not from separate
attachments in the filings, but from reading the management discussion and analysis in the
filings and confirming at least some overlap among the lead lender(s) with the previous
contract. They must also occur prior to the most recently stated contract maturity. From
an economic standpoint, these distinctions among renegotiation types are less important.
All three events correspond to changes to the terms of the contract between the borrower
and existing lender(s).
The possible terminal events of a loan path include: mature, terminate, replace, and
censor. A loan is deemed to have matured if it terminates on the most recently stated
maturity date. This is the default terminal event. Loans are assumed to have matured
unless I can find evidence in the SEC filings that the loan terminated in a different manner.
This determination is governed by the limitations of the data.
Terminated loans are those loans that end before their most recently stated maturity
date. Early termination can arise for a variety of reasons. Relatively few loans carry prepayment penalties and those that do — typically institutional tranches — carry a relatively
small penalty (Wright, Cooke, and Gray, 2007). Further, most loans impose a fee on undrawn
amounts and require frequent financial reporting distinct from the reporting requirements of
the SEC.
The third event refers to loans that are replaced by a new loan from a different lender.
The condition that new lenders replace the loan is important. Replacements by the same
7

For rollovers, I have information for changes to the pricing, amount, and maturity of the contract, but
not for changes to covenants.

7

lender are what I refer to as “rollovers” and, as discussed above, are treated as renegotiations.
The distinction necessitates the collection of information on the lead lender or, in the case of
a syndicated loan, lenders. Most of this information comes from Dealscan, with supplemental
data from the SEC filings. I also gather information on bank restructurings to account for
bank name changes.8
The result of this data collection is a sample of 501 loan paths for the 114 firms. Each
observation is an event (e.g., origination, renegotiation, terminus) along a unique loan path
for a given firm. (Appendix B presents and discusses a sample loan path in addition to
providing further details about the data.) Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample.
Panel A shows that the sample contains 1,773 renegotiations of 501 loans. Amendments tend
to occur more quickly than the other two types of renegotiations. They also tend to make
less extensive modifications to the contract.
Each loan experiences 3.5 renegotiations over an average stated maturity at origination
of 51 months. If I consider the total duration of each loan from origination to terminal event,
the average life is 71 months reflecting a greater tendency to extend rather than shorten the
maturity of the loan in renegotiation.
Conditioning the sample on loans that are renegotiated at least once eliminates 27% of the
loans — mostly short-term loans and loans originated towards the end of the sample horizon
whose full loan paths are censored. For this subsample, the average loan is renegotiated
almost five times. The average stated maturity at origination is approximately 54 months
compared to a total loan duration of 82 months. These renegotiations are not confined to
revolving lines of credit. Term loans are renegotiated 4.0 times, on average, compared to 5.5
times for lines of credit.
Panel B summarizes some of the loan characteristics at origination for the sample, as
well as the Dealscan sample for comparison. Dealscan comprises both originations and
8

It is important to recognize the limitations of the data when distinguishing rollovers from replacements.
Without a continuous record of loan ownership and sales, their is a certain amount of educated guesswork
involved in assignment.

8

renegotiations, many of which cannot be clearly distinguished.9 The contract characteristics
are broadly similar across the two samples. The tranches in my sample are dominated by
revolving lines of credit and term loans, much like Dealscan. One notable difference is the
“Other” category, which contains 42 loan types in Dealscan but only twelve in my sample.
Finally, my deal purpose distribution is more symmetric than that in Dealscan, which is
skewed towards general corporate purposes.
Panel C compares the sample of borrowers’ financial characteristics to the characteristics
of firms in the Compustat database over the period 1994 to 2010. My firms are, on average,
smaller, more highly levered, more profitable and have fewer growth opportunities (lower
market-to-book ratio). These differences reflect my sampling scheme, which conditions on
issuing privately-placed debt. Fortunately, this condition represents the large majority of
the population of publicly traded firms (Strebulaev and Yang, 2008). Appendix A discusses
the Compustat data, as well as the supplementary macroeconomic data used in my analysis.

3.

Theoretical Motivation
The theoretical motivation for my study has roots in a vast literature on financial con-

tracting. In discussing this literature, I emphasize renegotiation: how it arises, how it affects
security design, and its outcomes. For a broader and more detailed treatment of financial
contracting, I refer the reader to the textbooks by Bolton and Dewatripont (2005) and Tirole
(2006), and the surveys by Biais, Mariotti, and Rochet (2011) and Sannikov (2012).
Renegotiation occurs when the parties to a contract are unable to commit to the terms
of their agreement. This lack of commitment is a consequence of an ex post inefficiency
arising under the prevailing terms of the contract. At first glance, such an outcome seems
odd: why would agents design a contract in which inefficient outcomes could arise? There
are two reasons.
9

There is a “refinancing” indicator variable in Dealscan. In my extract, this variable is missing for 63%
of the facility (i.e., loan) level observations. Further, Dealscan refinancings are defined differently from my
definition of renegotiation, making direct comparisons difficult. See Appendix B for further details.

9

The first reason is that inefficient outcomes may be purposely incorporated into the ex
ante contract as means to punish agents for deviations from equilibrium. Of course, this just
begs the question of why agents, upon arriving at a punishment, do not abandon the contract
and sign a new one resulting in a pareto improving outcome. The problem is that if punishments are renegotiated, they may no longer serve as an effective deterrent to off-equilibrium
outcomes. If agents know that punishments are not credible because they will be renegotiated away, then ex ante incentives get distorted. Further, financial contracts often specify a
payoff distrbution (e.g., for the purpose of risk-sharing) that may not be realized in renegotiation even though renegotiation leads to a pareto optimal outcome. These considerations
imply that the security design problem must take into account the possilibity of renegotiation. Unfortunately, doing so makes the contracting problem significantly more difficult
(Maskin and Sjorstrom, 2002). Consequently, a large fraction of the financial contracting
literature assumes away the possibility of renegotiation or emphasizes renegotiation-proof
contracts in which renegotiation does not occur on the equilibrium path.
For example, early work by Gale and Hellwig (1985) shows that debt is the optimal financing arrangement between entrepreneur and investor. Gale and Hellwig assume that renegotiation does not occur, but recognize that the optimal contract is not renegotiation proof.10
Both borrower and lender would be better off renegotiating the contract in bankruptcy so
that the lender avoids the full cost of verifying the state and the borrower retains a portion
of the asset value. The punishement in this example — costly bankruptcy — is ex post
inefficient and, hence, generates scope for pareto-improving renegotiation. However, ex post
punishment is necessary from an ex ante perspective to impose discipline on the borrower.
This intuition extends to a number of dynamic theories of financial contracting. Bolton
and Scharfstein (1990) assume that renegotiation is infeasible in deriving the optimal contract, but show that the presence of an enforceable investment covenant will lead to renegotiation because liquidation is inefficient. Similarly, the asymmetric information models
10

Gale and Hellwig (1989) explore the implications of renegotation in a similar theoretical framework.

10

of Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman
(2007), and Biais, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve (2010) produce long-term contracts that
are susceptible to renegotiation because of the inefficiency of the punishment — e.g., firing
the agent or liquidating her assets.

11

Thus, the common theme among these models relating

to renegotiation is that ex post inefficient outcomes arising from the need to impose ex ante
discipline on the agent generate surplus that leads to renegotiation.12
The second reason why agents would design a contract in which inefficient outcomes
could arise is contractual incompleteness. More precisely, contracts may contain gaps, missing provisions, and ambiguities arising from bounded rationality, transaction costs, and nonverifiatiblity of information (Hart, 1995). In this case, inefficient outcomes arise not from
explicit punishments in the contract but, rather, contingencies not explicitly addressed in the
contract. As such, contractual incompleteness puts renegotiation (or judicial interpretation)
at the fore of resolving ex post inefficient outcomes under the contract.
This discussion highlights that inefficient outcomes and unforseen contingencies are likely
to give rise to surplus under the terms of the contract and, consequently, provide scope for
pareto-improving renegotiation. Specifically, these theories highlight that changes in the
credit quality of the borrower, changes to the outside options available to the parties, and
the contract itself are all relevant for the onset of renegotiation.

3.1. Implications for Renegotiation Outcomes and Security Design
In addition to providing a rationale for the occurence of renegotiation, several theories
provide sharper predictions for what happens in renegotiation and the impact on ex ante se11

One possible interpretation of the state-contingent contracts arising in these models, as well as the
dynamic asymmetric information models, is that they are implemented with non-contingent contracts that are
then renegotiated in a way that results in the appropriate state-contingencies. An alternative interpretation,
and one emphasized by the authors of these studies, is that the state-contingent nature of these contracts
reflects the contractual contingencies observed in actual debt contracts, such as performance pricing.
12
The limited enforcement models of Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004), Lorenzoni and Walentin (2007),
and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) derive optimal long-term contracts that are free from renegotiation (Quadrini (2004)) because the lack of contract enforceability necessitates a long-term contract that
remains on the pareto frontier. Kovrijnykh (2013) models partial commitment as a means to incorporate
renegotiation along the equilibrium path.

11

curity design. For example, Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) note that with costly renegotiation
and symmetric information, as in Hart and Moore (1998), contracts are designed to minimize
renegotiation costs by anticipating, as much as possible, future contingencies. Further, with
the possibility to hold up ex ante investments, decision rights should be allocated in order to
minimize distortions in ex ante investment. Arguably, borrower effort is more important to
the success of funded investments than the effort of creditors, who typically play a passive
role in their debtors’ investment activities.
Building on these insights, Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) show that in a setting with asymmetric information stronger rights are granted to the lender in the initial contract, precisely
the opposite implication of the traditional incomplete contracts literature. Further, stronger
rights are granted to the lender when information asymmetry is greater, it is more costly
for the lender to become informed, and it is less costly to renegotiate. Renegotiation will
also be biased toward the uninformed party giving up these rights. In other words, lenders
will yield strong decision rights by loosening covenants and waiving violations. Finally, the
equilibrium represents a tradeoff between early and late information acquisition. Acquiring
information early results in more efficient initial contracts. The cost of early information
acquisition is that the lender may be acquiring costly information when future states of the
world do not warrant it — in situations when the scope for ex post renegotiation is small
and there is no need to become informed.
Dessein (2005) studies a closely related model to that in Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009).
Like Garleanu and Zwiebel, Dessein shows that better-informed borrowers yield control rights
to the less informed lender. Further, adverse selection implies that investor control is increasing in the level of asymmetric information, holding fixed borrower quality. Finally, Dessein
shows that investor control is also increasing in the level of ex post uncertainty. Intuitively,
more ex post uncertainty makes lender monitoring less effective. Lenders put less faith in
their information and are therefore less inclined to intervene.
Gorton and Kahn (2000) embed the one-sided lender moral hazard of Sharpe (1990)

12

and Rajan (1992) in their model by layering moral hazard on behalf of the borrower. The
role of the initial contract is to allocate bargaining power in the renegotiation game that
always occurs. Gorton and Kahn show that the key determinant of bank loan pricing is
the mitigation of moral hazard, as opposed to the pricing of default risk. Consequently,
renegotiated interest rates are nonmonotonic in borrower quality. Borrowers experiencing
the most favorable news experience no interest rate change since asset substitution is unlikely.
Those experiencing only moderately favorable news are granted concessions by the lender
(e.g., lower interest rates) to prevent asset substitution by the borrower. Finally, borrowers
experiencing the worst news face increased interest rates as lenders attempt to extract some
surplus in the face of inevitable asset substitution.
In sum, these theories provide a host of empirical implications. Data limitations, and in
particular a lack of random variation in the design of the debt contracts and bargaining in
renegotiation, limit my ability to cleanly distinguish among alternative hypotheses. As such,
my analysis is aimed at shedding light on existing theories and providing the motivation for
future theories.

4.

What Happens in Renegotiation?
Table 2 examines the changes to contract terms made in renegotiation. Panel A examines

the probability of modifying each contract term. The first column labeled All presents the
empirical likelihood of each term being modified in the sample of renegotiations. The most
frequently changed items are covenants restricting accounting measures (e.g., debt-to-ebitda
ratio) and the maturity of the contract, 34% and 29% of all renegotiations, respectively.13
Changes to the former are sometimes due to violations or anticipated violations of financial
covenants. However, in many cases these changes are not due to financial distress but to
13

As noted above in footnote 7, I do not have information on covenant modifications for rollover events,
which are excluded from the sample for the analysis of covenant changes. However, visual inspection suggests
that rollovers are significantly more likely to modify covenants, and more of them, than amendments and
amended and restated agreements.

13

changes in the operation, investment, or financial policies of the firm that would adversely
affect the constrained ratios. For example, a planned debt issuance could increase the debtto-ebitda ratio beyond its maximal value, or a capital expenditure, if financed with cash,
could reduce the current ratio below its minimal value. Loan amounts are also frequently
modified, as are changes to the interest rate on the loan (Yield Spread).
Columns two through four present the empirical probabilities of a loan modification
conditional on the change occurring in a particular renegotiation round. For example, 28%
of the initial renegotiation rounds result in a change to the loan amount, while 25% of
the second through fifth renegotiation rounds result in a modification of the loan amount.
The last column presents the slope coefficient of a linear regression of an indicator variable
identifying whether a loan term was modified on a count variable indicating the renegotiation
round. Most estimates are economically and statistically small suggesting no linear univariate
relation between the renegotiation round and the propensity to modify different terms of the
contract. Visual inspection suggests few clear monotonic relations between the renegotiation
round and propensity to change a specific term, with the exception of commitment fees. In
sum, panel A shows that renegotiations lead to a variety of modifications to the contract
terms throughout the life of the loan.
Panel B presents the magnitudes of the changes made to the more easily quantifiable
terms. Renegotiation leads to significant changes to the amount, pricing, and maturity of
the contract in virtually every renegotiation round. The last column shows that the slope
coefficient from regressions of the change in the contract term on the renegotiation round
is insignificant for each term but for the yield spread. Most contract terms undergo large
changes regardless of in which renegotiation round the change occurs.
The results in Panel B also suggest that the modifications to the pricing of loans results in
“shifts” of the pricing grid since most of the loans in the sample have a pricing grid. In other
words, when interest rates or commitment fees are amended, the entire grid is moved up or
down. This fact can be inferred from the similar magnitudes of changes to the minimum and

14

maximum yield spread and fee in the whole sample and within each renegotiation round.
I also find in untabulated analysis that the width of the pricing grid, i.e., the difference
between the maximal and minimal values, changes relatively little in renegotiation.
In sum, the results in Table 2 suggest that large changes to contract terms occur throughout the life of a loan. These dynamics suggest that contracts do not become more complete
over time, making renegotiation less important. On the contrary, the probabilities of amending each contract term and the amount by which each term is amended show no tendency
to decline over time. Thus, borrowers and lenders are not moving towards a complete contract but, rather, addressing persistent contractual incompleteness throughout the lending
relationship.

4.1.

The Allocation of Control Rights

Table 3 presents the joint distribution of renegotiation outcomes.14 To ease the presentation, I collapse all covenant related changes into one category, and all pricing (Yield Spread
and Fee) related changes into another. The table shows that covenant modifications are the
plurality (45.91%) of renegotiation outcomes. This finding speaks to the allocation of control
rights and the potential importance of asymmetric information in lending markets.
As discussed above, Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) show that the ex ante allocation of
control rights is an important distinction between theories predicated on symmetric versus
asymmetric information. Previous studies have shown that covenants are set tightly based on
two different metrics. The first is an ex ante measure of distance from a covenant threshold.
Several studies have shown that this distance appears small based on various norms (e.g.,
Dichev and Skinner (2002), Chava and Roberts (2008), Demiroglu and James (2010), and
Murfin (2012)). While suggestive, ex ante measures may be misleading for several reasons.
The null hypothesis defining small is subjective and receives little guidance from theory.
Ex ante measures do not account for the possibility that initial thresholds anticipate future
14
For this analysis, I exclude rollovers for which I do not have information on changes in the covenants
between the new and previous contract.

15

movements away from the threshold. So what may appear to be a tightly set covenant to the
econometrician, may not be tightly set in practice. Related, ex ante measures ignore potential
signaling motives by which better borrowers, who are less likely to breach a covenant, agree
to tighter covenants (Demiroglu and James (2010)). Thus, ex ante tight covenants may have
little relation to ex post control rights transfers for reasons other than equilibrium outcomes.
The second metric is an ex post measure of covenant violation frequency. Roberts and
Sufi (2009a) show that almost a quarter of publicly traded firms experience a covenant violation between 1996 and 2006, suggesting that at least some borrowers yield strong decision
rights to lenders. The results in Table 3 expand this ex post metric to encompass all firms,
not just covenant violators. I find that less than 28% of renegotiations in the sample occur
within a one-year window of a covenant violation. Though, more than 75% of all covenant
violations lead to a contract renegotiation. Casual inspection of specific covenant modifications reveals that these changes are made to accommodate the borrowers’ future operating
and financing activities. Further, untabulated results show that the joint distribution of loan
term modifications is fairly stable across renegotiation rounds. Thus, borrowers yield strong
decision rights to lenders at all points in time during the life of the contract.
This finding suggests that information asymmetry is important throughout the lending
relationship. It also hints at the primary consequence of information asymmetry. During the
course of the lending relationship, lenders may learn about borrowers’ types (i.e., the quality
of their investment prospects, the ability of management, etc.). However, the incentives for
borrowers to engage in ex post moral hazard are persistent. Thus, borrowers concede strong
ex ante decision rights throughout the lending relationship as suggested by Garleanu and
Zwiebel (2009) and Dessein (2005).
These results could also be consistent with time-varying information asymmetry, which
can generate adverse selection at each renegotiation round. However, the high frequency of
and short durations between renegotiation suggests that the degree of information asymmetry
would have to be fairly volatile. At a minimum, time varying information asymmetry is

16

unlikely a complete explanation for this phenomenon.
I investigate the allocation of control rights further in Table 4. Panel A presents the
results from a binary logit regression. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to
one if the covenant package is modified in a renegotiation and zero otherwise. The independent variables include contemporaneous macroeconomic factors, one-quarter lagged
borrower characteristics, loan characteristics, and loan type fixed effects. Marginal effects
are presented as the difference in predicted probabilities of changing a covenant when varying
the covariate from the 75th to the 25th percentile and holding all other covariates fixed at
their median values. The coefficient t-statistics are in parentheses and are robust to within
loan dependence.
The results present a number of insights. First, macroeconomic conditions in the credit
markets and the financial strength of commercial lenders play a significant role in whether
covenants are modified in renegotiation. When lending standards are tight or the leverage
of banks is low covenants are more likely to be modified. Further, the economic magnitudes
of these effects are relatively large. A one interquartile range change in each variable results
in an eight and a nine percentage-point change in the probability of modifying the covenant
package, respectively.
Second, the borrower variables reveal results that are broadly consistent with the motivating theory. As leverage increases and credit quality declines, the probability of covenant
modifications increases. This is precisely when covenants are likely to be violated and when
agency problems are at their worst. Thus, covenant modifications are necessary to preempt or to address technical default. Firms investing more are less likely to modify their
covenants, suggesting that overinvestment — assuming that it is occurring — is less concerning for creditors than for shareholders. Any excess capital expenditures simply add to
the collateral available to lenders that are often senior and secured.
Firms facing greater uncertainty, as proxied by their stock return volatility, are more
likely to modify their covenants in renegotiation. In fact, this covariate has the largest

17

marginal effect with a one interquartile range increase associated with a 12.6 percentage
point increase in the probability of a covenant modification. This finding is consistent with
the implications of both Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) and Dessein (2005) that show increased
information asymmetry or uncertainty leads to borrowers relinquishing greater control rights
to lenders. However, it is interesting to note that firm-specific, as opposed to macroeconomic,
uncertainty is what matters for the allocation of control rights between borrower and lender.
Consistent with the univariate results in Table 3, the renegotiation round is unrelated to
covenant modifications. However, the duration of the lending relationship since origination
and the duration since the previous event — origination or renegotiation — are both economically significant predictors of covenant modifications. Conditionally, covenants are less
likely to be modified as time passes. One interpretation of this duration dependence is that
they reflect differences in the covenant packages of the loans or the quality of borrowers not
captured by the empirical model. That is, they are spurious results due to omitted variables. However, unreported results including loan fixed effects in the specification reveals
similar findings. Loan fixed effects eliminate all cross-sectional variation in the terms of the
agreement at origination, thereby ruling out differences in loan agreements as a potential
explanation. Further, renegotiations occur frequently and over relatively short horizons as
shown earlier. Thus, changing borrower (or lender) quality is unlikely a complete explanation
for these findings.
To better understand these results I examine the dynamic behavior of covenant slack
throughout the loan. Covenant slack refers to the distance between a covenant threshold
and the state of the firm. For example, the covenant slack on a loan restricting the debt-toebitda ratio to be less than 4 when the borrowers actual debt-to-ebitda ratio is 3 is equal
to 1, or 25% on a percentage basis. For a subsample of loan originations and amendments,
I gather data from Dealscan on covenant thresholds and buildups and match this to my
sample of loan originations and renegotiations.15 Panel B presents the findings.
15

Buildup (a.k.a. covenant grids, elevators, etc.) refers to contract features in which the covenant thresholds change over the life of the loan, typically in a manner that leads to tighter thresholds. I measure

18

The first column presents the observation counts behind each estimate. The number
of observations is small because I require information for multiple, contiguous observations
on the same accounting covenant within each loan path in order to compute changes in
the covenants over time. The second column shows that the probability of loosening a
covenant or decreasing the monthly buildup is statistically equivalent to the probability of
tightening a covenant or increasing the monthly buildup. For example, the probability of
increasing the slack in the debt-to-ebitda covenant in renegotiation is 46.24%, statistically
indistinguishable from 50%. Likewise, the probability of increasing the monthly buildup in
the debt-to-ebitda covenant is 50.96%, again statistically indistinguishable from 50%. In
effect, covenant restrictions do not become systematically looser or tighter as a consequence
of renegotiations throughout the loan.
The third and fourth columns present median magnitudes of the covenant slack and
buildup up changes conditional on loosening or tightening the covenant. For example, the
median increase in slack for capital expenditure covenants is 15.25%, while the median
decrease in slack for these covenants is 9.94%. That is, the magnitude by which the median
capital expenditure covenant is loosened is larger than that when it is tightened. However,
this difference is not statistically distinguishable. In contrast, the median current ratio
covenant is loosened by 37% and tightened by 14%, a statistically significant difference.
More broadly, the results relating to the magnitude of the changes are mixed. As a whole,
covenants appear no more likely to be loosened than tightened as the relationship progresses.
In conjunction with the results in Panel A, covenant modifications become more rare as
the lending relationship progresses despite the fact that covenant slack is largely unchanged.
Consider a borrower with 25% slack in its debt-to-ebitda covenant throughout its lending
relationship. This same slack is more likely to lead to a covenant modification early in the
lending relationship relative to later in the relationship. Hence, the covenant slack is greater
the buildup by computing the percentage change between the threshold at origination and the threshold at
maturity divided by the remaining maturity on the loan measured in months. Larger buildups are more
restrictive than smaller buildups in that they impose tighter covenants more quickly on the borrower.

19

from an ex post perspective, but the same from an ex ante perspective.16
This asymmetry is consistent with banks learning about borrowers during the relationship and the efficiency of the contract improving over time by avoiding costly covenant
amendments. Borrowers and lenders can restructure the contract such that covenant slack
is smaller without an increase in costly renegotiation. This asymmetry also shows that ex
ante measures of covenant slack are imperfectly correlated with renegotiation and ex post
control rights transfers. What appears to be a covenant with little slack may in fact have
little chance of resulting in a control rights transfer ex post. These findings follow closely the
implications of Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009). They reinforce the importance of asymmetric
information and the attenuation of the information asymmetry in the lending relationship
over time

4.2. Moral Hazard and Pricing in Renegotiation
My data also enable me to investigate the implications of Gorton and Kahn (2000),
who argue that interest rates reflect moral hazard potential, as opposed to credit risk. As
discussed above, the most favorable news is accompanied by no change in interest rates,
moderately favorable news is met with decreased interest rates, and bad news is met with
increased interest rates. Table 5 examines this hypothesis by relating changes in interest
rates made in renegotiation to changes in measures of credit quality since the previous event
— origination or renegotiation.
I stratify the sample into three groups: (1) bad news, (2) moderate news, and (3) good
news. I proxy for news about borrower credit quality and future earnings with changes in
the market-to-book ratio and profitability of the borrower. All weakly negative changes fall
into group (1). I split all strictly positive changes in the proxy into two equal-size groups.
Small positive changes are allocated to group (2), large positive changes to group (3). I then
16

This result is not explained by soon-to-mature contracts in which later round renegotiations avoid
altering the covenants because the contract is set to expire. The loan duration variable remains statistically
significantly negative even after incorporating the remaining time to loan maturity as a control variable.

20

compute the average change in the interest rate spread and the commitment fee for each of
these strata.
Counter to the implication of Gorton and Kahn’s model, pricing changes are monotonically related to news about the borrower. The first column shows a significantly negative
relation between changes in the interest rate spread and changes in the market to book ratio.
Negative changes to the market-to-book ratio are met with statistically significant increases
of 27 basis points in the yield spread. In contrast, large positive changes in the market-tobook ratio are met with nearly 35 basis point reductions in the yield spread. Small changes
are met with no significant modification to the yield spread. Column 2 shows that the
relation between yield spread changes and borrower profitability is similarly monotonically
negative.17
Columns 3 and 4 examine the relation using changes to commitment fees as my pricing
measure. Though noisier, the estimates point to a negative relation between news and
pricing, at least for the tails of the news distribution. For the market-to-book ratio, small
positive changes or moderate news are met significantly larger increases in commitment
fees relative to bad news. However, the difference between the two estimates is statistically
indistinguishable. Yet, even with this nonmonotonicity, the results run counter to the pricing
implication in Gorton and Kahn (2000).
Continuing this analysis, I regress the change in yield spreads on a host of control variables
including: year, quarter, loan, and industry fixed effects, as well as changes in borrower
leverage. I then take the residuals from this regression and estimate a fractional polynomial
in the change in the market-to-book ratio. In essence, this analysis is akin to a semiparametric regression of the change in the loan spread that is linear in the control variables
and nonparametric in the change in the market-to-book ratio. Figure 2 plots the fitted values
from this second stage regression against the change in the market-to-book ratio. Clear from
17

I exclude from this analysis all renegotiations that do not change the yield spread. Including them as
zeros reduces the magnitudes of the estimates but the monotonically negative relation between news and
yield spread remains.

21

the figure is the monotonically negative relation, similar to that found in Table 5.
These results do not imply that moral hazard is irrelevant. Rather, it suggests that
moral hazard may be responsible for only a small fraction of the change in interest rates
occurring in renegotiation. This inference is consistent with the results of previous studies
examining the role of information-based market imperfections in determining loan pricing
(e.g., Ivashina (2009), Santos and Winton (2010)).

5.

When Does Renegotiation Occur?

5.1.

Graphical Analysis

Figure 3 presents kernel-smoothed estimates of the renegotiation hazard function by
renegotiation round. More precisely, the hazard is estimated as follows:
D

1X
ĥ(t) =
b j=1



t − tj
b




Ĥ(tj ) − Ĥ(tj−1 ) ,

(1)

where

Ĥ(tj ) =

X dj
,
nj

(2)

j|tj ≤t

tj represent the failure times, nj represent the number of loans at risk for failure leading
up to tj , and dj is the number of failures at tj . The summation in equation (1) is over the
D times at which failure occurs (Klein and Moeschberger (2003)) and the kernel function,
K, is given in Muller and Wang (1994)). The bandwidth is denoted b. Confidence bands
for the smoothed hazard are estimated using the log transformation discussed in Klein and
Moeschberger (2003). To ease the presentation I group renegotiation rounds into three
categories: initial, early (second through fifth rounds), and late (sixth round and beyond).
As in Table 2, these categories correspond to the first round, the second through fifth rounds,

22

and all subsequent rounds, respectively. I also drop observations with durations in excess of
60 months.
There are several features of the figure to note. First, the hazard functions are noticeably
different. Visual inspection of the functions and their confidence intervals suggest that
there are statistically significant differences across the categories. I formally test the null
hypothesis of survival function equality across the three groups by performing a Wilcoxon
test. This null is rejected at less than the 1% level. Further, this rejection is not driven by
late renegotiations. A pairwise test between initial and early renegotiations also rejects the
null of survival function equality at less than the 1% level.
The most apparent difference among the hazard functions is in their level. Initial and
early renegotiations are substantially more likely to occur at all durations. This feature is
by construction; late durations occur only if initial and early durations occur. The differences in the form of duration dependence are more interesting. Each estimated hazard is
nonmonotonic. Firms face an increasing likelihood of renegotiating soon after an origination
or previous renegotiation. This likelihood peaks after 10 and 12 months for initial and early
renegotiations, respectively. For late renegotiations, the peak occurs more quickly — after
3 months — before a permanent decline. This latter result is in part due to the effect of
maturity. Late renegotiations occur closer to the maturity date of the contract when lenders
can exercise the option to not renew the debt. Hence, absent a renegotiation shortly after
the previous renegotiation, the likelihood of renegotiating steadily declines in later rounds
as contracts are terminated or mature.
Initial and early renegotiation round hazard functions reveal several local minima and
maxima over durations in excess of four years. For early renegotiations, the peaks are
approximately equally spaced in time, occurring at an annual frequency. In other words,
the probability of renegotiating for a second time, for example, conditional on not having
done so yet peaks after one, two, and three years. This suggests that the timing of these
renegotiations are driven by more than just responses to random shocks, which would be

23

closer to uniformly distributed in event time. Rather, this feature suggests that follow-on
renegotiations may be driven in part by transaction cost considerations. In effect, any surplus
arising under the terms of the contract is typically outweighed by the cost of renegotiating
within the year.
Speculating, intra-year renegotiations may be too costly early in the relationship and
postponed because of costly data collection on the borrowers’ side or monitoring costs on
the lenders side. Borrower discussions with lenders necessitate the gathering of information.
Importantly, this information is often unique to the lending relationship and confidential
(Leftwich (1983)). Regularly spaced renegotiations may economize on the costs associated
with this information collection effort. On the creditors side, lenders monitor a large number
of borrowers whose loan originations are distributed throughout the year. Equal spacing of
renegotiations in loan event time avoids having lenders bargain with many borrowers at any
one time. Consequently, early renegotiations are delayed until the end of each event year.
Particularly apparent among early renegotiations is the large peak occurring after three
years. This peak is due to a change in loan composition and maturity of loans experiencing
early renegotiations at this point relative to other points in time. Specifically, I see a shift in
the distribution of loan types from revolvers to term loans, which have an average maturity
roughly 50% longer than revolvers. Longer maturities permit changes to the contract to
occur after more time elapses because the specter of expiration and the shift in bargaining
power to the lender is less imminent. Yet, the three-year duration peak still occurs well
before the average maturity of these contracts, 7.2 years. Thus, liquidity risk and maturity
extensions are not the sole concerns of most renegotiations.
The peaks among the initial renegotiation hazard function are less pronounced and regular than those of early renegotiations. What is significant is the trough occurring at three
years. The likelihood of an initial renegotiation drops precipitously after 26 months to a
minimum around 36 months. Unlike the spike in the hazard of early renegotiations at this
time, differences in loan type and maturity are not responsible for this trough. The distri-

24

bution of loan types and average maturities at this duration are similar to those for all loans
in the initial renegotiation subsample.

5.2. Multivariate Analysis
To better understand differences in the timing of renegotiation more broadly, I turn to a
Cox regression model with a shared frailty term. The model for the hazard function, h, is

hilt (t|α) = αl hilt (t) = αl exp (xilt β) h0 (t).

(3)

The indices correspond to firm i, loan l, time t. The frailty term, α, is assumed to have
a gamma distribution, though assuming an inverse Gaussian distribution has no significant
effect on the estimation. This term is akin to a random effect in a linear panel data model
and is important for addressing latent heterogeneity across renegotiations within loans. This
specification also enables me to address censored observations.
I choose a Cox regression to avoid making an ad hoc assumption about the functional
form of the baseline hazard, h0 . In this sense, the model is semi-parametric leaving largely
unconstrained the shape of the baseline hazard while requiring a (log) linear relation with the
covariates, x. In unreported results, parametric specifications for the baseline hazard, such
as Exponential, Weibull, Lognormal, and Log Logistic, coupled with maximum likelihood
estimation produce qualitatively similar coefficient estimates.
Table 6 presents estimated hazard ratios, defined as exp(β̂), and t-statistics. One minus
the hazard ratio times 100 equals the percentage increase or decrease in the baseline hazard
function. The first column presents the results using the entire sample or “All” renegotiation rounds. The following three columns present estimates from the three subsamples
conditioned on the renegotiation round — initial (round 1), early (rounds two through five),
and late (rounds five and later) — as indicated at the top of each column. Because the
sample of initial renegotiations include only one observation per loan, the frailty term is

25

unidentified and dropped from the specification.
For each sample other than initial renegotiations, I include a measure of the duration
from the previous round. This variable serves two purposes. First, it captures duration
dependence, the notion that previous durations directly impact the current time to renegotiation and, as such, acts independently of the frailty term, α. Second, this variable also
serves as a type of restricted error component, complementing the frailty term that captures
omitted loan-specific effects related to the timing of renegotiation. To further help with any
confounding, I also include loan type fixed effects and the maturity of the loan at origination.
The results in the first column reveal that the timing of renegotiations across rounds is
governed by three factors: the financial health of the parties to the loan, the uncertainty
regarding borrowers future profitability, and the outcome of renegotiation. The first factor
is captured by the hazard ratios for the banking sector leverage and borrower leverage (i.e.,
Debt / EBITDA). When bank and borrower leverage increase, the hazard function shifts up
and renegotiations are accelerated.
The positive relation between bank leverage and the renegotiation hazard appears to
be at odds with the negative effect of bank leverage on the probability of a renegotiation
leading to a covenant change.18 Further investigation reveals this disparity is due to two
forces. First, there is a nonlinear relation between bank leverage and renegotiation that is
concentrated among a relatively small number of observations at the beginning of the sample
when balance sheet bank leverage was at its highest in the sample. Second, the difference
in variation between the indicator used in the logit and the duration implicit in the hazard
model result in different weights assigned to these observations and, consequently, a different
impact on the coefficient. Removal of these observations eliminates the statistical significance
of the bank leverage variable, but has little effect on the other coefficients.
The second factor driving the timing of renegotiation is uncertainty about borrowers’
future prospects, as captured by borrowers’ stock return volatility. More uncertainty about
18

I thank a referee for bringing this to my attention.

26

borrowers’ prospects is associated with shorter durations until renegotiation. To better
understand this result, I interact borrower uncertainty with borrower leverage to determine if
greater uncertainty in conjunction with greater credit risk further accelerates renegotiations.
In other words, does uncertainty about the borrower generate surplus only when the borrower
is in distress? I find no significant association for the interaction effect, consistent with the
general finding that many renegotiations have little to do with financial distress. Rather,
they are primarily aimed at addressing unforeseen contingencies and information problems
between the borrower and lender.
Finally, covenant modifications are associated with shorter durations to renegotiation
relative to changes in the amount, price, and maturity. This result is closely related to
borrower distress. When I incorporate the interaction between borrower leverage and an
indicator for a change to the covenant package, this interaction is statistically significantly
positive. Thus, renegotiations arise quickly to address potential moral hazard problems
among financially weak borrowers regardless of the financial health of lenders.
Turning to the remaining three columns, I note several differences in how the timing of
renegotiations responds to these factors depending on the renegotiation round. For initial
renegotiations, the only statistically significant determinants are GDP growth and the borrowers’ leverage, as measured by the ratio of total debt to EBITDA. Borrowers with high
leverage (Debt / EBITDA) and better economic times are met with quicker initial renegotiations. However, the GDP growth coefficient is economically small and only marginally
significant.
In contrast, the timing of early (two through five) and late (greater than five) renegotiation rounds is governed more closely by macroeconomic factors, borrower credit quality, and
whether or not the covenant package is modified. Post-initial renegotiations are accelerated
when the banking sectors leverage increases, though these results remain sensitive to the
early observations. Increasing macroeconomic uncertainty accelerates early renegotiation
rounds but decelerates later renegotiation rounds. An explanation for this reversal is not

27

obvious. Late renegotiations are closely related to the current (EBITDA/Assets) and future
(stock return) profitability of the borrower, both of which are negatively associated with the
hazard function. In contrast, late renegotiations are accelerated by increases in firm-specific
uncertainty and renegotiations that modify the covenant package.
What does this heterogeneity across renegotiation rounds mean? Unfortunately, theory
has little to say on these relations and there are undoubtedly many plausible interpretations.
However, when interpreted in light of the previous findings the results are consistent with
the broader theme of information asymmetry and its reduction throughout the lending relationship. Specifically, lenders learn more from observable signals as time progresses and
monitoring frequency increases. Early renegotiations appear to be guided relatively less by
observable signals, and more by ex ante expectations.
My final investigation of when renegotiation occurs examines which ex ante characteristics
predict the number of renegotiation rounds. This analysis is useful from two perspectives.
First, it offers another robustness test for the previous findings. I have attempted to mitigate
confounding from borrower heterogeneity with the frailty term, lagged duration, and fixed
effects. However, this is an imperfect solution. Consequently, a plausible interpretation
of the previous findings can be based on selection. Firms that experience early and late
renegotiations select on unobservables that are unrelated to information problems. Thus,
the question is whether firms that experience more renegotiations are different than those
that experience fewer renegotiations. I can only test for observable differences but this
analysis is at least suggestive.
The second use of this analysis is as another investigation of existing theories. The
models in Dessein (2005) and Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) predict a close relation between
information-related problems and renegotiation. I can offer more evidence of this relation
by examining information related proxies and the expected frequency of renegotiation.
Table 7 presents estimates from a zero-inflated, negative binomial model of the number
of amendments. This model captures the essential features of the dependent variable, which

28

is a count variable containing many zero values. Intuitively, the negative binomial aspect
of this model is akin to a Poisson model for count data. The key difference is that the
negative binomial relaxes the Poisson restriction that the mean of the distribution equal its
variance. The zero-inflated aspect simply adjusts the count probabilities by the likelihood
of experiencing a non-zero count. For further details, I refer the reader to Long and Freese
(2001).
The body of the table presents estimated marginal effects, defined as the change in the
expected number of renegotiation rounds corresponding to a change in the independent
variable from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile. The normalization eases the interpretation of the estimates and enables comparisons across coefficients. All t-statistics are
presented in parentheses and are computed using standard errors that are robust to within
deal dependence.
The results suggest that selection on observable borrower characteristics is unlikely responsible for the differences observed in Table 7. Columns six and seven reveal that only
one of the borrower characteristics, capital expenditures, is significantly associated with the
number of renegotiation rounds after controlling for macroeconomic conditions and covenant
features. Yet, this coefficient is not robust to the inclusion of contracts terms, namely fees
and the presence of an investment restriction. In other words, more or less renegotiation is
not associated with a particular type of borrower, at least not as represented by observable
characteristics. Rather, contract characteristics and macroeconomic conditions are the most
significant predictors of the number of renegotiation rounds. These results also speak to the
motivating theory.
Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) suggest that renegotiation is a response to initially tight
contracts designed to mitigate information-related problems. By tight, these authors refer
to contracts that severely restrict the behavior of borrowers. Column 1 focuses on the three
primary contract characteristics — amount, maturity, and interest rate — as well as macroeconomic factors. All three contract characteristics are strongly positively correlated with the

29

number of future renegotiation rounds. The maturity result emphasizes the point that renegotiation is not just about maturity extensions. Rather, longer maturity loans demand even
more renegotiations because of the greater potential for unforeseeable contingencies, as well
as relatively tighter covenant packages.
The interest rate on drawn funds, the “alldrawn spread” in Dealscan terminology, is
also positively related to the number of renegotiation rounds. A higher interest rate is
indicative of a more restrictive contract insofar as larger interest payments lead to less funds
for alternative purposes both good — positive net present value projects — and bad — free
cash flow problems (Jensen (1986)). While the bulk of this spread is likely due to credit
risk, existing empirical work has shown that there is an economically significant premium
associated with asymmetric information embedded in the interest rate (e.g., Moerman (2009),
Santos and Winton (2010)). Further, this premium covaries positively with credit risk. Thus,
this result is suggestive of a positive link between asymmetric information and the frequency
of renegotiation.
Column 2 incorporates macroeconomics factors. The banking sector leverage is the only
significant factor. Loans originated when bank leverage is high are more likely to be frequently renegotiated. (See below for a discussion of the robustness of this result.) Given the
procyclical nature of bank leverage (Adrian and Shin (2010)), this finding suggests that loans
originated in good times experience fewer renegotiations ex post. Several papers have shown
that lending terms, both price and non-price, are strongly procyclical: looser contracts are
originated in good times (e.g., Bradley and Roberts (2003), Roberts and Sufi (2009b)). Thus,
during good times when contracts are less restrictive, it is not surprising that I subsequently
see less renegotiation.
Column 3 incorporates two additional contract terms: loan commitment fees (a.k.a.,
allundrawn in Dealscan terminology) and an indicator identifying the presence of a restriction
on capital expenditures. If one views loan contracts as two-part tariffs, then any surplus may
be due in part to the magnitude of the fees imposed by lenders. Additionally, many of the

30

renegotiations are motivated by strategic changes to firms’ investment policies according to
the management discussion and analysis sections of the filings.
The remaining columns (re)introduce macroeconomic factors and borrower characteristics. Though none of the latter factors are statistically significant, they cause a significant
attenuation in the yield spread coefficient because of common credit risk variation.
In light of the earlier discussion of bank leverage, I re-estimate each model in Table 7
after excluding pre-1997 observations. The results reinforce the tabulated findings — the
bank leverage coefficient is significantly positive. They also reveal the robustness of the other
coefficient estimates, which are qualitatively similar.
In sum, the most robust findings are that the financial health of the bank sector, maturity of the contract, and presence of an investment restriction all predict the number of
renegotiation rounds. Economically, these results are consistent with theories predicated on
information asymmetry and the appropriate allocation of control rights in different states of
the world (Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009)). Renegotiations are an ex post mechanism designed
to address information problems at the contracting stage.

6.

Conclusion
I show that frequent renegotiation is an integral part of bank lending. The role of

renegotiation is as an ex post remedy to ex ante restrictive contracts that grant lenders
strong control rights when confronted with an informational disadvantage. Indeed, it is
precisely because borrowers are able to renegotiate the terms of their contracts that they are
willing to accept such restrictive contracts in the first place. Renegotiation is also a means
to dynamically complete contracts, which are inherently incomplete.
Ex post renegotiations have several important implications for bank lending. In particular, renegotiation influences the design of the initial contract. It influences the terms
of the agreement once the relationship is underway. And, it influences the behavior of the

31

contracting parties throughout the relationship.
On a more practical level, my study also provides a cautionary note for researchers
investigating loan contracts. When ex post renegotiation is possible — virtually inevitable
— the role of the initial terms of the contract is different than when parties are able to
commit not to renegotiate. Contracts are necessarily structured with future bargaining in
mind. I hope that future research further explores the implications of ex post bargaining for
ex ante security design.

32

Appendix A.

Data and Variable Definitions

All renegotiation data used in this study is gathered from filings on the SEC-EDGAR website and available upon request to the authors. Dealscan information is provided by Thompson Reuter’s Loan Pricing Corporation via electronic media in August of 2010. Dealscan
and Compustat are matched via the link file provided by Michael R. Roberts. Information
on AAA and BAA bond yields (daily), 3-month T-bill yields (daily), 3-month LIBOR, the
S&P 500 Composite index (daily), and GDP (quarterly) come from Global Financial Data.
Information on civilian unemployment (monthly) and bank prime rate (daily) come from the
St. Louis Fed’s FRED database.
Stock return information comes from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
I use the CRSP value weighted index inclusive of dividends, VWRETD, to measure the
equity market return. Stock return volatility is computed as a one-year rolling standard
deviation of monthly stock returns.
Standard and Poor’s quarterly Compsutat database is used for borrower accounting information. The borrower characteristics variables used in this study and how they are constructed are listed below. Statement of cash flow variables are disaggregated into quarterly
flows. I also construct four-quarter moving averages of each variable that are used in the
analysis. All ratios are Winsorized at the upper and lower one percentiles. Earnings volatility is computed as the standard deviation of the annual change in operating income before
depreciation using a three year moving window. This standard deviation is normalized by
the average assets of the firm over the same three years.
Borrower Characteristics (S&P mnemonics in parentheses):
Altman’s Z-Score = 1.2 * ((actq - lctq)/atq) + 1.4 * (req / atq) + 3.3 * (piq / atq) +
0.6 * ((prccq * cshoq) / ltq) + 0.999 * (saleq / atq)
Book Leverage = Total Debt / Book Assets = (dlcq+dlttq) / atq
Cash = Cash / Book Assets = cheq / atq
Market-to-Book = (atq-(atq-ltq+txditcq)+(prccq*cshoq))/atq
33

Current Ratio = actq / lctq
Tangibility = ppentq / atq
Profitability = oibdpq / atq
Total Debt / EBITDA = (dlcq+dlttq) / oibdpq
Cash Flow = (ibq+dpq) / atq;
Interest Coverage = Interest Expense / EBITDA = xintq / oibdpq
Investment = capxq / atq
Acquisitions = aqcq / atq
Log(Book Assets) = ln(atq)
Log(Sales) = ln(saleq)
Collateral = ppentq+invtq+cheq+rectq / atq

Appendix B.

Sample Loan Path

In this Appendix, I examine the loan path for Aeroflex Inc., a global provider of radio
frequency and componentry used in wireless communications systems. Panel A of Table B1
presents the loan observations for Aeroflex Inc. available in the Dealscan extract. Dealscan
identifies four separate deals, or packages, as indicated by Package ID. The first deal consists
of two tranches: a revolver and a term loan that both begin in March of 1996. The second
deal consists of three tranches beginning in February of 1999. The third deal consists of two
tranches beginning in February of 2003, and the final deal is a single tranche revolver that
begins in March of 2006.
Panel B of Table B1 lists the entire loan path for each tranche as culled from the SEC
filings. The Dealscan facility and package identifiers are provided in the first two columns.
The tranche identifier is in the third. The data is sorted by tranche id and event date to
emphasize the notion of a loan path and the organization of the data. I also present a subset
of the information on changes to the maturity, amount, interest rate spread, and covenant

34

package. Though the events are self-explanatory, I note that there are two types of renegotiations: amendments (Amend) and amended and restated contracts (Amend/Restate).
The difference between the two is that the former only discusses changes to the existing
agreement; the latter restates the contract in its entirety, incorporating the effects of any
past amendments. The choice between the two forms is largely determined by practical considerations. If the renegotiation changes a sufficient number of terms, or if a change cannot
be adequately conveyed without the entire contract, then the parties will file the modified
contract in its entirety. From an economic standpoint, the distinction is less important.
Both events correspond to changes to the terms of the contract.
The contract corresponding to the first package in Dealscan (Package ID 47875) is available in an 8-K filed on March 25th 1996. From the discussion in the recitals and definitions
sections of the contract, I identify this deal as the third amended and restated credit agreement. I can also determine the entire lineage of the loan up to this point in time. The
contract was originated on April 24th of 1989 as a single tranche revolver with an aggregate commitment of $50 million. The contract was then amended three times before being
amended and restated on October 10th, 1991. On this date, the revolver amount was reduced
to $23.5 million and a new $15 million term loan tranche (Tranche id, 2) was added to the
deal. These two tranches underwent one more amendment on October 5th of 1992 before the
deal was amended and restated for a second time on April 11th, 1994. This second amended
and restated contract is amended two more times before being amended and restated for the
third time on March 15, 1996. Thus, the third amended and restated agreement on March
15, 1996 is the ninth amendment to the contract originated on April 24, 1989.
All subsequent renegotiations are found as exhibits in the filings. The third restated
contract underwent two more amendments, the last of which terminated the term loan and
rolled any outstanding amounts under this tranche into the revolving line of credit, which
was increased from 22 to 27 million dollars on April 30, 1998. In February of 1999, the
agreement was amended and restated for the fourth time, which reintroduced a term loan

35

tranche (Tranche id, 3) and an additional revolving line of credit (Tranche id, 4). This
secondary revolver was converted to a $3.2 million term loan on February 14, 2003, and
the original revolvers maturity was extended and its credit line increased to $50 million.
There are eight subsequent amendments, the last of which announces the termination and
replacement of the revolving line of credit with a new line of credit (Dealscan package ID
147799), and several changes to the term loan tranche.
A few points are worth mentioning. First, while the sheer number of renegotiations is
extreme in this example, it highlights a number of features of the lending process. For
example, tranches within a credit agreement are often terminated and introduced during the
life of the agreement. Also, renegotiations can affect all or only some of the tranches of a
credit agreement. The renegotiation process is complex, making for a rich analysis but a
costly data collection effort, hence, the restriction on the sample size.
Second, the availability of data in the early- and mid-1990s is typically limited to the
date of a renegotiation event because there are no electronic filings. Occasionally, I can glean
one or two contract terms, such as the amount in the Aeroflex case, but this often depends
on whether or not that term is being changed by a renegotiation.
Third, Dealscan observations do not correspond to any particular type of event. In
the Aeroflex example, each Dealscan observation corresponds to an amended and restated
contract. This is not always the case. For the 817 unique Dealscan observations contained in
the sample, 59% correspond to an origination, 29% correspond to an amended and restated
contract, and 13% correspond to an amendment.
Fourth, Table B1 provides only a snapshot of the available data and the implications of
renegotiations. For observations in Dealscan, there is often detailed information on many
loan terms. For observations not in Dealscan, I collect information on changes to five different
types of covenant changes in addition to information on pricing, maturity, and amount
modifications. Specifically, I note changes to covenants restricting accounting measures
(e.g., debt-to-ebitda), distributions (e.g., dividends), investments (e.g., acquisitions, capital

36

expenditures), collateral, and financing (e.g., debt or equity issuances).
I track amendments at the tranche level. Doing so enables us to examine which contract
terms change and how they change. However, amendments often do not clearly delineate
to which tranche they apply, particularly in cases where qualitative changes are made (e.g.,
definitions and covenants). For these cases, I assume that all tranches are affected.

37

References
Adrian, T., Shin, H., 2010. Liquidity and leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19,
418–437.
Aghion, P, Bolton, P., 1992. An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting.
Review of Economic Studies 59, 473–494.
Aghion, P., Tirole, J., 1997. Formal and real authority in organizations. Journal of Political
Economy 105, 1–29.
Albuquerque, R., Hopenhayn, H.A., 2004. Optimal dynamic lending contracts with imperfect enforceability. Review of Economic Studies 71, 285–315.
Altman, E., Gande, A., Saunders, A., 2010. Bank debt versus bond debt: Evidence from
secondary market prices. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42, 755–767.
Asquith, P., Beatty, A., Weber, J., 2005. Performance pricing and bank debt contracts.
Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 101–128.
Asquith, P., Gertner, R., Scharfstein, D., 1994. Anatomy of financial distress: An examination of junk-bond issuers. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 625–658.
Beneish, M., Press, E., 1993. Costs of technical violation of accounting-based debt covenants.
The Accounting Review 68, 233–257.
Beneish, M., Press, E., 1995. The resolution of technical default. The Accounting Review
70, 337–353.
Benmelech, E., Bergman, N., 2008. Liquidation values and the credibility of financial contract renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. Airlines. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123,
1635–1677.
Berger, A., Espinosa-Vega, M., Frame, W., Miller, N., 2005. Debt maturity, risk, and
asymmetric information. Journal of Finance 60, 2895–2923.
Biais, B., Mariotti, T., Rochet, J., 2011. Dynamic financial contracting. In: Acemoglu,
D., Arellano, M., Dekel, E. (eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World
Congress, vol. 1. Cambridge University Press.

38

Biais, B., Mariotti, T., Rochet, J.-C., Villeneuve, S., 2010. Large risks, limited liability and
dynamic moral hazard. Econometrica 78, 73–118.
Bolton, P., Dewatripont, M., 2005. Contract Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Bolton, P., Scharfstein, D., 1990. A theory of predation based on agency problems in financial
contracting. American Economic Review 80, 93–106.
Bradley, M., Roberts, M., 2003. The structure and pricing of debt covenants. Working
Paper, Duke University.
Chava, S., Livdan, D., Purnanandam, A., 2009. Do shareholder rights affect the cost of bank
loans? Review of Financial Studies 22, 2973–3004.
Chava, S., Roberts, M., 2008. How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
covenants. Journal of Finance 63, 2085–2121.
Chen, K., Wei, K., 1993. Creditors’ decisions to waive violations of accounting based debt
covenants. Accounting Review 68, 218–232.
Clementi, G., Hopenhayn, H., 2006. A theory of financing constraints and firm dynamics.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 229–265.
DeMarzo, P., Fishman, M., 2007. Optimal long-term financial contracting. Review of Financial Studies 20, 2079–2128.
DeMarzo, P., Sannikov, Y., 2006. Optimal security design and dynamic capital structure in
a continuous-time agency model. Journal of Finance 61, 2681–2724.
Demiroglu, C., James, C., 2010. The information content of bank loans. Review of Financial
Studies 23, 3700–3737.
Dessein, W., 2005. Information and control in ventures and alliances. Journal of Finance
60, 2513–2549.
Dewatripont, M., Tirole, J., 1994. A theory of debt and equity: Diversity of securities and
manager-shareholder congruence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1027–1054.
Dichev, I., Skinner, I., 2002. Large sample evidence on the debt covenant hypothesis. Journal
of Accounting Research 40, 1091–1123.

39

Gale, D., Hellwig., M., 1985. Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period problem.
Review of Economic Studies 52, 647–663.
Gale, D., Hellwig., M., 1989. Repudiation and renegotiation: The case of soverieng debt.
International Economic Review 30, 3–31.
Garleanu, N., Zwiebel, J., 2009. Design and renegotiation of debt covenants. Review of
Financial Studies 22, 749–781.
Gorton, G., Kahn, J., 2000. The design of bank loan contracts. Review of Financial Studies
13, 331–364.
Gorton, G., Winton, A., 2003. Financial intermediation. In: Constantinides, G., Harris, M.,
Stulz, R. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 1. Elsevier, North Holland.
Grossman, S., Hart, O., 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and
lateral integration. Journal of Political Economy 94, 691–719.
Hart, O., Moore, J., 1988. Incomplete contracts and renegotiation. Econometrica 56, 755–
785.
Hart, O., 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford University Press.
Hart, O., Moore, J., 1998. Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113, 1–42.
Ivashina, V., 2009. Asymmetric information effects on loan spreads. Journal of Financial
Economics 92, 300–319.
Ivashina, V., Sun, Z., 2011. Institutional stock trading on loan market information. Journal
of Financial Economics 100, 284–303.
Jensen, M., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American
Economic Review 76, 323–329.
Johnson, S., 1997. An empirical analysis of the determinants of corporate debt ownership
structure. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 47–69.
Kaplan, S., Zingales, L., 1997. Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful measures
of financing constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169–215.

40

Klein, J., Moeschberger, M., 2003. Survival Analysis: Techniques for Censored and Truncated Data. 2nd ed., Springer, New York.
Kovrijnykh, N., 2013. Debt contracts with partial commitment. American Economic Review
103, 2848–2874.
Leftwich, R., 1983. Accounting information in private markets: Evidence from private lending agreements. Accounting Review 58, 23–42.
Long, J., Freese, J., 2001. Predicted probabilities for count models. Stata Journal 1, 51–57.
Lorenzoni, G., Walentin, K., 2007. Financial frictions, investment, and Tobin’s q. Working
Paper, Northwestern University.
Maskin, E., Moore, J., 1999. Implementation and Renegotiation. Review of Economic
Studies 66, 39–56.
Maskin, E., Sjorstrom, T., 2002. Implementation Theory. In: Arrow, K., Sen, A., Suzumura,
K. (eds.), Handbook of Social Choice and Welfare, vol. 1. Elsevier, North Holland.
Mian, A., Santos, J., 2012. Liquidity risk and maturity management. Working Paper,
University of California, Berkeley.
Moerman, R., 2009. The role of information asymmetry and financial reporting quality
in debt trading: Evidence from the secondary loan market. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 46, 240–260.
Murfin, J., 2012. The supply side determinants of loan contract strictness. forthcoming
Journal of Finance.
Muller, H., Wang, J., 1994. Hazard rate estimation under random censoring with varying
kernels and bandwidths. Biometrics 50, 61–76.
Nini, G., Smith, D., Sufi, A., 2009. Creditor control rights and firm investment policy.
Journal of Financial Economics 92, 400 420.
Ortiz-Molina, H., Penas, M., 2004. Lending to small business: The role of loan maturity in
addressing information problems. Working Paper, Tilburg University.
Quadrini, V., 2004. Investment and liquidation in renegotiation-proof contracts with moral

41

hazard. Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 713-751.
Rajan, R., 1992. Insiders and Outsiders: The choice between informed and arm’s-length
debt. Journal of Finance 47, 1367–1400.
Rampini, A., Viswanathan, V., 2010. Collateral, risk management, and the distribution of
debt capacity. Journal of Finance 65, 2293–2322.
Rampini, A., Viswanathan, V., 2013. Collateral and capital structure. Journal of Financial
Economics 109, 466–492.
Roberts, M., Sufi, A., 2009a. Control rights and capital structure: An empirical investigation. Journal of Finance 64, 1657–1695.
Roberts, M., Sufi, A., 2009b. Renegotiation of financial contracts: Evidence from private
credit agreements. Journal of Financial Economics 93, 159–184.
Sannikov, Y., 2012. Dynamic security design and corporate financing. In: Constantinides,
G., Harris, M., Stulz, R. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 2. Elsevier,
North Holland.
Santos, J., Winton, A., 2010. Bank capital, borrower power, and loan rates. Working Paper,
University of Minnesota.
Scherr, F., Hulburt, H., 2001. The debt maturity structure of small firms. Financial Management 30, 85–111.
Sharpe, S., 1990. Asymmetric information, bank lending, and implicit contracts: A stylized
model of customer relationships. Journal of Finance 45, 1069 1087.
Smith, C., 1993. A perspective on violations of accounting based debt covenants. Accounting
Review 68, 289–303.
Smith, C., Warner, J., 1979. On financial contracting: An analysis of bond covenants.
Journal of Financial Economics 7, 117–161.
Strebulaev, I., Yang, B., 2008. The mystery of zero-leverage firms. Working paper, Stanford
University.
Sweeny, A., 1994. Debt covenant violations and managers accounting responses. Journal of

42

Accounting and Economics 17, 281–308.
Tirole, J., 2006. The theory of corporate finance. Princeton University Press.
Wright, R., Cooke, W., Gray, R., 2007. Understanding the credit agreement. In: Taylor, A.,
Sansone, A., (eds.), The Handbook of Loan Syndications and Trading, McGraw-Hill.

43

.125
.1
Fraction
.075
.05
.025
0
91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11

Year
Origination

Renegotiation

Fig. 1. Distribution of Originations and Renegotiations by Year. The figure presents the empirical histograms
of loan originations and renegotiations by year.

.4
.2
Yield Spead Residuals
−.2
0
−.4
−.6
−1.5

−1

−.5
0
Change in Market−to−Book

.5

1

Fig. 2. Interest Rate - News Relation. The figure presents the fitted values from a fractional regression of the
change in yield spread residuals against the change in the market-to-book ratio. The residuals are estimated
in a first state linear regression of the change in the yield spread on fixed effects for year, quarter, loan type,
and industry, and the change in the borrower debt-to-ebitda ratio.

.8
Hazard Function
.4
.6
.2
0
0

10
95% CI
Round = 1

20

30
Months
95% CI
Round = 2 − 5

40

50

60

95% CI
Round = >5

Fig. 3. Hazard Functions by Renegotiation Round. The figure presents kernel smoothed hazard functions
for renegotiation stratified by renegotiation round groups. The three groups are all initial renegotiations
(Round = 1), rounds two through five, and rounds six through twenty two, which is the maximal number of
rounds in the sample.

Table 1
Sample statistics
Panel A presents summary statistics for the sample of loan paths. Duration estimates are computed after
excluding censored observations. Panel B presents contract characteristic summary statisics for the sample
of loans from the SEC filings and the dealscan database. Panel C presents borrower characteristic summary
statisics for the sample of deals from the SEC filings and the Compustat database. All variables are formally
defined in Appendix A.
Panel A: Sample Statistics
Entire Sample
Count
501

Mean

Per Tranche
Min Med

Max
Tranches
Terminal Events
# of Renegotiations
1,773
3.54
0.00 2.00
30.00
Duration to Amend & Restate (Months)
303
12.13 0.69 10.00 49.38
Duration to Amend (Months)
1,354
7.40
0.03 5.51
55.51
Duration to Rollover (Months)
116
17.20 1.74 11.34 179.70
Terminal Events
Replace
141
Terminate
28
Mature
229
Censor
103
Subsample with at Least One Renegotiation
Per Tranche
Count Mean Min Med
Max
Tranches
364
Terminal Events
# of Renegotiations
1,773
4.87
1.00 4.00
30.00
Duration to Amend & Restate (Months)
303
12.13 0.69 10.00 49.38
Duration to Amend (Months)
1,354
7.40
0.03 5.51
55.51
Duration to Rollover (Months)
116
17.20 1.74 11.34 179.70
Terminal Events
Replace
94
Terminate
22
Mature
166
Censor
82

Panel B: Contract Characteristics

Contract Characteristics
Tranche Amount (Mil)
Maturity (Months)
All Drawn Spread (%)
# of Lenders
Loan Type Distribution (%)
364-Day Facility
Revolver
Term Loan
Other
Deal Purpose Distribution (%)
Corporate Purposes
Debt Repayment
LBO/MBO
Takeover
Working Capital
Other

Obs

SEC Data
Mean
SD

487
481
353
173

196.62
50.56
1.99
4.43

25
266
173
16
71
78
15
97
87
52

Dealscan Data
Mean
SD

Med

Obs

100.00
60.00
1.75
3.00

245,329
220,186
136,587
153,064

216.11
55.80
2.24
3.85

4.99
53.09
34.53
3.19

12,486
89,933
90,619
52,849

5.08
36.57
36.85
21.49

14.17
15.57
2.99
19.36
17.37
10.38

79,382
23,241
5,454
6,666
20,982
38,734

45.50
13.32
3.13
3.82
12.03
22.20

307.12
26.04
1.48
4.56

643.02
47.94
1.64
5.23

Med
65.00
54.00
2.00
2.00

Panel C: Borrower Characteristics

Sales (Mil)
Total Debt / EBITDA
Total Debt / Book Assets (%)
EBITDA / Book Assets (%)
Market-to-Book
Net PPE / Book Assets (%)
Cash / Book Assets (%)
Altman’s Z-Sscore
Frac w/ Credit Rating
Vol(EBITDA / Book Assets) (%)

Obs
2,759
2,474
2,651
2,543
2,584
2,731
2,731
2,410
2,582
2,612

SEC
Mean
412.11
12.75
35.01
3.29
1.48
31.61
5.30
1.89
0.42
1.66

Data
SD
540.32
20.38
19.95
2.37
0.63
22.64
6.59
2.08
0.49
1.64

Med
179.05
10.29
33.34
3.11
1.32
25.83
2.76
1.42
0.00
1.10

Obs
394,885
366,664
400,737
378,183
383,236
413,180
413,468
361,163
456,373
296,028

Compustat Data
Mean
SD
500.66 1,489.35
5.65
24.06
31.54
51.15
-1.89
18.75
3.06
6.47
30.70
26.03
17.59
22.29
0.78
24.59
0.26
0.44
4.75
11.30

Med
48.63
2.90
21.58
2.45
1.47
22.48
7.66
1.70
0.00
1.68

Table 2
Changes to Contract Terms in Renegotiations
Panel A presents the probability of a change to each contract term for the whole sample (All) and
conditional on a particular renegotiation round. For example, the unconditional probability of changing
the amount of the loan is 27%. Conditional on the change occuring in the first renegotiation round, this
probability is 28%. Conditional on occurring in the second through fifth renegotiation rounds this probability
is 25%, and so on. The last column presents the slope coefficient from a regression of an indicator variable
identifying whether the contract term was changed on the renegotiation round. Panel B presents average
changes in the magnitude of the contract term conditional on whether the change was positive or negative.
For example, conditional on a positive change to the maturity of the contract, the average loan maturity
increased by 23.12 months. Conditional on this change occuring in the first renegotiation round, the loan
maturity increased by 21.82 months. The last column presents the slope coefficient from a regression of an
indicator variable identiying whether the contract term was changed on the renegotiation round. Statistical
significance for all regression coefficients at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**”, and “***”,
respectively. All hypothesis tests are conducted with standard errors robust to within loan dependence.
Panel A: Probability of Contract Term Changes by Renegotiation Number
Renegotiation Round
All
1
2-5
>5
β
Frequency
1,773 364 857
552
Amount
0.27 0.28 0.25
0.29
0.00
Yield Spread
0.30 0.29 0.30
0.30
0.00
Fee
0.12 0.08 0.11
0.15
0.01***
Maturity (Months)
0.29 0.30 0.27
0.30
0.00
Probability of Change to Covenant Structure
Accounting Measure 0.34 0.30 0.35
0.34
0.00
Distributions
0.07 0.06 0.08
0.08
0.00
Investments
0.16 0.14 0.16
0.18
0.00
Collateral
0.12 0.09 0.13
0.10
-0.00
Financing
0.06 0.05 0.06
0.07
0.00

Panel B: Magnitude of Positive & Negative Average Changes to Pricing, Amount, and Maturity

Amount (%)
Amount ($ mil)
Max Yield Spread (%)
Min Yield Spread (%)
Max Fee (%)
Min Fee (%)
Maturity (Months)
Amount (%)
Amount ($ mil)
Max Yield Spread (%)
Min Yield Spread (%)
Max Fee (%)
Min Fee (%)
Maturity (Months)

Renegotiation Round
All
1
2-5
>5
Positive Changes
103.17 134.73 110.47
69.57
102.75 100.68 116.88
84.66
0.75
0.61
0.73
0.90
0.71
0.55
0.72
0.83
0.17
0.16
0.14
0.21
0.15
0.16
0.12
0.18
23.12
21.82
22.82
24.46
Negative Changes
-31.13 -28.63 -30.41
-33.08
-99.62 -47.92 -80.15 -145.89
-0.75
-0.87
-0.70
-0.74
-0.72
-0.90
-0.71
-0.62
-0.15
-0.12
-0.16
-0.15
-0.14
-0.13
-0.16
-0.12
-12.24
-9.04
-12.44
-13.12

β
-4.45
-1.31
0.03***
0.03**
0.00
0.00
0.13
0.13
-3.25
-0.00
0.01
-0.00
0.00
-0.02

Table 3
Renegotiation Outcome Probabilities
The table presents the probability of different renegotiation outcomes as characterized by the combination
of contract terms that are changed. To ease reporting, I combine changes to the yield spread and commitment
fee into one category, Pricing. Likewise, I treat all covenant changes as a change to the Covenant Structure.
For example, the most popular renegotiation outcome occurring in 45.91% of all renegotiations changes only
the covenant structure of the contract. The next most popular outcome changes the amount, yield spread,
fess, and maturity of the contract. And so on. For presentation purposes I do not report the 11 outcomes
that occur in less than 1% of the renegotiations.

%
45.91
11.61
7.79
5.30
4.68
4.36
3.66
3.43
2.34
2.26
2.10
2.03
1.71
1.64
1.17

Cumulative
%
45.91
57.52
65.32
70.62
75.29
79.66
83.32
86.75
89.09
91.35
93.45
95.48
97.19
98.83
100.00

Amount
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Pricing
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Maturity
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Covenant
Structure
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 4
Control Rights in Renegotiation
Panel A presents the estimated marginal effects from a logit regression. The dependent variable is an indicator function equal to one if a covenant was modified in a renegotiation and zero otherwise. Macroeconomic
variables are contemporaneous with the dependent variable, borrower characteristics are lagged one quarter.
Loan type fixed effects include indicators for revolving, term, and 364-day loans. The marginal effects are
computed as the difference in predicted probabilities when moving from the 75th percentile to the 25th percentile of the variables distribution, holding all other variables constant at their median values. Statistical
significance for all regression coefficients at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**”, and “***”,
respectively. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics that are robust to within loan dependence are used
to compute statistical significance. Panel B presents statistics on changes to specific accounting covenants
occurring in renegotiation including: the probability of loosening a covenant (i.e., increasing slack), and the
avergae percentage increase and decrease in the magnitude of any change in slack. Statistical significance of
the percentage change in the covenant slack at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**”, and
“***”, respectively.
Panel A: Covenant Modification Logit Regression
Macroeconomic Variables
Volatility Index
Tight Lending Standards
Bank Leverage
GDP Growth
S&P 500 Return
Borrower Variables
Debt / EBITDA
EBITDA / Assets
Capital Expenditures / Assets
Market-to-Book Ratio
Stock Return
Stock Return Volatility
Loan Variables
Renegotiation Round
Event Duration
Loan Duration
Loan Type Fixed Effects
Pr(Y=1)
Obs.

0.008
( 0.200)
0.084**
( 2.447)
-0.091**
( -2.053)
0.000
( 0.027)
-0.017
( -0.788)
0.036***
( 3.062)
0.001
( 0.075)
-0.032***
( -3.042)
0.018
( 1.354)
-0.002
( -0.092)
0.126***
( 4.160)
0.013
( 0.602)
-0.116***
( -5.196)
-0.053*
( -1.949)
Yes
0.648
1,083

Panel B: Dynamics of Covenant Slack

Covenant Slack
Debt-to-EBITDA
Capital Expenditures
Current Ratio
Covenant Buildup
Debt-to-EBITDA
Capital Expenditures

% Change in Covenant Slack
Loosen
Tighten

Obs

Pr(Loosen)

93
22
17

46.24
54.55
47.06

12.07
15.25
37.28

-23.81
-9.94
-13.79*

104
19

50.96
52.63

0.34
0.32

-0.16*
-0.42*

Table 5
Loan Pricing and Credit Risk
The table presents average interest rate and commitment fee changes in renegotiation for three types of
news regarding credit quality. I proxy for news with the borrower’s market-to-book ratio and profitability.
Bad news is defined as a negative change since the previous renegotiation or origination. I then split all
positive changes into two equal-size groups. Small positive changes correspond to moderate news, large
positive changes to good news. Statistically significant differences from zero at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels
are denoted by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively. All t-statistics are reported in parentheses and are robust
to within loan dependence are used to compute statistical significance.

Bad News
Moderate News
Good News
Observations

Yield Spread
Market-to-Book Profitability
0.273***
0.180***
( 4.245)
( 2.906)
-0.017
-0.011
( -0.173)
( -0.110)
-0.349***
-0.314**
( -2.749)
( -2.050)
394
376

Commitment Fee
Market-to-Book Profitability
0.030*
0.041**
( 1.878)
( 2.043)
0.067*
0.054
( 1.661)
( 1.121)
-0.034
-0.056**
( -0.818)
( -2.211)
121
119

Table 6
When Does Renegotiation Occur?
The table presents estimated hazard ratios, defined as exp(β̂), from a Cox proportional hazard model. The
column “All” presents results using the entire sample. The subsequent columns present results conditioning
the sample on the renegotiation round. For example, the column headed “2 - 5” uses only those durations
from the second through fifth renegotiation rounds. I incorporate a shared frailty term in the Cox models
estimated using samples with multiple renegotiation spells (columns 1, 3, and 4). P-value for θ = 0 is the
p-value of a likelihood ratio test of the null hypothesis that correlation across spells within a loan is equal
to zero. Statistically significant differences from one at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”,
“**”, and “***”, respectively. All statistical tests are conducted with standard errors that are robust to loan
dependence.

All
Macroeconomic Variables
Volatility Index
Tight Lending Standard
Bank Leverage
GDP Growth
Borrower Variables
Debt / EBITDA
EBITDA / Assets
Market-to-Book Ratio
Stock Return
Stock Return Volatility
Loan Variables
Covenant Change
Lag Duration
P-Value for θ = 0
Loan Maturity
Loan Type Fixed Effects
Obs

Renegotiation Round
1
2-5

>5

0.996
( -0.529)
0.994***
( -2.594)
1.399***
( 6.267)
1.000
( 0.216)

1.005
( 0.465)
0.998
( -0.652)
1.067
( 0.723)
1.002*
( 1.710)

1.011
( 1.314)
0.990***
( -3.625)
1.340***
( 5.125)
1.000
( -0.105)

0.947***
( -3.596)
1.006
( 1.326)
1.653***
( 3.992)
1.000
( -0.050)

1.003*
( 1.864)
0.977
( -0.974)
1.078
( 0.926)
0.999
( -1.462)
1.015***
( 3.331)

1.006***
( 3.093)
1.008
( 0.256)
0.886
( -1.252)
1.000
( -0.279)
1.011
( 1.018)

1.004**
( 2.057)
0.971
( -1.145)
1.057
( 0.650)
1.000
( -0.081)
1.009*
( 1.648)

1.003
( 1.168)
0.887*
( -1.767)
1.843***
( 2.970)
0.997***
( -2.720)
1.031***
( 3.919)

1.406***
( 4.633)
0.983***
( -3.043)
0.001
Yes
Yes
974

1.023
( 0.200)

1.454***
( 4.382)
0.980***
( -3.283)
0.083
Yes
Yes
721

1.648***
( 3.281)
0.988
( -0.875)
0.415
Yes
Yes
253

Yes
Yes
336

Table 7
Predicting the Number of Renegotiation Rounds
The table presents marginal effects from zero-inflated negative binomial regressions of the number of
amendments of each tranche on various determinants measured in the month prior to the start of the tranche.
The marginal effects are the expected change in the number of amendments in response to an interquartile
change in the explanatory variable. Loan type fixed effects include indicators for term and revolving loans.
Terminal event fixed effects include indicators for tranches that end in termination, replacement, or censor.
Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics that are robust to within deal dependence.
Statistically significant differences from zero at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**”, and
“***”, respectively.

Contract Terms
Loan-to-Assets
Maturity
Yield Spread

1

2

0.412***
( 3.048)
0.463**
( 2.122)
0.426**
( 2.320)

0.184**
( 2.192)
0.470***
( 2.810)
0.580***
( 3.790)

Fees
Investment Restriction
Macroeconomic Factors
Volatility Index

Number of Renegotiation Rounds
3
4
5
0.375***
( 2.969)
0.672**
( 2.075)
0.951**
( 2.281)
0.203
( 0.718)
1.326***
( 2.721)

0.149
( 0.820)
0.247
( 1.403)
0.747***
( 4.683)
-0.064
( -0.472)

Lending Standards
Bank Leverage
GDP Growth

0.176*
( 1.916)
0.507*
( 1.957)
0.711**
( 2.249)
0.053
( 0.253)
1.454***
( 3.582)
-0.112
( -0.380)
-0.064
( -0.242)
1.222***
( 4.869)
-0.191
( -0.935)

Borrower Characteristics
Log(Sales)
Debt-to-EBITDA
Earnings
Market-to-Book
Stock Return
Stock Return Vol
CapEx
Loan Type Fixed Effects
Terminal Event Fixed Effects
Avg No. of Amendments
Obs (No. of Tranches)

Yes
Yes
2.689
338

Yes
Yes
2.696
438

0.269***
( 3.335)
0.647***
( 3.585)
0.313
( 1.619)

Yes
Yes
2.968
252

Yes
Yes
2.968
252

-0.367
( -1.511)
0.028
( 1.333)
0.124**
( 2.227)
-0.267*
( -1.745)
-0.169*
( -1.932)
0.369**
( 1.991)
-0.217**
( -2.033)
Yes
Yes
2.559
379

6

7

0.227***
( 2.936)
0.589***
( 3.281)
0.393**
( 2.162)

0.130
( 1.056)
0.621*
( 1.709)
0.261
( 0.721)
0.236
( 1.168)
1.206***
( 2.651)

0.220
( 1.170)
0.272
( 1.516)
0.559***
( 2.700)
-0.041
( -0.283)

0.059
( 0.196)
0.048
( 0.161)
1.118***
( 3.642)
-0.072
( -0.336)

-0.250
( -1.109)
0.027
( 1.459)
0.093
( 1.589)
-0.167
( -1.434)
-0.049
( -0.667)
0.117
( 0.639)
-0.251**
( -2.245)
Yes
Yes
2.550
378

-0.408
( -1.571)
-0.025
( -0.891)
-0.083
( -0.604)
0.165
( 1.411)
-0.015
( -0.209)
0.092
( 0.412)
-0.007
( -0.034)
Yes
Yes
2.806
216

Table B1
Sample Loan Path
Panel A presents a snapshot of loan data for Aeroflex Inc from a 2010 Dealscan extract. Facility ID
identifies the tranche, Package ID identifies the deal. Panel B presents the entire loan path at the tranche
level constructed from information in the SEC filings. Tranche ID is the internal loan identifier. Spread is
the interest rate spread on the loan over Libor. Fee is the commitment fee. Covenant indicates whether or
not the covenant package was modified.
Panel A: Dealscan Data for Aeroflex Inc.
Facility ID
ID
62943
62944
67178
67177
67179
145204
145320
194507

Package
ID
47875
47875
50913
50913
50913
114755
114755
147799

Loan
Type
Revolver
Term
Term
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Term
Revolver

Event
Date
3/15/1996
3/15/1996
2/25/1999
2/25/1999
2/25/1999
2/14/2003
2/14/2003
3/21/2006

Maturity
Date
3/31/1999
9/30/2000
12/31/2002
12/31/2002
4/30/2008
2/14/2007
4/30/2008
3/21/2011

Amount
($mil)
16
4
20
23
4
50
3
100

Panel B: Tranche Level Loan Path Data for Aeroflex Inc
Deal
ID

47875

Facility
ID

62943

50913

67177

114755

145204

47875

62944

50913

67178

50913
114755

67179
145320

147799

194507

Tranche
ID
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5

Event
(Amendment #)
Origination
Amend (1)
Amend (2)
Amend (3)
Amend/Restate (4)
Amend (5)
Amend/Restate (6)
Amend (7)
Amend (8)
Amend/Restate (9)
Amend (10)
Amend (11)
Amend/Restate (12)
Amend (13)
Amend/Restate (14)
Amend (15)
Amend (16)
Amend (17)
Amend (18)
Amend (19)
Amend (20)
Amend (21)
Terminate
Origination
Amend (1)
Amend/Restate (2)
Amend (3)
Amend (4)
Amend/Restate (5)
Amend (6)
Terminate
Origination
Mature
Origination
Amend/Restate (1)
Amend (2)
Amend (3)
Amend (4)
Amend (5)
Amend (6)
Amend (7)
Amend (8)
Amend (9)
Mature
Origination
Amend (1)
Mature

Loan
Type
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Revolver
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
0
Revolver
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
Term
0
Revolver
Revolver
0

Event
Date
4/24/1989
11/2/1989
9/27/1990
11/27/1990
10/10/1991
10/5/1992
4/11/1994
6/22/1994
1/1/1995
3/15/1996
7/1/1997
4/30/1998
2/25/1999
12/20/2002
2/14/2003
3/31/2003
6/26/2003
7/24/2003
10/31/2003
9/28/2004
4/19/2005
5/20/2005
3/21/2006
10/10/1991
10/5/1992
4/11/1994
6/22/1994
1/1/1995
3/15/1996
7/1/1997
4/30/1998
2/25/1999
12/31/2002
2/25/1999
2/14/2003
3/31/2003
6/26/2003
7/24/2003
10/31/2003
9/28/2004
4/19/2005
5/20/2005
3/21/2006
4/30/2008
3/21/2006
8/28/2006
3/21/2011

Maturity
(Months)

Amount
(Millions)
50.0

Spread
(%)

Fee
(%)

3.00

0.50

Covenant

23.5
16.0

36

46

22.0
27.0
23.0

48

50.0

Yes
2.00
1.75

0.25
0.30

15.0
4.0

54

3.25
16.0

Yes

46

20.0

2.00

110
62

4.5
3.2

1.50

Yes
60

100.0

1.13

