                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ARE DYNAMIC VICKREY AUCTIONS PRACTICAL?:
                PROPERTIES OF THE COMBINATORIAL CLOCK AUCTION

                                          Jonathan Levin
                                         Andrzej Skrzypacz

                                        Working Paper 20487
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20487


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014




We thank Chiara Farronato, Maarten Janssen, Paul Klemperer, Erik Madsen, David Salant and Ernesto
Wandeler for useful comments and discussions. The authors have advised bidders and the U.S. Federal
Communications Commission on radio spectrum auctions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20487.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jonathan Levin and Andrzej Skrzypacz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Are Dynamic Vickrey Auctions Practical?: Properties of the Combinatorial Clock Auction
Jonathan Levin and Andrzej Skrzypacz
NBER Working Paper No. 20487
September 2014
JEL No. D44,D47,D82,L51,L96

                                           ABSTRACT

The combinatorial clock auction is becoming increasingly popular for large-scale spectrum awards
and other uses, replacing more traditional ascending or clock auctions. We describe some surprising
properties of the auction, including a wide range of ex post equilibria with demand expansion, demand
reduction and predation. These outcomes arise because of the way the auction separates allocation
and pricing, so that bidders are asked to make decisions that cannot possibly affect their own auction
outcome. Our results obtain in a standard homogenous good setting where bidders have well-behaved
linear demand curves, and suggest some practical difficulties with dynamic implementations of the
Vickrey auction.


Jonathan Levin
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
jdlevin@stanford.edu

Andrzej Skrzypacz
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
skrz@stanford.edu




A Online Appendix is available at
http://web.stanford.edu/~skrz/CCA%20Levin%20Skrzypacz%20Appendix.pdf
1     Introduction

In this paper we study some properties of a new auction design, the combinatorial clock auction
(or CCA). The CCA was proposed by Ausubel, Cramton and Milgrom (2006). It is essentially a
dynamic Vickrey auction. The Vickrey auction is central to economic theory as the unique auction
that provides truthful incentives while achieving an eﬃcient allocation. Yet it is often viewed as
impractical for real-world applications because it requires bidders to submit bids for many possible
packages of items.1 Economists think of dynamic auctions as having an advantage in this regard
because bidders can discover gradually how their demands fit together – what Paul Milgrom has
called the “package discovery” problem.
    The CCA combines an initial clock phase, during which prices rise and bidders state their
demands in response to the current prices, with a final round in which bidders submit sealed package
bids. The seller uses the final bids to compute the highest value allocation and the corresponding
Vickrey payments.2 Ideally, bidders demand their most desired package at every stated price in
the clock phase, allowing for information revelation. Then in the final round, they bid their true
preferences, leading to an eﬃcient allocation with truthful Vickrey prices. The question we address
is whether this is the likely equilibrium outcome of the CCA; that is, whether the desirable incentive
properties of the Vickrey auction are retained.
    The practical motivation for our study is the recent and widespread adoption of CCA bidding to
sell radio spectrum licenses.3 Spectrum auctions have provided the motivation for some important
recent innovations in auction design, starting with the simultaneous ascending auction pioneered by
the FCC in the early 1990s and subsequently adopted in many other countries (Klemperer, 2004;
Milgrom, 2004). The FCC design allows for gradual information revelation, but it does not easily
accommodate package bidding, and it creates incentives for demand reduction because winners pay
their bids (Cramton, 2013). In principle, the CCA addresses both of these issues.
    As it turns out, the CCA does have an equilibrium in which bidding is truthful and the outcome
is eﬃcient. But it is a rather tenuous equilibrium. To support it, each bidder must behave “just
    1
      Ausubel and Milgrom (2006) oﬀer additional reasons why sealed-bid Vickrey auctions have not caught on in
practice, including vulnerability to collusion even by losing bidders, incentives for shill bidding, and the potential for
low revenue.
    2
      The original CCA of Ausubel, Cramton and Milgrom (2006) and the rules used in practice actually call for a
slight modification of Vickrey pricing, where the Vickrey prices are adjusted upwards if the outcome is outside the
core. This “core-adjustment” will not be relevant in our model, but in general it means the truth-telling properties
of the Vickrey auction may not apply. For papers on core-adjustment see for example Day and Raghavan (2007),
Day and Milgrom (2008), Edril and Klemperer (2009), Ausubel and Baranov (2010), Beck and Ott (2013) or Goeree
and Lien (2013).
    3
      Countries that have used CCAs to sell radio spectrum licenses include Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark,
Ireland, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the UK.


                                                            1
right” when selecting between many final bids that lead to the exact same individual payoﬀ. This
indeterminacy may be surprising given the dominant strategy incentive properties of the Vickrey
auction. It stems from the CCA activity rules that link final bids to earlier clock phase bids.
In a dynamic auction, activity rules are essential in order to make early bids meaningful, and to
prevent bidders from holding back their demand like eBay snipers (Ausubel, Cramton and Milgrom,
2006). The CCA activity rules have the feature that the clock phase bids can pin down exactly the
allocation of items (Ausubel and Cramton, 2011; Ausubel and Baranov, 2013). Then the final bids
determine the payments. But with Vickrey pricing, a bidder cannot aﬀect her own payment unless
she changes the allocation. So each bidder may be completely indiﬀerent across her permissible
final bids, despite the choice aﬀecting the prices paid by rivals.
   We explore the implications in a series of steps. We focus on a standard allocation problem
where bidders have linear downward sloping demand curves. We first show that depending on
how bidders resolve their final round indiﬀerence, the CCA can have many ex post equilibria.
These equilibria involve varying degrees of strategic demand expansion in the clock phase, and no
guarantee of eﬃciency. The multiplicity arises even though we focus on (linear) “proxy” strategies
in which bidders do not condition their bids on rival bidding behavior. That is, we do not allow
for bootstrapped equilibria of the type that are common in many dynamic games. Instead the
source of multiplicity is the flexibility that bidders have to set each other’s prices, and the lack of
incentives to do so in any particular way. These points are developed in Sections 2-5, with Section
4 providing some empirical evidence on bidding in recent CCAs for radio spectrum.
   We then ask what happens if bidders resolve their indiﬀerence in favor of making their rivals
pay more. This resolves the final round indiﬀerence problem. In the class of linear proxy strategies
it leaves only the equilibrium in which both bidders bid truthfully and the outcome replicates the
sealed-bid Vickrey auction. However, if bidders truly want to raise rival prices without aﬀecting
their own payoﬀs, there are new problems in the clock phase. Our second analysis, in Section 6,
shows that if bidder 1 bids truthfully, bidder 2 can adopt a non-proxy predatory strategy that
exaggerates her demand in the clock phase. This relaxes her activity constraints and allows her
to submit higher final bids that raise bidder 1’s payment, all without aﬀecting her own profit. If
bidder 1 understands this, her best response is to reduce demand, leading to an equilibrium that
skews the allocation in favor of the predatory bidder.
   Finally, our third analysis considers what happens if both bidders try to raise each other’s prices
by relaxing the activity rule constraints on their final bids. This appears to have happened in at
least one recent large-scale auction. We show in Section 7 that this leads to another multiplicity


                                                  2
of ex post equilibria. These equilibria feature demand reduction in the clock phase, again with no
guarantee of eﬃciency. Indeed in the limiting case of maximal aggressiveness, the bidders anticipate
that they will pay linear clock prices, so the auction eﬀectively becomes a standard ascending clock
auction.
        Our paper relates to an extensive literature on multi-item auctions (e.g. Milgrom, 2004). One of
its central messages is that multi-item auction design involves hard trade-oﬀs. The standard auctions
that have been considered - simultaneous ascending and clock auctions, pay-as-bid combinatorial
auctions - have well-documented limitations. In this sense, it is hardly surprising that the CCA
also appears to have some drawbacks from a strategic perspective. In fact, one point we emphasize
in the conclusion is that our analysis highlights a serious challenge for any attempt to implement
a dynamic Vickrey auction, namely that it may be diﬃcult to provide incentives for bidders to
submit truthful bids for packages that they are very unlikely to win, despite these bids potentially
being important for setting rival prices.
        More narrowly, the novelty of the CCA design means there are not many directly related
papers. The closest is Janssen and Karamychev (2013), who analyze bidding incentives in a CCA
with discrete quantities and multiple products. They show that when bidders have preferences for
raising rivals’ costs (modeled similarly to what we do in Section 6), bidders have an incentive to
submit large final round bids and bid aggressively in the clock phase. They also discuss how budget
constraints can lead to non-truthful bidding. Salant (2013) provides a broader review of practical
issues in auction design that covers the CCA as well as competing formats.4


2        The Combinatorial Clock Auction

The combinatorial clock auction can be used with multiple bidders and multiple products in diﬀerent
quantities. For concreteness, we will assume there are two bidders,  = 1 2, and a single product.
The product is perfectly divisible and there is unit supply.
        The auction consists of an initial clock phase and a final bid round. In the clock phase, the seller
gradually increases the price . In response, the bidders announce demands 1  2 . A bidder may
reduce her demand, but not increase it, as the auction proceeds. The price increases until there
                                       P
is no excess demand. If at this point   = 1, we say there is market clearing. Alternatively if
P
      1, there is excess supply. Our analysis will focus on the case where the starting price is
low and bidders reduce their demands continuously, so there is never excess supply.
    4
    Additionally, Knapek and Wambach (2012) discuss why bidding in a CCA may be strategically complicated;
Bichler et.al. (2013) present experimental results on the CCA.


                                                       3
       After the clock phase, the bidders submit final (sealed) bids 1 (1 ) and 2 (2 ). The seller
computes the allocation and winner payments based on these final bids. She selects the allocation
               P                                                    P
that maximizes   ( ) subject to the feasibility constraint that   ≤ 1. She then computes
the Vickrey payment for each bidder . Bidder ’s Vickrey payment is max∈[01]  () −  (∗ ),
where ∗ is ’s winning quantity.5 If  is increasing,  pays  (1) −  (∗ ).
       The final bids are constrained by an activity rule that ties them to bids in the clock phase.
The activity rule we describe corresponds to those used in recent CCA auctions.6 It has three
parts. First, bids in the clock phase are binding. If at price , bidder  demanded , then bidder
’s final bid for  units must be at least , i.e.  () ≥ . Second, final bids must satisfy
revealed preference with respect to the last clock bids. If the clock phase ends at a price ∗ , with 
demanding ∗ , then for any  6= ∗   () − ∗  ≤  (∗ ) − ∗ ∗ . Third, for quantities  ≥ ∗ , ’s
final bids must satisfy an additional local form of revealed preference. If  was the highest price at
which  demanded  or more units, then  cannot express an incremental value greater than  for
                                                          (+)− ()
obtaining slightly more than , i.e. lim→0+                              ≤ .7 We illustrate these rules below.
       The activity rule has an important implication. Suppose the clock phase ends with market
clearing. Then the final clock demands will be value-maximizing for any permissible final bids!
To see why, let ∗1  ∗2 be the final clock demands. Consider an alternative assignment where each
                                        P
bidder  receives  = ∗ +  , with   ≤ 0 required for feasibility. From the second activity rule
requirement,

             X                 X                                    X                      X          X
                   ( ) ≤        (∗ ) − ∗ · (∗ −  ) =        (∗ ) + ∗ ·        ≤        (∗ ) .   (1)
                                                                                                  


       This has the following consequence noted by Ausubel and Cramton (2011). If the clock phase
ends with market clearing and ties are resolved in favor of the clock phase allocation, bidder ’s
quantity and payment do not depend on her final bids. The payment part follows from Vickrey
pricing: fixing ’s quantity, her payment depends only on the bids of others. Therefore if a bidder is
maximizing her own individual profit she will be completely indiﬀerent across all permissible final
   5
     Here we implicitly assume a zero reserve price, but positive reserve prices are easily incorporated by adding a
“bidder 0” that bids 0 () where 0 (1) − 0 () is the required revenue to sell 1 −  units.
   6
     It is exactly the rule used in Canada, and equivalent to the rules used in Switzerland, Ireland, Netherlands, and
UK if those auctions had been run for only a single category of licenses. The exact rules used in these auctions vary
somewhat in how they handle multiple license categories.
   7
     An obvious candidate for an activity rule would be to require global revealed preference. That is, if  demanded
 at price , then for any  6= , final bids must satisfy  () −  ≥  () − . In our model, this rule would impose
what we later will call consistent bidding. However, as noted by Ausubel and Cramton (2011), such an approach
seems unworkable with multiple categories because it can lead to “dead ends”. In response to this, Ausubel and
Baranov (2013) have suggested a new global approach based on GARP. We discuss their proposal in the conclusion.



                                                             4
bids. However, these bids are very important for pricing, as we now show.


3    An Illustrative Example

We use an example to illustrate the CCA rules and resulting incentives. We first show how the
activity rules permit a given bidder, here bidder 2, to make a range of final bids for any clock phase
behavior. Then we show how bidder 2’s choice of final bid aﬀects bidder 1’s total payment and
the marginal prices he faces for additional units. These marginal prices in turn aﬀect bidder 1’s
incentives in the clock phase, where the allocation is determined. Finally, we preview our results
on predatory bidding by showing how bidder 2 can exaggerate her clock phase demand to relax her
activity constraints and further raise bidder 1’s payment.
    For this example, we assume that during the clock phase bidder 2 behaves as if she has a value
for 2 units equal to 2 (2 ) = 22 − 12 22 , and a diminishing marginal value 2 (2 ) = 2−2 .8 When
the price is , she demands 2 () = 2 −  units irrespective of bidder 1’s behavior. The quantity
1 − 2 () is the residual supply available to bidder 1 at price . Assume the clock price starts at
 = 1. It rises so long as bidder 1 demands 1 ()  1−2 (), and stops as soon as 1 () ≤ 1−2 ().
Suppose the clock phase ends at a price ∗ with bidder 2 demanding ∗2 = 2 − ∗ , and bidder 1
demanding ∗1 = 1 − ∗2  From above, we know the allocation ∗1  ∗2 will be the final auction result
for any permissible final bids.
    Despite the allocation being pinned down, bidder 2 has considerable flexibility in her final bids.
Figure 1 illustrates the possibilities. The lower curve shows the bids that bidder 2 submitted during
the clock phase. As the price rose, bidder 2 reduced her demand continuously from 1 to ∗2 . For
quantities above ∗2 , bidder 2 demanded 2 units when the price was  = 2 (2 ). When she did
this, she submitted a bid of 2 2 (2 ) for 2 units. This bid is less than the value function 2 (2 )
that guided bidder 2’s clock phase bidding. In particular, the auctioneer records the revenue from
bidder 2’s bid at price  = 2 (2 ), but not her consumer surplus. For quantities below ∗2 , bidder
2 has not recorded any bid during the clock phase, so her bid is zero.
    The activity rule states that bidder 2’s final bid 2 must lie everywhere above the bids she
recorded during the clock phase. Also, above ∗2 the final bid function cannot rise more steeply
than 2 . It must satisfy the local revealed preference restriction: 20 (2 ) ≤ 2 (2 ). So at the upper
extreme, bidder 2 can raise her bids to the dashed curve, which rises at a slope 2 (2 ) from her
   8
     For this example it is not important whether 2 is bidder 2’s actual valuation. In our equilibrium analysis in
Section 5, bidders generally will not bid truthfully in the clock phase.




                                                        5
final clock bid.9 The shaded area in Figure 1 shows that space in which the final bid function must
lie, for quantities above ∗2 . Below ∗2 , bidder 2 may submit any non-negative bid 2 so long as it
lies below the dotted line with slope ∗ that runs straight from the origin to bidder 2’s final clock
bid. These bids, however, are not important for pricing.10
    We say that bidder 2 is consistent if she raises her final bid above ∗2 to its maximum amount.
When she does this, the marginal values she expresses with her final bid correspond exactly to her
inverse demand in the clock phase. In contrast, we say that bidder 2 is quiet if she does not raise
her bids at all, so that 2 (2 ) = 2 (2 ). Under quiet bidding, 2 corresponds to the revenue
generated by bidder 2’s clock phase demand, and the slope of 2 is the marginal revenue associated
with assigning more units to bidder 2, rather than the marginal values implicit in bidder 2’s clock
demand. In addition to consistent and quiet bidding, there are intermediate cases as well, since in
the range 2 ≥ ∗2 (Region II in the figure), bidder 2 can select any 2 (2 ) that lies in the shaded
area and rises less steeply than 2 (2 ).
    Next we explain how bidder 2’s choice will aﬀect both the total payment by bidder 1, and the
marginal price he must pay for additional units. For simplicity, assume 2 is increasing as it will
be under both quiet and consistent bidding. Then bidder 1 must pay 2 (1) − 2 (∗2 ) – bidder 2’s
bid for all units minus her bid for the units she wins. This amount is higher if bidder 2 is consistent
than if she is quiet. So is bidder 1’s marginal price for additional units. To see this, assume 2
                                                                                 R1
is diﬀerentiable and define 20 (2 ) = 2 (2 ). Writing bidder 1’s payment as ∗ 2 (2 ) 2 , we
                                                                                                        2

can see that bidder 1’s price for his final unit equals bidder 2’s marginal bid for this unit, 2 (∗2 ).
                                                                                               
Under consistent bidding 2 (2 ) = 2 (2 ). Under quiet bidding 2 (2 ) =                  2 2 2 (2 ).   Consistent
bidding means that bidder 1 must pay the clock price at which bidder 2 gave up the final unit.
Quiet bidding means that bidder 1 must pay only the (smaller) marginal revenue reduction!
    The marginal prices are important for clock phase incentives because the clock phase is where
quantities are determined. Figure 2 illustrates the marginal prices faced by bidder 1 under consistent
and quiet bidding. The -axis shows the allocation: as we move to the right, we increase 1 and
decrease 2 . The -axis is dollars. The solid green line plots the values 2 (2 ) that guide bidder
2’s clock phase demand. At  = 2 (2 ), bidder 2 demands 2 units and the auctioneer records a
    9
      Our discussion presumes that bidder 2 does not increase her clock bid for ∗2 , i.e. sets 2 (∗2 ) = ∗2 2 (∗2 ). We
will assume this throughout for simplicity. If bidder 2 raises her bid for ∗2 by ∆ she is permitted to translate all her
bids up by this same amount, so there is an analogue of quiet and consistent bidding for any choice of ∆. Of course,
if bidder 2 raises her bid for ∗2 , but does not raise her other bids, then bidder 1 could end up paying very little, and
in fact pays zero if 2 achieves its maximum at ∗2 . We mention below the possibility that bidder 2’s final bids might
be chosen in a way that drives down bidder 1’s payment relative to quiet bidding, but will not focus on it.
   10
      That is because the activity rule prevents bidder 2 from claiming to value 2  ∗2 more than she values ∗2 . So
the maximum of 2 will be achieved at a quantity 2 ≥ ∗2 .



                                                             6
bid 2 2 (2 ). The dotted line in Figure 2 shows how the recorded bid changes with 2 , i.e. it is the
marginal revenue curve 2 (2 ) associated with bidder 2’s demand. If bidder 2 is quiet in the final
round, this curve represents the marginal prices at which bidder 1 can purchase additional units.
If bidder 2 is consistent, the marginal prices are given by the solid demand curve.
       Now consider how bidder 1 should behave in the clock phase. We assume for concreteness that
bidder 1 has value 1 (1 ) = 2 − 12 21 for 1 units, and diminishing marginal value 1 (1 ) = 2 − 1 .
Given bidder 2’s assumed behavior, bidder 1 can purchase any quantity 1 by demanding this
amount in the clock phase when  = 2 (1 − 1 ). Fixing bidder 2’s final bid strategy 2 (and
assuming it is increasing), the optimization problem faced by bidder 1 is


                                    max 1 (1 ) − [2 (1) − 2 (1 − 1 )]                                     (2)
                                   1 ∈[01]

                                                                                                   R1
       If bidder 1 expects bidder 2 to be consistent, he expects to pay 2 (1)−2 (1 − 1 ) =       1−1   2 () 
for 1 units. The marginal price for the 1 th unit is 2 (1 − 1 ), so he should purchase 1 = 12,
the quantity at which his marginal value 1 (1 ) just equals his marginal price 2 (1 − 1 ). Figure
2 shows how bidder 1 can achieve this outcome by bidding truthfully in the clock phase. If bidder
1 is truthful, his demand will intersect the residual supply available to him when 1 (1 ) =  =
2 (1 − 1 ).
       In contrast, if bidder 1 expects bidder 2 to be quiet, the marginal price for his 1 th unit is
2 (1 − 1 ). So he should purchase up to the point at which 1 (1 ) = 2 (1 − 1 ), i.e. 1 = 23.
To do this, he must end the clock phase with 1 = 23 and 2 = 13. Figure 2 shows how he can
do this by inflating his stated demand from 1 (1 ) to 1 (1 ).11 Here, bidder 1 does not want to be
truthful. He wants to overstate his demand because when the residual supply is 1 − 2 , the clock
price is 2 (2 ) = 2 − 2 , but the true marginal price is only 2 (2 ) = 2 − 22 !
       This example points to a key strategic issue in the CCA. On the one hand, the rules are such that
if bidders care only about their own quantity and payment, they are completely indiﬀerent across
permissible final bids. On the other hand, the way this indiﬀerence is resolved is very important for
determining rival payments and rival incentives in the clock phase. A bidder will want to behave
truthfully in the clock phase if his rival uses a consistent final bid strategy, but overstate his clock
demand if he anticipates a quiet final bid strategy. We expand on this point, and consider a wider
range of strategic postures and equilibrium outcomes, in Section 5.
  11
    In this example, bidder 1’s optimal strategy is pinned down at only a single point. In the models we consider
below, we will pin down optimal strategies everywhere by requiring that bidder 1’s strategy be optimal for a range
of possible values of bidder 2, and vice versa.



                                                        7
         The example is also useful to demonstrate a final point, namely how bidder 2’s clock demand
for inframarginal units aﬀects bidder 1’s payment. We illustrate in Figure 3. The figure shows
bidder 2’s baseline clock demand, and bidder 1’s truthful demand, which is optimal if bidder 2 is
consistent. Bidder 1 expects to pay the shaded area under bidder 2’s demand curve. But what
happens if bidder 2 raises her demand? In particular, what if she demands all the units (i.e. sets
2 = 1) until the clock price reaches  = 32, before reducing demand to match her baseline
bidding? If bidder 2’s final bid is now consistent with this higher demand, bidder 1 should still be
truthful in the clock phase. However, he must pay the dotted area as well. His payment doubles
from 18 to 14! We will explore this type of predatory bidding behavior in Sections 6 and 7,
starting with the scenario where a single bidder inflates clock phase demand to raise her rival’s
payment, and then considering what happens if both bidders are predatory.


4         Evidence on CCA Bidding Behavior

Given the ambiguous nature of incentives, a natural question is whether data from past auctions can
tell us more about bidder behavior. Either bidding data or summary reports are available for several
CCA sales of radio spectrum licenses. This evidence suggests a striking degree of heterogeneity
across bidders and across auctions. Some bidders have submitted minimal final round bids, as in
the quiet strategy described above. Some have submitted final bids that express clear valuation
increments and resemble the consistent strategy described above. Others seem to have followed
strategies designed to make rivals pay prices that are close to the linear prices at the end of the
clock phase, as in our predatory bidding example.12


4.1        Early UK Auctions (2008)

The United Kingdom held two early CCA sales in 2008: for spectrum licenses in the 10-40 GHz
range and then for L Band licenses. The auctions had combined revenue of around £10 million. We
have information on these sales from reports released by the UK government (Cramton, 2008a,b;
Jewitt and Li, 2008).13
    12
     We discuss evidence from five past auctions below. As we were finalizing this draft, bidding data was released
from the Canadian 700 MHz auction conducted in early 2014. Our preliminary analysis of the data further supports
the claim that there can be a great deal of heterogeneity in bidder behavior. Of the three most active bidders,
two (Bell Canada and Telus) submitted final bids for a large number of diﬀerent license packages (close to 500) at
essentially the maximum amount allowed by the activity rules, whereas the third (Rogers), which ended up paying
much more for the licenses it won, submitted only a single final round bid, with which it increased its bid for its
winning package.
  13
     The UK government also published a note explaining how the bids in the 10-40 GHz auction determined
the winner payments: http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/spectrum/spectrum-awards/completed-awards/10-


                                                        8
   In the 10-40 GHz auction, there were ten bidders competing for 27 available licenses. There
was a fair amount of competition during the clock phase. The average demand across licenses was
2.2 in the initial bidding round, and it took 17 rounds to reach market clearing. However, there
was relatively little activity in the final bid round, despite the fact that all ten bidders ending up
winning licenses. Only two bidders submitted final round bids on large numbers of packages. In
Cramton’s (2008a) description of the auction, the others “simply increased their clock bids, and
added a handful of supplementary [i.e. final] bids on packages closely related to their bids in the
latter part of the 4 [i.e. phase].” Moreover, as Jewitt and Li (2008) explain, “all but one of the
bidders made their highest supplementary bid either on their final clock package, or on a subset
of it.” This is an extreme form of quiet bidding. Most bidders expressed zero (or in fact negative)
value for incremental spectrum beyond what they actually won!
   In the L Band auction, there were eight bidders and 17 licenses for sale. Bidders could demand
arbitrary packages of these licenses. Again, there was a fair amount of competition in the clock
phase. The average demand for the licenses in the first round was 3.8 and the market cleared
after 32 rounds. Again, however, there was little activity in the final bid round. Six of the
bidders submitted final bids on just zero, one or two packages (Cramton, 2008b). Only two bidders
submitted significant numbers of final bids. So again, the behavior of most bidders could be
described as quiet, and there seems to have been some of the same behavior flagged by Jewitt and
Li above. For example, Cramton (2008b) writes: “It is diﬃcult to understand why WorldSpace
[which entered only two new final bids] did not enter a more complete set of supplementary bids.
Based on its bidding in the clock stage, it would appear to value nearly any set of three small lots
at its upper limit of 2,614.”


4.2   UK 4G Auction (2013)

The United Kingdom’s subsequent auction for 800 and 2600 MHz spectrum involved much more
valuable licenses, with the auction generating over £2 billion in revenue. There were four 10 MHz
licenses and a 20 MHz license available in the 800 MHz band. There were also multiple licenses
available at 2600 MHz.
   Table 1 shows the number of distinct packages bid on by each bidder in the 52 4 s, and subse-
quently in the final round.14 If a bidder bid for the same package in multiple 4 s, we count it just
28-32-40-ghz-awards/baseprices.pdf
  14
     The numbers in this section come from our own analysis of the bidding data, which is avail-
able at: http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/spectrum/spectrum-awards/awards-archive/completed-awards/800mhz-
2.6ghz/auction-data/



                                                    9
once in the first column; if a bidder bid for a package in the clock phase and raised the bid in the
final round, it counts in both columns.

                                   Packages Bid        MHz Won
                     Bidder        Clock   Final       800   2600    Payment
                     EE              6       48        10    70       £589M
                     Niche (BT)      7       89         -     20      £186M
                     H3G             7       12        10     -       £225M
                     MLL             8       8          -     -          -
                     HKT             8       8          -     -          -
                     Telefonica      7       6         20     -       £550M
                     Vodafone        11      94        20    65       £791M

                           Table 1. Bidding in the UK 800/2600 Auction

   Two of the bidders, MLL and HKT, dropped their demands to zero during the clock phase.
Two other bidders, Telefonica and H3G, were active throughout the clock phase but submitted just
a few final round bids. In contrast, EE, Niche and Vodafone bid for large numbers of packages in
the final round.
   Figure 4 shows the full set of package bids submitted by Vodafone. The bars represent the
amount of spectrum demanded in diﬀerent bands, and the line above shows the amount of each
bid. Vodafone submitted bids for essentially all combinations of licenses that involved 20 MHz of
low-frequency spectrum (the most it was allowed to bid for) and the most desirable high-frequency
spectrum. The bids are highly systematic. Vodafone expressed a value for the 20 MHz low-frequency
block nearly equivalent to its value for two 10 MHz blocks, and appears to have expressed clear
incremental values for the high-frequency blocks.
   The incremental values expressed in these final bids are consistent with Vodafone’s demand
reductions in the clock phase. For instance, in 4 37, when the price was £87.6 million for each
10 MHz license, Vodafone reduced demand from 4 to 3 C band licenses. Later in its final round
bidding, it expressed an incremental value of £87.6 million for a fourth C band license. Toward the
end of the clock phase, Vodafone was bidding for 20 MHz at 800 MHz and 30 MHz in band C, and
reduced its demand from 7 to 5 to 4 to 3 and then to 0 licenses in band E. The prices at which it
made the reductions are consistent with the final bids shown in Figure 4. In this sense, Vodafone
appears to have bid in a way that approximates fairly closely the consistent behavior described
above.

                                                  10
       Telefonica, which bid for similar amounts of spectrum during the clock phase, behaved very
diﬀerently in its final round bidding. Figure 5 shows its complete set of package bids. Telefonica
bid for 7 diﬀerent packages in the 4 s. In the final round, it added four new packages (bids 1-
4), raised its bid for two packages from the clock phase (bids 5-6), and left five clock phase bids
unchanged (bids 7-11). The bids it left unchanged are dominated. They could not have been
winning bids or mattered for rival prices as each is for a larger package than bid 4, and oﬀers less
money.
       Telefonica’s five meaningful bids were quite similar in terms of spectrum demanded and amount
oﬀered. Bid 2 was Telefonica’s winning bid. So Telefonica expressed very little value for packages
larger than what it won – the incremental values expressed in its final bids are much lower than
the prices at which it reduced demand in the 4 s. In this sense, its bidding behavior was much
closer to the quiet strategy described above than to consistent bidding.


4.3      Austrian 4G Auction (2013)

The Austrian 4G auction involved the sale of high-value spectrum licenses in the 800, 900 and
1800 MHz bands. The only bidders were the three major wireless companies in Austria. Each
was limited to bidding on no more than 50% of the available licenses. This still allowed any two
bidders to submit a combined bid for all licenses in the auction, i.e. it did not imply that winners
automatically received some spectrum at reserve prices.
       The auction yielded revenue of just over 2 billion, which far exceeded forecasts.15 A report
released by the regulatory authority after the auction cited aggressive final round bids as a key
factor in the high prices paid by the winners:16 The report reads:

              During [the final bid] stage every bidder was allowed to submit as many as 3,000
         supplementary bids. (...) The three bidders actually submitted a total of more than
         4,000 supplementary bids. More than 65% of these supplementary bids were submitted
         for the largest permissible combinations of frequency blocks, with a share of some 50%
         of available frequencies. In addition, the bidders utilised almost to the full the price
         limits that had applied to these large packages during the sealed-bid [i.e. final] stage.
         (...) These supplementary bids submitted on large frequency packages had a significant
         eﬀect on the prices oﬀered by the other bidders. At the same time, such bids generally
         only have a marginal likelihood of winning out in the end. If these bids for very large
  15
     Press coverage after the auction quoted one industry CEO as saying that the high prices were "a bit-
ter pill to swallow," and another as claiming that the outcome was “a disaster for the industry as a
whole.” (http://www.fiercewireless.com/europe/story/austrian-operators-file-complaints-over-spectrum-auction-800-
mhz-900-mhz-an/2013-11-27).
  16
     The report, titled “Result of the 2013 multiband auction driven by consistently oﬀensive bidding strategy on
the part of all three contenders” is available at https://www.rtr.at/en/pr/PI28102013TK, along with a presentation
containing the numbers quoted below.


                                                       11
           numbers of frequencies had been ignored when determining the winners and prices, the
           revenue from the auction would have settled at a level of about EUR 1 billion.

         A remarkable feature of the Austrian auction is that the final revenue ended up quite close to
the total license prices at the end of the clock phase, which were 2.07 billion. Had the bidders
submitted no final round bids (i.e. been quiet), the winners would have paid 765 million. Instead
they paid 2.01 billion. If bidding in both stages of the auction was truthful, average license prices
under the Vickrey formula only would be as high as prices at the end of the clock phase if bidders
were willing to pay for all their incremental spectrum at the same rate as for a marginal license.
         In this sense, the pricing outcome in the Austrian auction resembles the predatory example at
the end of the previous section, where a bidder could end up paying the full clock price for every
unit. We explore the idea that bidders may strategically increase rival prices, and the implications
of this behavior for equilibrium allocations and revenue, in Sections 6 and 7 below.


5         Discounts and Demand Expansion

In this section and the following ones, the basic environment is the same. There is a single unit to
be allocated, perfectly divisible. There are two bidders,  = 1 2. Each bidder  has marginal value
for an th unit given by  () =  −  , where  ≥   0. Bidder ’s total value for  units
           R
is  () = 0  ()  =   − 12  2 . Throughout, we use lower case to denote marginal values
and upper case to denote total values. We assume that the  ’s are private information and take
values between [   ], while the  ’s are common knowledge. To avoid messy corner solutions, we
assume that  −    . This means that the eﬃcient allocation is always interior, and satisfies
1 (1 ) = 2 (1 − 1 ).
         A proxy strategy for bidder  is described by a (continuous, positive and decreasing) marginal
value function  (), and associated  () that guides demand in the clock phase, and a final bid
function  () with associated marginal bid function  () that guides behavior in the final bid
round. In the clock phase, bidder  demands quantity  when  =  () (if    (1) bidder 
demands the whole supply). In doing so, she expresses a bid  () for  units. In the final bid
round, she bids  () for all quantities  demanded in the clock phase (bids for smaller quantities
are irrelevant if there is market clearing in the clock phase). To satisfy the activity rule, the proxy
values must satisfy, for all : (i)  () ≥  (), and (ii)  () ≤  ().17
    17
    We focus on proxy strategies in order to emphasize issues that are specific to the CCA. The CCA also admits a
rich set of contingent or bootstrapped equilibria, in which bidder  makes a certain demand in equilibrium because
she believes that if she doesn’t, bidder  will punish her as the auction proceeds. However, these types of dynamics
are familiar from other dynamic auctions and are not specific to the CCA.


                                                        12
   We restrict bidders to use proxy strategies and focus on equilibria in linear proxy strategies, in
which each bidder bids a linear demand curve in the clock phase, and adopts a mixture of quiet
and consistent behavior in the final round.
   A linear proxy strategy for bidder  specifies a linear demand for the clock phase


                                              () =  −                                        (3)


with  ≥   0, and associated marginal revenue curve

                                                 
                                      () =       () =  − 2                               (4)
                                                

   It also specifies a linear demand for the final bid round:


                                     () = (1 −   )  () +    ()
                                            =  − (1 +   )                                      (5)


   The parameter   ∈ [0 1] captures the extent to which bidder  is consistent ( = 0) versus quiet
( = 1). Higher values of   mean lower marginal prices for bidder , because  is expressing less
value for any particular unit. It is easy to see that for any value of   ,  () satisfies the activity
rule.
   A linear proxy strategy requires the choice of three parameters:    and   . Provided the clock
price starts suﬃciently low, the clock phase will end with market clearing. So for any       ,
bidder ’s payoﬀ will depend only on her choice of    , and will be independent of her choice of
  . Therefore to characterize equilibria, we fix  1 and  2 as parameters, and solve for equilibrium
choices of 1  2  1  2 . We focus on equilibria that are “ex post” or “robust”, in that for any  ,
the strategy adopted by bidder  is a best response to ’s strategy for every value of  ∈ [   ].


5.1     Proxy Best Responses

We start by deriving best responses for bidder 1. We show that if bidder 2 uses a linear proxy
strategy, where 2 varies with her private information 2 , but 2 and  2 do not, then bidder 1
always has an ex post best response that involves using a linear proxy strategy in which 1 is the
only parameter to vary with 1 (so that iterating on the best-response correspondence keeps us
within this class of strategies).
   Suppose bidder 2 bids according to 2 () = 2 − 2 . If bidder 1 bids according to 1 (), and


                                                      13
the clock allocation is interior, then bidder 1 obtains quantity 1 such that


                                              1 (1 ) = 2 (1 − 1 )                                             (6)


Then after the final bid round, bidder 1 will pay 2 (1) − 2 (1 − 1 ). His final payoﬀ will be:


                                        1 (1 ) − [2 (1) − 2 (1 − 1 )]                                        (7)


       A necessary condition for bidder 1’s strategy to be ex post optimal is that knowing 2 , he
does not prefer to purchase a slightly larger or smaller quantity than . The marginal benefit of
additional quantity is 1 (), and the marginal price is 2 (1 − ). So a necessary condition for ex
post optimality is that:
                                               1 () = 2 (1 − )                                                (8)

This condition is also suﬃcient for ex post optimality if it holds for all 2   that satisfy (6).18
       Substituting (6) into (8), and using the fact that bidder 2 is playing the linear proxy strategy
2 (1 − ) = 2 (1 − ) −  2 2 (1 − ), we obtain a best response for bidder 1:


                                        1 () = 1 () +  2 2 (1 − )                                          (9)


       Therefore bidder 1 can follow the linear proxy strategy 1 () = 1 − 1 , with


                               1 = 1 +  2 2          and       1 = 1 +  2 2                              (10)


and this is a best response for every 2 .


5.2      Proxy Equilibrium

We now solve for an ex post equilibrium in linear proxy strategies. To do this, we combine the best
response conditions (10) for bidders 1 and 2. Then, so long as  1 and  2 are not both equal to one,

                                                    2 ( 1 1 + 2 )
                                     1 = 1 +                        ≡ 1 + 1                                  (11)
                                                       1 −  1 2
  18
    This is because, given 2 , bidder 1’s global best response problem is first to choose 1 that maximizes 1 () −
{max 2 ()−2 ()}, which is a concave problem, and then choose some decreasing 1 such that 1 (1 ) = 2 (1 − 1 ).
Moreover, by this reasoning, the strategies we characterize remain best responses even if we remove the restriction
to continuously-decreasing proxy strategies. For example, even if bidders could drop demand discontinuously to end
the clock phase with excess supply, they would not find it profitable.




                                                          14
and
                                              2 ( 1 1 + 2 )
                                 1 = 1 +                      ≡ 1 + 1 .                          (12)
                                                 1 − 12

Proposition 1 Fix any  1   2 ∈ [0 1] with  1  2  1. The CCA has an ex post equilibrium in
linear proxy strategies, in which bidder  bids according to  () in the clock phase and  () in the
final round, with


                                       () =  () +  (1 − ) 
                                  and  () =  () −  ,

               (   + )
where  =      1−    .


Remark 1 The above proposition describes equilibria for  1  2  1 What if both bidders are com-
pletely quiet? Then the best responses (10) imply 1 = 1 + 2 , and 2 = 2 + 1  The system
"explodes" as  1 =  2 → 1 and there is no equilibrium. This non-existence is a consequence of
assuming 2 bidders and is familiar from other models with linear demands (e.g., Kyle 1989 or
Vives 2011). For example, adding to the model a small non-strategic third bidder would allow us
to construct linear proxy equilibria even for  1 =  2 = 1

   Figure 6 shows the optimization problem for bidder 1, for a fixed value of 1 , given that bidder
2 is playing her equilibrium strategy. For each realization of 2 , bidder 1 wants the clock phase
to end with his marginal benefit for additional quantity 1 (1 ) just equal to the marginal price
2 (2 ). To make sure this happens, bidder 1 needs to have 1 (1 ) = 2 (2 ) at the relevant 1  2 .
Solving the optimization problem for each 2 traces out bidder 1’s optimal demand curve 1 (1 ).
   Figure 7 illustrates the equilibrium. It shows the equilibrium bids 1 (1 ) and 1 (2 ) for a
particular realization of 1  2 , along with the final bids 1 (1 ) and 1 (2 ). (Note that as we did
in Figures 2 and 3, we have drawn the marginal bids rather than the total bids.) As the clock
price rises, the bidders reduce demand along their proxy demand curves 1 (1 ) and 2 (2 ) until
reaching market clearing at ∗ . At the end of the clock phase, the final allocation is determined to
                                                                               R1
be ∗1  ∗2 . Then the final bids are made. Bidder 1 pays 2 (1) − 2 (∗2 ) = ∗ 2 (2 ) 2 , which is
                                                                                  2

the shaded area in the figure. The price bidder 1 pays for his last unit is 2 (∗2 ).


5.3   Properties of Equilibrium

Bidding Behavior. The equilibrium involves bidders engaging in demand expansion during the
clock phase because they perceive that their true marginal prices will be discounted from the clock

                                                   15
price. To see this, consider bidder 1’s behavior in an equilibrium with  2  0. The residual
supply available to bidder 1 will be  when the clock price is  = 2 (1 − ). Yet bidder 1’s true
marginal price for buying the th unit is less than . It is equal to 2 (1 − ) =  − 1 (1 − ). The
discount is greatest if bidder 1 is buying a small quantity, and smaller for large quantities. The
equilibrium response is to engage in demand expansion. Bidder 1’s clock demand is higher than
his true demand: 1 () − 1 () = 1 (1 − ) ≥ 0 Following the logic above, the degree of demand
expansion is largest for small quantities, and smaller for large quantities.
    The one exception occurs if bidder 2 is consistent and  2 = 0. In this case the true marginal
price that bidder 1 faces is the same as the clock price. So bidder 1’s optimal strategy is to bid his
true demand in the clock phase, 1 () = 1 ().
    The relationship between a bidder’s true demand and her final round demand is more compli-
cated. Although bidder  will engage in demand expansion in the clock phase if bidder  is not
consistent, she does not increase her final bids to match her clock demand provided that    0.
Combining these oﬀsetting forces,


                                            () −  () =  (1 − ) −  .


                                                                                         b =
Bidder ’s final demand  () is steeper than her true demand  () and rotated around 
  ( +  ).

Allocation and Revenue. The equilibrium allocation is generally not eﬃcient and the revenue diﬀers
from what would occur in a Vickrey auction with truthful bidding. The main exception to this
occurs if both bidders are consistent. If bidder 2 is consistent, the best response for bidder 1 is to
bid truthfully, and vice-versa. So the clock phase allocates the items eﬃciently, and after the final
bid round, each bidder pays its truthful Vickrey price.
    More generally, we can obtain a fairly sharp characterization for symmetric equilibria in which
 1 =  2 =  and 1 = 2 = . In this case, bidder ’s clock phase strategy is  () =  () +
 
1−  (1 − ).      Provided that   0, the equilibrium allocation will be distorted toward 1/2 because
a low-value bidder inflates her clock phase demand more than a high-value bidder. In particular,
we can find the eﬃcient allocation is obtained by setting 1 (1 ) = 2 (1 − 1 ), which occurs at
        1       1 −2
1 =   2   +     2 .   The equilibrium outcome ∗1 solves 1 (1 ) = 2 (1 − 1 ), which means

                                           1 1 − 2          1
                                   ∗1 =     +       (1 − ) =  + (1 − ) 1 
                                           2    2            2



                                                           16
         It is also possible to show for the case of symmetric equilibria that the expected CCA revenue
is decreasing in . Since the outcome with  = 0 corresponds to a Vickrey auction with truthful
bidding, this means that every symmetric equilibrium that involves any degree of “quietish” final
round bidding (  0) generates lower expected revenue than a truthful Vickrey auction. The
derivation of this result requires some calculations that we go through in the Appendix.
         It is harder to obtain sharp characterizations for asymmetric equilibria. However, one particular
case of interest occurs when one bidder is consistent while the other is partially quiet, e.g. if  1  0
and  2 = 0. In this case, bidder 1 bids his true demand in the clock phase, 1 () = 1 ()  but
does not fully raise his final bids. In contrast, bidder 2 expands her clock demand to 2 () =
2 () +  1 1 (1 − ), and raises her final bids to this same demand. The result is that bidder 1
obtains a strictly smaller quantity in equilibrium than is eﬃcient, ∗1  1 . It turns out, however,
that the revenue comparison is ambiguous. In particular, we show in the Appendix that the
expected CCA revenue for this type of asymmetric equilibrium can be either higher or lower than
in a Vickrey auction with truthful bidding.


6         Predatory Behavior

Our first model emphasized that each bidder is indiﬀerent between alternative final bids, yet her
choice matters for how her opponent should behave in the clock phase. The result is that even if we
restrict attention to relatively non-strategic proxy strategies, there are many equilibria involving
varying amounts of demand expansion in the clock phase, to compensate for the price reductions
oﬀered in the final bid round. The equilibrium is generally not eﬃcient, unless both bidders raise
their bids fully in the final round.
         Of course in practice, bidders may not be truly indiﬀerent. They may care to some extent about
rival payments. A bidder might benefit from raising rival costs, or from looking good relative to
opponents. (See Janssen and Karamychev 2013 for further discussion and analysis of the bidding
incentives when bidders care about relative prices as in this section.19 )
         Suppose that each bidder still wants to maximize her own profit, but if she can raise her rival’s
payment without aﬀecting the allocation or her own payoﬀ, she will do so. Now both bidders will
want to be consistent in their final bids. But will they want to be truthful in the clock phase? From
above, the answer is yes if we restrict attention to proxy strategies. However, if bidder 1 is truthful
in the clock phase and consistent in his final bidding, bidder 2 will have an incentive to depart from
    19
         See also Morgan, Steiglitz and Reis (2003) and a subsequent literature of spiteful bidding in standard auctions.




                                                             17
a proxy strategy and force her rival to pay higher prices. In particular, she can overstate her clock
phase demand as in the last part of Section 3. We will show that if bidder 1 understands this,
and continues to restrict himself to a proxy strategy, he will want to engage in demand reduction,
leading to an ineﬃcient outcome where the predatory bidder obtains an advantage.


6.1      Proxy Bidding and Predatory Best Responses

We now assume that the bidders care first about maximizing their own profit, and second about
making rivals pay more. Under this assumption, both bidders will want to raise their final bids to
the maximum allowed by the activity rules, and hence will be consistent. Additionally, we restrict
bidder 1 to a proxy strategy in the clock phase. That is, bidder 1 bids according to 1 () in the
clock phase (which is continuous and weakly decreasing), and then demands 1 () = 1 () in
the final round. We allow bidder 2 to use any bidding strategy so long as she reduces demand
continuously in the clock phase. To model this, we allow for the possibility that bidder 2 may drop
her demand discretely, say from 02 to 2 , at a given price , but assume that if she does this, she
oﬀers to buy any intermediate quantity at that price. The last assumption ensures there will be
market clearing.20
       We have seen how bidder 2 can raise bidder 1’s price in Section 3. Her most eﬀective strategy
is to keep her demand at 1 until the price  and residual supply 1 − 1 reach a level at which


                                            2 (1 − 1 ) =  = 1 (1 )                                           (13)


and then reduce her demand to 1 − 1 ending the auction. She can then submit her maximal final
bid of 2 () =  for  ≥ 1 − 1 , and make bidder 1 pay the clock price for all 1 units.
       Why is this optimal for bidder 2? First, consider bidder 2’s problem of maximizing her own
profit. To buy 2 units and obtain value 2 (2 ) she must pay 1 (1) − 1 (1 − 2 ) = 1 (1) −
1 (1 − 2 ). So she wants to choose a quantity 2 that maximizes:


                                        2 (2 ) − [1 (1) − 1 (1 − 2 )]                                        (14)


Therefore, her ex post optimal quantity is the unique solution to 2 (2 ) = 1 (1 − 2 )  Moreover,
conditional on buying 2 units and ending the auction with market clearing, the most she can
possibly make bidder 1 pay for his 1 = 1 − 2 units is 1 1 (1 − 1 ), which she achieves.
  20
    In particular, if bidder 1 is demanding 1 at  and 1 − 1 is strictly between 02 and 2 , then when bidder 2 drops
her demand from 02 to 2 , bidder 2 will be assigned 1 − 1 .



                                                          18
Remark 2 If we allowed bidder 2 to create excess supply at the end of the clock phase, she could
increase bidder 1 payment even more. For example, suppose bidder 1 follows a proxy strategy
1 () = 1 − Then, player 2 with valuation 2 = 1− could demand 2 = 1 until the price reaches
(almost) 1 and then drop demand to 2 = 12  She would then submit two supplementary round bids:
                  ¡ ¢                                                ¡       ¢
2 (1) = 1 and 2 12 = 58  In this way the final allocation would be 12  12 as in the best response
                                                                                  ¡ ¢            ¡ ¢
we described above, but player 1 would end up paying his full value: 2 (1) − 2 12 = 38 = 1 12 
Such extreme predatory behavior is even more diﬃcult to execute and even more risky for player 2
than what we describe. Moreover, analyzing equilibria in this case is diﬃcult, so we maintain the
assumption that player 2 is not allowed to create excess supply in the clock phase.


6.2      Ex Post Equilibria with a Predatory Player

How does bidder 2’s predatory behavior aﬀect the auction? Suppose bidder 1 is truthful, so that
1 () = 1 (). Then bidder 2’s predatory behavior leads to the same eﬃcient quantity outcome
as if she also bid truthfully. However, bidder 1 pays the full market clearing clock prices, rather
than the Vickrey payment. If bidder 1 understands this, and anticipates that he will pay the clock
price for all of his units, he optimally responds by reducing demand.
       For bidder 1 to purchase , he must pay 2 (1 − ). So bidder 1 would like to solve


                                       max 1 () − 2 (1 − )                                   (15)
                                         


which gives a unique optimal  that satisfies


                          1 () = 2 (1 − ) − 02 (1 − ) = 2 (1 − ) + 2 .                  (16)

This implies demand reduction: −02 (1 − )  0 so in equilibrium player 1 gets a quantity that
is smaller than eﬃcient (eﬃciency is where 1 () = 2 (1 − ))
       To implement the optimal , bidder 1 needs the clock phase to end when 1 () = 2 (1 − ).
Therefore the following linear proxy strategy is ex post optimal against any 2 parameterized by
2 :
                                1 () = 1 () − 2  = 1 − (1 + 2 )                         (17)

Proposition 2 Suppose bidders 1 and 2 resolve indiﬀerences in favor of making rivals pay more,
and that furthermore bidder 1 restricts attention only to proxy strategies, while bidder 2 to strategies
that do not cause excess supply in the clock phase. Then there is an ex post equilibrium in which


                                                    19
bidder 1 uses the proxy strategy 1 () = 1 () − 2  in the clock phase, and bidder 2 maintains
demand of 1 until dropping demand immediately to 1 −  when  = 1 () = 2 (1 − ), and then
both bidders are consistent in the final bid round.


6.3   Properties of the Equilibrium with Predatory Player

Allocation. In the equilibrium we described the allocation is skewed ineﬃciently in favor of player
2 In particular, the equilibrium allocation is:

                                        1 − 2 + 2        1 + 2
                                ∗1 =                = ∗1           1 
                                          1 + 22         1 + 22

where 1 is the eﬃcient allocation just as in Section 5.3. Here the intuition is straightforward: given
the demand submitted by the player 1, the predatory player 2 wants to choose the same quantity
as if she was bidding truthfully, whereas player 1 engages in defensive demand reduction.

Revenue. In equilibrium bidder 1 pays ∗1 ∗ while bidder 2 pays (assuming 1 ≥ 1 + 2 ) 1 (1) −
1 ( )  There are two opposing eﬀects. First, compared to the truthful Vickrey payments, bidder 1
does not get any discount oﬀ the clock price for his inframarginal units. Second, bidder 1’s reduced
demand allows bidder 2 to pay less. After some algebra, revenue is equal to:

                                                 1³ ∗ 2     ´
                                 = 1 −        (1 ) + 1 (1 + 2 ) 
                                                 2

which can be above or below the truthful Vickrey revenue. For example, if 1 = 2 and 1 = 2
(so the eﬃcient allocation is for both players to win half of the units), the demand reduction eﬀect
dominates and revenue is lower than in the truthful equilibrium. If 1 = 2 but 1 À 2 (so bidder
1 gets almost all units), the predatory eﬀect dominates and revenues are higher than in the truthful
equilibrium.


7     Mutually Aggressive Behavior

What happens if both bidders are predatory and attempt to push rival payments up toward the
final clock prices? As we saw in the last section, bidders can raise rival’s costs by demanding
extra quantity in the clock phase, then sharply dropping demand to clear the market. However,
it is diﬃcult to develop an equilibrium theory with sharp predictions if bidders employ non-proxy
strategies.



                                                     20
       Instead we take a more direct approach. We focus on proxy strategies, but assume that each
bidder also has some ability to relax the revealed preference constraint on its final bids, and force
its rival to pay closer to the final clock price for all units. This modeling approach is motivated by
the features of CCA sales with multiple categories. Under the multi-category CCA rules that have
been used in practice, bidders do in fact have a fair amount of flexibility to relax the final round
revealed preference constraints without greatly distorting their clock phase bidding.
       Specifically, we focus on (linear) proxy strategies in which bidder  uses a proxy demand  () =
 −   in the clock phase, with  ≥   0, and then in the final round submits marginal values


                                         () = (1 −   )  () +   ∗ 


that are a linear combination of her clock value  () and the final clock price ∗ .
       The parameter   ∈ [0 1] captures the extent to which bidder  is able to relax the local revealed
preference constraints. If   = 0, bidder  is consistent. If    0, bidder  is able to increase her
stated values in the final bid round toward the final clock price. In particular, because  () is
decreasing from ∗ above ∗ , an increase in   means that bidder ’s final bid function is everywhere
steeper, starting from the same bid for ∗ . So an increase in   increases the rival’s total payment
and marginal prices.
       The behavior of the predatory bidder 2 in Section 6 is also captured in this model, by assuming
that  2 = 1. Indeed, the equilibrium described there will correspond to the one we will identify
below, with 1 = 0 and 2 = 1.
       A complete proxy strategy for bidder  is described by (      ) As we did in Section 5, we
treat  1   2 as parameters, and solve for an ex post equilibrium in choices of (   ). As in the
above analysis, these equilibria will have the feature that  varies with  but  does not.


7.1       Proxy Best Responses

We identify a strategy for bidder 1 that is an ex post best response, assuming that bidder 2 follows
a linear proxy strategy 2 with varying intercept, and final round strategy given by  2 .
       Suppose bidder 1 uses the proxy demand 1 (). He will win  units, where  satisfies:21


                                              1 () = 2 (1 − )                                           (18)
  21
    We assume for now that the resulting equilibrium has interior quantities and prices, an assumption that can be
later verified under our assumption that |1 − 2 |  min {1  2 }.




                                                         21
       The ending clock price will be  = 2 (1 − ). So bidder 2’s final bid will specify:


                           2 () = (1 − 2 ) 2 () +  2 2 (1 − ) for  ≥ 1 −                       (19)


       The final payment by bidder 1 will be22
                                                         Z   1
                       2 (1) − 2 (1 − ) = (1 − 2 )           2 ()  +  2 2 (1 − )             (20)
                                                         1−


       Once again, bidder 1 would like to choose the quantity that maximizes:


                                       1 () − [2 (1) − 2 (1 − )]                                     (21)


A necessary condition for bidder 1 to be purchasing an optimal quantity given bidder 2’s actual bid
(and hence a necessary condition for bidder 1’s behavior to be ex post optimal) is that bidder 1’s
marginal value for his last unit, 1 (), is just equal to his marginal payment for that unit. Bidder
1’s marginal payment for his th unit is

                               
                                 {2 (1) − 2 (1 − )} = 2 (1 − ) +  2 2                            (22)
                              

       Therefore a necessary condition for  to be bidder 1’s ex post optimal quantity is that


                                       1 () = 2 (1 − ) +  2 2                                     (23)

Substituting the market-clearing condition (18) we get that the optimality condition (23) will hold
for all 2 and corresponding purchase quantities  provided that:


                                          1 () = 1 () −  2 2                                      (24)


       Therefore bidder 1 has an ex post best response that involves following a linear proxy strategy
for the clock phase with 1 = 1 and 1 = 1 +  2 2 .


7.2      Proxy Equilibrium

We now solve for an ex post equilibrium in linear proxy strategies. Since we already found that
the best-response  =   we need to only solve for the equilibrium   Using the best response
  22
   This assumes 2 () ≥ 0 for  ∈ (1 −  1) which requires that 0  are not too high. The formula below for
marginal price applies more generally.


                                                      22
conditions  =  +    , we obtain

                                          ¡          ¢ ¡           ¢
                                       =  +    1 −                                      (25)


Defining
                                                            2 +  1 1
                                         =    =  2               ,                             (26)
                                                            1 − 1 2
allows us to describe the ex post equilibrium as follows:

Proposition 3 If bidders can relax the local revealed preference constraints in the final bid round,
then for any  1   2 with  1  2  1, there is an ex post equilibrium of the CCA in which each bidder
 uses a linear proxy strategy:


                                       () =  () −  
                                  and  () = (1 −   )  () +   ∗ ,


where ∗ is the final clock round price.


7.3   Properties of the Equilibrium

Bidding Behavior. When bidders are aggressive in their final bids to the point of bidding higher
than their consistent final bids, the best response is to engage in demand reduction. Therefore in
the mutually aggressive equilibrium, demand in the clock phase is lower and flatter (rotated in from
 = 0) than under truthful bidding:


                                       1 () − 1 () = −1  ≤ 0


This contrasts with the earlier model, where bidders tended toward being quiet in their final bids
and the response was demand expansion in the clock phase.

Allocation and Revenue. Again, the equilibrium allocation and revenue generally diﬀer from the
truthful Vickrey outcomes. Consider the symmetric example (the extreme asymmetric case  1 = 0
and  2 = 1 is outcome-equivalent to the predatory player model discussed in the previous section).
                                                                               
That is, suppose  1 =  2 =  and 1 = 2 =  which implies 1 = 2 =       1−    Then the allocation
is distorted toward 1/2 compared to the eﬃcient allocation 1 :

                                               1
                                          ∗1 =  + (1 − ) 1 .
                                               2

                                                     23
As for revenue, in the parameter range where  () ≥ 0 for all , we have:


                        = 1 (1) − 1 (∗1 ) + 2 (1) − 2 (1 − ∗1 )
                                    1 + 2 1  − 3 1            ( − 1)2
                               =           −      − (1 − 2 )2          
                                       2    4 −1 4                 

Under our maintained assumption |1 − 2 |  , the revenue is decreasing in  (so despite the more
aggressive final round bidding when   0, revenues are lower than under truthful bidding since
the demand reduction eﬀect dominates).


8    Conclusion

Our analysis highlights several properties of the combinatorial clock auction. First, the activity
rules used to encourage truthful bidding mean that a bidder’s final round bids may have no eﬀect
at all on her own payoﬀ. Yet if bidders do not increase their final bids to levels consistent with
their expressed demand in the clock phase (and they have no strict incentive to do so), this leads
to price discounts and incentives for demand expansion in the initial clock phase. Even in the very
simple model we considered, the result is a wide range of ex post equilibria, with no guarantee of
an eﬃcient allocation or truthful Vickrey prices.
    Second, bidders may care not just about their own payoﬀ, but about their outcome relative to
rival bidders. At first glance, this seems to create an incentive for bidders simply to raise their final
bids to the correct levels, generating an eﬃcient outcome. However, we have shown that this is not
the case. Instead, if one bidder behaves in a truthful manner, its rival will have both the incentive
and the opportunity to behave in predatory fashion, keeping demand high during the clock phase
in order to drive up the payment of the first bidder. At the extreme, the first bidder’s average
payment will equal its marginal payment for its last unit. If the first bidder understands this, he
will reduce demand, leading again to an ineﬃcient equilibrium outcome with predation.
    Third, we have argued that if all bidders attempt to drive up rival prices, the final prices
may resemble clock prices, creating incentives for demand reduction. So once again, there is no
particular reason to expect an eﬃcient outcome or truthful Vickrey prices. We modeled this last
case in a somewhat stylized way to get clear results. If bidders all attempt to keep demand high
during the clock phase to raise rival costs, it seems possible that information revelation in the clock
phase may be hindered.
    A loose way to summarize these points is that the CCA relies on bidders “doing the right
thing” in making decisions about which they have no direct financial incentives. Unfortunately,

                                                   24
doing the right thing is subtle. Bidders must raise their final round bids so that the revealed
preference activity constraints bind, but not take actions in the clock phase to purposely relax
these constraints! Our examples show how, if bidders are not suﬃciently aggressive, or are overly
aggressive, incentives for demand expansion and/or reduction appear and outcomes need not be
eﬃcient, even if behavior is completely understood and bidders play minimally strategic ex post
equilibria.
       Our analysis makes several simplifying assumptions. We mostly restrict attention to proxy
strategies in which bidders do not condition their bidding on rival behavior. With contingent
strategies, our model admits many more equilibria. These include highly collusive equilibria in
which bidders split the market and drive each other’s prices to zero, using the threat of aggressive
final bids to punish deviations. However, these types of equilibria also arise in traditional clock
auctions and are not special to the CCA.23 Our assumptions also implied that the clock phase
ends with market clearing. If bidders can drop demand discontinuously, the clock phase may end
with some units unallocated. This can be useful for package bidders who want to avoid exposure
problems – a potentially important benefit of the CCA that is not captured in our model24 – but
also creates new strategic possibilities.25
       Another important point is that while our analysis shows some limitations of the CCA, other
multi-item auction designs have their own drawbacks. Ausubel and Cramton (2002) have shown in
great generality that uniform price auctions create incentives for demand reduction and ineﬃciency.
Ausubel and Milgrom (2006) have catalogued problems with the sealed-bid Vickrey auction, such as
incentives for collusion, and the fact that Vickrey outcomes may lie outside the core. Our analysis
points to a further problem with the Vickrey auction that we view as equally serious. If bidders
understand that the allocation will almost certainly lie in a particular range (the relevant situation
in most radio spectrum auctions), their incentives to bid truthfully outside of this range may be
very weak despite these bids potentially being crucial for pricing. Indeed, one way to view our
paper is that we have simply formalized this point for a particular dynamic implementation of the
Vickrey auction.
       A final question is whether a diﬀerent CCA activity rule could resolve some of the issues we have
  23
      In fact, Riedel and Wolfstetter (2006) show that the simultaneous multiple round auction with complete informa-
tion has an essentially unique subgame perfect equilibrium in which the bidders immediately demand their eﬃcient
allocation and the auction ends.
   24
      See Bulow, Levin and Milgrom (2009) and Cramton (2012) for discussions of the exposure problem faced by
package bidders in traditional clock auctions.
   25
      If there are unallocated units in the final round of the CCA, bidders will have an incentive to bid truthfully for
these units, but not necessarily for units that they cannot possibly win. The ability to create excess supply also creates
new opportunities for predation, as a predatory bidder can potentially drop its demand to zero and subsequently
raise its rival’s payment even higher than contemplated in Section 6.


                                                           25
flagged, and lead to a successful dynamic Vickrey implementation. A recent and very interesting
paper by Ausubel and Baranov (2013) suggests one possibility, which is to require that clock phase
bids satisfy GARP, and then to use an algorithm based on the Afriat inequalities to fill in the final
bids. In our setting, this would amount to requiring global rather than local revealed preference.
This would resolve the quiet bidding problems illustrated in Section 5, but not the predatory
bidding problems illustrated in Sections 6 and 7.26 Nevertheless, this proposal and others seem to
merit further investigation.


9        References

 Ausubel, Lawrence M. (2004), “An Eﬃcient Ascending-Bid Auction for Multiple Objects,” Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 94(5), 1452-1475.

 Ausubel, Lawrence M. and Oleg Baranov (2010) “Core-Selecting Auctions with Incomplete Infor-
     mation,” University of Maryland Working Paper.

 Ausubel, Lawrence M. and Oleg Baranov (2013) “An Enhanced Combinatorial Clock Auction,”
     University of Maryland Working Paper.

 Ausubel, Lawrence M. and Peter Cramton (2011), “Activity Rules for the Combinatorial Clock
     Auction,” University of Maryland Working Paper.

 Ausubel, Lawrence M., Peter Cramton and Paul Milgrom (2006), “The Clock-Proxy Auction:
     A Practical Combinatorial Auction Design,” in Peter Cramton, Yoav Shoham and Richard
     Steinberg (eds.) Combinatorial Auctions, MIT Press, Chapter 5, pp. 115-138.

 Ausubel, Lawrence M. and Paul Milgrom (2006), “The Lovely but Lonely Vickrey Auction,” in
     Peter Cramton, Yoav Shoham and Richard Steinberg (eds.) Combinatorial Auctions, MIT
     Press, Chapter 1, pp. 17-40.

 Beck, Marissa and Marion Ott (2013) “Incentives for Overbidding in Minimum-Revenue Core-
     Selecting Auctions,” Stanford University Working Paper.

 Bichler, Martin, Pasha Shabalin, and Jürgen Wolf (2013), “Do Core-Selecting Combinatorial Clock
     Auctions Always Lead to High Eﬃciency? An Experimental Analysis of Spectrum Auction
     Designs,” Experimental Economics, 16(4), pp. 511-545.

 Bulow, Jeremy, Jonathan Levin and Paul Milgrom (2009), “Winning Play in Spectrum Auctions,”
     Stanford University Working Paper.
    26
     A similar point about incentives for aggressive bidding also would apply in our setting to the Ausubel (2004)
clinching auction, which is an alternative dynamic VCG implementation in our setting. Ausubel, Cramton and
Milgrom (2006) also proposed a relaxed version of revealed preference, which forces bidders to increase their final
clock rounds bids in order to "guarantee” their package from the last clock round. However, this rule also doesn’t
appear to provide strong incentives to submit “correct” bids for losing packages.




                                                        26
Cramton, Peter (2008a), “A Review of the 10-40 GHz Auction,” Oﬃce of Communications, United
   Kingdom.
Cramton, Peter (2008b), “A Review of the L Band Auction,” Oﬃce of Communications, United
   Kingdom.
Cramton, Peter (2009),“Auctioning the Digital Dividend,” Communications Regulation in the
   Age of Digital Convergence: Legal and Economic Perspectives. Ed. Jan Kramer and Stefan
   Seifert. Karlsruhe, Germany: Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.
Cramton, Peter (2013), “Spectrum Auction Design,” Review of Industrial Organization, 42(2), pp.
   161-190.
Day, Robert and Paul Milgrom (2008), “Core-Selecting Package Auctions,” International Journal
    of Game Theory, 36, pp. 393-407.
Day, Robert. and S. Raghavan (2007) “Fair Payments for Eﬃcient Allocations in Public Sector
    Combinatorial Auctions,” Management Science, 53, pp. 1389-1406.
Erdil, Aytek and Paul Klemperer (2009). “A New Payment Rule for Core-Selecting Auctions,”
    Journal of the European Economic Association, 8, 537-547.
Goeree, Jacob and Yuanchuan Lien (2013). “On the Impossibility of Core-Selecting Auctions,”
    forthcoming in Theoretical Economics.
Janssen, Maarten and Vladimir Karamychev (2013), “Gaming in Combinatorial Clock Auctions,”
    Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 13-027/VII.
Jewitt, Ian and Zhiyun Li (2008), “Report on the 2008 UK 10-40 GHz Spectrum Auction,” Oﬃce
    of Communications, United Kingdom.
Klemperer, Paul (2004), Auctions: Theory and Practice, Princeton University Press.
Knapek, Stephan and Achim Wambach (2012), “Strategic Complexities in the Combinatorial
   Clock Auction,” CESifo Working Paper 3983.
Kyle, Albert S. (1989), “Informed Speculation With Imperfect Competition,” Review of Economic
    Studies, 56(3), 317—355.
Milgrom, Paul (2004), Putting Auction Theory to Work, Cambridge University Press.
Milgrom, Paul (2007), “Package Auctions and Exchanges,” Econometrica 75: 935-965.
Morgan, John, Ken Steiglitz and George Reis (2003), “The Spite Motive and Equilibrium Behavior
   in Auctions,” Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, 2(1), Article 5.
Riedel, Frank and Elmar Wolfstetter (2006), “Immediate demand reduction in simultaneous
    ascending-bid auctions: a uniqueness result,” Economic Theory, 29(3), pp. 721-726.
Salant, David (2013), A Primer on Auction Design, Management, and Strategy, mimeo, Toulouse
    School of Economics.
Vives, Xavier. (2011), “Strategic Supply Function Competition With Private Information,”
    Econometrica, 79: 1919—1966



                                             27
   Figure 1. Activity Rule and Final Bid Options




    2




                                           Maximal bidding allowed by                         0
  3/2                                          revealed preference
                                            V2(x2) - [V2(x2*)-e(x2*)]




    1
                           V2(x2)=2x2 - x22/2
                                                                  Binding clock round bids
                                                                  e(x2)=x2v2(x2)= 2x2 - x22
p*x2*
                   p*x                         Final clock bid



                          Region I                                   Region II
                          x2 < x2 *                                   x2 > x2 *
   0                                                                                                  x2
        0                                   x2 *   ½                                          1


   Figure shows the flexibility that bidder 2 has in choosing final bids in the final bid round. The lower
   curve shows bidder 2’s clock phase bids, which places a lower bound on her final bids. The dashed
   curve is the upper bound for final bids (assuming bidder 2 leaves her last clock bid unchanged). The
   top curve is the valuation that guides bidder 2’s clock round bidding. The dashed upper bound is
   parallel to this curve for quantities above x2*.




                                                       28
Figure 2. Best Responses to Quiet and Consistent Bidding




           p

           3

                                Bidder 1’s
                             inflated demand
                                   v1(x1)




                        Bidder 1’s                                          Bidder 2
                       t
                       true demand
                            d      d                                       Consistent
          2                                                                 bidding             2
                          u1(x1)
                                                                 v2(x2)=2-x2
                                                   Best x1 if                      Bidder 2
                                                   Bidder 2
                                                                                    Quiet
                                                   is quiet.
                                   Best x1 if                                      bidding
                                   Bidder 2 is                              m2((x2))=2-2x2
                                   consistent.




          1

   x2          x1=0                               x1=1/2        x1=2/3                   x1=1       x1



Figure shows possible best responses for bidder 1 in response to bidder 2 using a quiet or consistent
strategy. If bidder 2 is consistent, bidder 1 faces marginal prices equal to clock prices, and optimally
intersects his clock demand with bidder 2’s clock demand. If bidder 2 is quiet, bidder 1’s marginal
price is lower than the clock price. The best response is to purchase a quantity at which bidder 1’s
marginal value equals bidder 2’s marginal revenue, which can be done by inflating demand in the
clock phase, as shown in the figure.


                                                     29
Figure 3. Predatory Clock Phase Bidding to Raise Rival Prices




          p

          3




                      Bidder 1’s truthful                               Bidder 2’s
          2             clock
                         l k demand
                              d       d                              bbaseline
                                                                          li clock
                                                                               l k           2
                            u1(x1)                                       demand
                                              Best x1 if
                                              Bidder 2 is
                       Bidder 2’s             consistent.
                       predatory                                        v2(x2)=2-x2
                     clock demand




          1

   x2         x1=0                             x1=1/2       x1=2/3                    x1=1       x1



Figure shows bidder 2’s baseline clock demand, and bidder 1’s truthful demand, which is a best
response if bidder 2 is consistent in the final round bid. In this case, bidder 1 expects to pay the
shaded area under bidder 2’s clock phase demand curve. However, if bidder 2 maintains a higher
(predatory) clock demand and submits final bids which are consistent with this higher demand, bidder
1 will have to pay both the shaded area and the dotted area.



                                                  30
      Figure 4. Final Bids by Vodafone in the UK 800/2600 MHz Auction




 160                                                                                                       £2,500

MH
MHz                                     E        C          A2       A1                               £ million
                                                                                                         illi

 140


                                                                                                           £2,000

 120




 100
                                                                                                           £1,500



  80



                                                                                                           £1,000
  60




  40

                                                                                                           £500


  20




   0                                                                                                       £0
        1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61 64 67 70 73 76 79 82 85 88 91 94


      Figure shows all of Vodafone’s final bids in the UK 800/2600 auction. The solid bars show the
      composition of each bid in terms of the MHz demanded in each of the four color  coded bands (E, C,
                                                                               color-coded
      A1 and A2). The solid line above shows the value of the bid in GBP (£). Vodafone’s bids place
      consistent value on spectrum increments corresponding to clock behavior.

                                                       31
      Figure 5. Final Bids by Telefonica in the UK 800/2600 MHz Auction




180                                                                                            £1,600,000,000

                               E      D2       C       A2       A1
160
                                                                                               £1,400,000,000


140
                                                                                               £1,200,000,000


120
                                                                                               £1,000,000,000

100

                                                                                               £800,000,000

 80

                                                                                               £600,000,000
 60


                                                                                               £400,000,000
 40


                                                                                               £200,000,000
 20



  0                                                                                            £0
        1      2        3       4       5       6          7    8       9       10      11



  Figure shows all of Telefonica’s final bids in the UK 800/2600 auction. The solid bars show the
  composition of each bid in terms of the MHz demanded in each of the four color-coded bands (E, C,
  A1 and A2). The solid line above shows the value of the bid in GBP (£). Telefonica submitted very
  few serious bids in the sealed bid round, with much smaller incremental valuations than it revealed
  during the clock phase, closer to a quiet strategy.



                                                      32
Figure 6. Bidder Incentives in a CCA Equilibrium




          p


                                                                                     v2(x2)
                            Bidder 1’s optimal                 Bidder 2’s clock
                              clock demand                    demand for high a2
                                  v1(x1)                                                s2((x2)

                                              Market
                                              clearing
                                              .                                       v2(x2)
                     Bidder 1’s
                  truthful demand                              Market                   s2(x2)
                       u1(x1)                                  clearing
                                                               .
                                                  z                                  Bidder 2’s
                                                                                   clock demand
                                                                                     for low a2
                                    Bidder 1 equates
                                    marg. benefit u1(x1) to
                                    marg. price s2(x2).




  x2          x1=0                            x1c, x2c         x1c, x2c                           x1=1    x1
              x2=11                           high a2          low a2                             x2=00



Figure shows the derivation of bidder 1’s best response given that bidder 2 is using her equilibrium
strategy. Bidder 1’s optimal demand inflates his true demand. His optimal demand is chosen so that
for any realization of bidder 2’s demand, the clock phase ends (market clearing) at the allocation
where bidder 1’s true marginal valuation just equals his marginal price, which he correctly anticipates
will
  ill be
      b set by
            b bidder
               bidd 2’2’s fi
                          finall bid
                                 bid.



                                                         33
Figure 7. Clock and Final Bids with Market Clearing




          p



                                                                  v2(x2)=A2-B2x2

                                        v1(x1))=A
                                                A1-B
                                                   B1x1

                          s1(x1)                  Market
                                                  clearing
                                                  .

         p*                                                              m2(x2)
                      Bidder 2
                      demand as
                      clock                          z
                      price rises

                                                                                  Bidder 1
                                                                                  demand as
                            s2(x2)                                                clock
                                                                                  price rises

                                    Payment by
                                    Bidder 1.



   x2         x1=0                                x1c, x2c                                      x1=1    x1
              x2=11                                                                             x2=00



Figure shows equilibrium behavior for a single realization of values. The solid lines represent the
equilibrium clock demand curves of the bidders; the dashed lines the final round demand curves. The
thin line for bidder 2 is her clock round marginal revenue curve. Her final demand curve is
intermediate between her clock demand and clock marginal revenue – so she bids partway between
quiet
   i t andd consistent.
                it t



                                                             34
