                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MEASURING THE EFFECT OF THE ZERO LOWER BOUND ON MEDIUM- AND
                     LONGER-TERM INTEREST RATES

                                          Eric T. Swanson
                                          John C. Williams

                                        Working Paper 20486
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20486


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014

We thank our discussants, James Hamilton, Kei Kawakami, Yvan Lengwiler, Benoit Mojon, John
Taylor, Min Wei, and Jonathan Wright; Refet Gurkaynak, Oscar Jorda, Leo Krippner, David Romer,
and Justin Wolfers; and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, NBER
Monetary Economics Meeting, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Conference,
Society for Economic Dynamics Meetings, Haas School of Business, Swiss National Bank Conference,
NBER EFG Meeting, UC Irvine, Brown University, Boston University-FRB Boston Conference, Reserve
Bank of Australia Conference, AEA Meetings, Blackrock, the University of Oregon, Stanford University,
and UC Davis, for helpful discussions, comments, and suggestions. We thank Maura Lynch and Kuni
Natsuki for excellent research assistance. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors
where employees of the Federal Reserve System. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the people listed above, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other individuals
within the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20486.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Eric T. Swanson and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates
Eric T. Swanson and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 20486
September 2014
JEL No. E43,E52,E62

                                              ABSTRACT

The federal funds rate has been at the zero lower bound for over four years, since December 2008.
According to standard macroeconomic models, this should have greatly reduced the effectiveness
of monetary policy and increased the efficacy of fiscal policy. However, these models also imply that
asset prices and private-sector decisions depend on the entire path of expected future short-term interest
rates, not just the current level of the overnight rate. Thus, interest rates with a year or more to maturity
are arguably more relevant for asset prices and the economy, and it is unclear to what extent those
yields have been affected by the zero lower bound. In this paper, we measure the effects of the zero
lower bound on interest rates of any maturity by comparing the sensitivity of those interest rates to
macroeconomic news when short-term interest rates were very low to that during normal times. We
find that yields on Treasury securities with a year or more to maturity were surprisingly responsive
to news throughout 2008–10, suggesting that monetary and fiscal policy were likely to have been about
as effective as usual during this period. Only beginning in late 2011 does the sensitivity of these yields
to news fall closer to zero. We offer two explanations for our findings: First, until late 2011, market
participants expected the funds rate to lift off from zero within about four quarters, minimizing the
effects of the zero bound on medium- and longer-term yields. Second, the Fed’s unconventional policy
actions seem to have helped offset the effects of the zero bound on medium- and longer-term rates.


Eric T. Swanson
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
eric.swanson@uci.edu

John C. Williams
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Executive Offices
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.c.williams@sf.frb.org
1     Introduction

The federal funds rate—the Federal Reserve’s traditional monetary policy instrument—has been

at a lower bound of essentially zero for over four years, since December 2008. According to many

macroeconomic models, the binding constraint of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates

should have greatly reduced the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy and increased the eﬃcacy of ﬁscal

policy during this period (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011; Woodford, 2011).1

However, standard macroeconomic theory, such as Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (1999) and Woodford

(2003), as well as the papers cited above, imply that asset prices and the economy are aﬀected

by the entire path of expected future short-term interest rates, not just the current level of the

overnight federal funds rate. Thus, interest rates with a year or more to maturity are arguably

more relevant for asset prices and the economy, and it is not clear whether the zero bound has

substantially constrained the Fed’s ability to aﬀect these longer-term yields.

     Theoretically, if a central bank has the ability to commit to future values of its policy rate, it

can work around the zero bound constraint by promising monetary accommodation in the future

once the zero bound ceases to bind (Reifschneider and Williams, 2000; Eggertsson and Woodford,

2003).2 Empirically, Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005a) show that the Federal Reserve’s

monetary policy announcements aﬀect asset prices primarily through their eﬀects on ﬁnancial

market expectations of future monetary policy, rather than changes in the current federal funds

rate. Thus, there are both theoretical and empirical reasons to think that monetary policy can

remain eﬀective even when the overnight interest rate is zero. In fact, 1- and 2-year Treasury

yields remained substantially above zero throughout much of 2008–10 (Figure 1), suggesting that

monetary policy still had room to aﬀect the economy despite the constraint on the funds rate. And

indeed, the Federal Reserve generated a drop in medium- and longer-term Treasury yields of as

much as 20 basis points (bp) on several occasions between 2008 and 2012 by managing monetary

policy expectations or purchasing assets (Gagnon et al., 2011; Wright, 2012).3
   1
     See also Eggertsson (2009), Erceg and Lindé (2010), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), and DeLong and Summers
(2012). Intuitively, the macroeconomic eﬀects of ﬁscal policy are larger when the zero bound is binding, because then
interest rates do not rise in response to higher output, so private investment and consumption are not “crowded out”.
   2
     The central bank does not need a perfect commitment technology for this to be true; a partial commitment
technology, as in Schaumburg and Tambalotti (2007), is suﬃcient.
   3
     Note that, in normal times, it would take a surprise change in the federal funds rate of more than 100 bp to
generate a fall of 20 bp in medium- and longer-term Treasury yields (Gürkaynak et al., 2005).


                                                         1
                                                                            10ͲYearTreasury
                                                                            5ͲYearTreasury
           5                                                                                     5
                                                                            2ͲYearTreasury
                                                                            1ͲYearTreasury
                                                                            FederalFundsRate
           4                                                                                     4



           3                                                                                     3



           2                                                                                     2



           1                                                                                     1



           0                                                                                     0




Figure 1. Federal funds rate target and 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-year zero-coupon Treasury yields
from January 2007 through December 2012. Data are from the Federal Reserve Board and the
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) online dataset.


     In this paper, we propose a novel method of measuring the extent to which interest rates

of any maturity—and hence monetary policy, more broadly deﬁned—are constrained by the zero

lower bound. In particular, we estimate the time-varying sensitivity of yields to macroeconomic

announcements using high-frequency data and compare that sensitivity to a benchmark period in

which the zero bound was not a concern (taken to be 1990–2000). In periods when a given yield

is about as sensitive to news as in the benchmark sample, we say that yield is unconstrained. In

periods, if any, where a yield responds very little or not at all to news, we say that yield is largely or

completely constrained. Intermediate cases are measured by the degree of the yield’s sensitivity to

news relative to the benchmark sample, and the severity and statistical signiﬁcance of the constraint

can be assessed using standard econometric techniques.

     We emphasize that the level of a yield alone is not a useful measure of whether that yield is

constrained by the zero lower bound, for at least three reasons. First, there is no way to quantify

the severity of the zero bound constraint or its statistical signiﬁcance using the level of the yield



                                                    2
alone. For example, if the one-year Treasury yield is 50 bp, there is no clear way to determine

whether that yield is severely constrained, mildly constrained, or even unconstrained. By contrast,

the method we propose in this paper provides an econometrically precise answer to this question.

     Second, the lower bound on nominal interest rates may be above zero for institutional reasons

(Bernanke and Reinhart, 2004), and this “eﬀective” lower bound may vary across countries or over

time. For example, the Federal Reserve has kept the federal funds rate at a ﬂoor of about 0 since

December 2008, but the Bank of England has maintained a ﬂoor of 50 bp for its policy rate over

the same period while conducting unconventional monetary policy on a similar scale to the Federal

Reserve. Evidently, the eﬀective ﬂoor on the monetary policy rate in the U.K. is about 50 bp rather

than zero. As a result, a 50 or even 100 bp gilt yield in the U.K. might be substantially constrained

by the eﬀective U.K. lower bound of 50 bp, while a similar 50–100 bp yield in the U.S. might be

only mildly constrained or unconstrained. The approach in this paper relies on the sensitivity of

interest rates to news rather than the level of rates, and thus can accommodate eﬀective lower

bounds that may be greater than zero or change over time.

     Third, the sensitivity of yields to news is more relevant than the level of yields for the ﬁscal

multiplier. As emphasized by Christiano et al. (2011), Woodford (2011), and others, what is crucial

for the ﬁscal multiplier is whether interest rates respond to a government spending shock; the level

of yields by itself is largely irrelevant. Although the zero lower bound motivates the analysis in those

studies, their results are all derived in a “constant interest rate” environment in which nominal

yields can be regarded as ﬁxed at any absolute level.

     To our knowledge, this paper represents the ﬁrst attempt to directly measure the eﬀects of the

zero lower bound constraint on the behavior of intermediate- and longer-maturity yields, and thus

the extent to which the zero bound has hindered the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy and ampliﬁed

the eﬀectiveness of ﬁscal policy. Previous studies of the eﬀects of the zero bound on longer-term

yields have focused on how to model the yield curve when rates are near zero (e.g., Gorovoi and

Linetsky, 2004; Kim and Singleton, 2012). In contrast, we directly measure rather than model

the zero bound’s eﬀects, so our estimates are model-free. This is an important advantage of our

approach, since there are a variety of nonnegative dynamic term structure models (NDTSMs) that

lead to a variety of predictions regarding the behavior of longer-term yields near the zero bound


                                                   3
(Kim and Singleton, 2012).

       To preview our results, we ﬁnd that Treasury yields with one or two years to maturity were

surprisingly responsive to news throughout 2008–10, despite the federal funds rate being essentially

zero over this period. Contrary to conventional wisdom, this suggests that the eﬃcacy of monetary

and ﬁscal policy were likely close to normal in 2008–10. Only beginning in late 2011 do we see

the sensitivity of the 2-year Treasury yield to news fall signiﬁcantly below normal. We also show

that 5- and 10-year Treasury yields were essentially unconstrained by the zero bound throughout

our sample, while Treasuries with six months or less to maturity have been severely constrained

since the spring of 2009. Importantly, our method provides a quantitative measure of the degree to

which the zero bound aﬀects each yield, as well as a statistical test for the periods during which it

was constrained.

       We provide two explanations for our ﬁndings. First, up until August 2011, market participants

expected the zero bound to constrain policy for only a few quarters, minimizing the zero bound’s

eﬀects on medium- and longer-term yields. Second, the Federal Reserve’s large-scale purchases

of long-term bonds and management of monetary policy expectations may have helped oﬀset the

eﬀects of the zero bound on medium- and longer-term interest rates.

       Our estimates are consistent with, and can help inform, the NDTSM literature mentioned

above. Although most NDTSMs to date have been estimated using Japanese data, Bauer and

Rudebusch (2013) apply one such model to the U.S.4 They estimate that, prior to August 2011,

ﬁnancial markets expected the zero bound to constrain U.S. short-term rates for only a few quarters;

after that date, they estimate the funds rate was expected to lift oﬀ much later. Our ﬁndings

corroborate and support these features of their model, which allow it to ﬁt the relatively high level

and volatility of intermediate-maturity yields prior to August 2011 without large term premia.

       The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out a simple New Keynesian

model that helps to motivate our empirical analysis and provide intuition for our results. Section 3

describes the details of our high-frequency empirical methodology. Our main results are reported
   4
    We do not consider Japanese data in this paper because we do not have access to the surprise component of
Japanese macroeconomic announcements or daily bond yield data that go back far enough to estimate the sensitivity
of Japanese yields to news when the zero bound is not binding. (This is partly due to data availability and partly
because the zero bound has been a potential constraint in Japan for so long, back to the 1990s.) Swanson and
Williams (2013b) apply the methods of the present paper to yields and exchange rates in the U.K. and Germany.



                                                        4
in Section 4. Section 5 considers the broader implications of our results for monetary and ﬁscal

policy, and various extensions and robustness checks. Section 6 concludes.



2    An Illustrative Model

A simple theoretical model helps to motivate our empirical analysis and provide intuition for our

results. The purpose of this section is to illustrate qualitatively how the zero bound might be

expected to aﬀect the sensitivity of bond yields to news, so the model is deliberately simplistic and

not intended to capture all the details of the eﬀects we estimate below.

     We follow the standard three-equation New Keynesian framework of Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler

(1999) and Woodford (2003), among others. The output gap, ỹt , satisﬁes a forward-looking IS curve,

                                ỹt = −α(it − Et πt+1 − rt∗ ) + Et ỹt+1 ,                        (1)

where it denotes the one-period nominal interest rate at time t, πt the inﬂation rate, rt∗ a “natural”

rate of interest, Et the mathematical expectation conditional on information at time t, and α is a

parameter. We model shocks to output as coming through shocks to rt∗ .

     Equation (1) can be solved forward, assuming limj→∞ Et ỹt+j = 0, to get
                                             ∞
                                             
                                                                     ∗
                               ỹt = −α Et         {it+j − πt+j+1 − rt+j }.                       (2)
                                             j=0

Equation (2) makes it clear that the output gap at time t depends on the entire expected future

path of short-term interest rates (as well as inﬂation and the natural rate of interest), rather than

just the current short-term interest rate. Thus, even if the current one-period interest rate is

constrained by the zero lower bound, the eﬀect of that constraint on the economy may be negligible

if expectations of future short-term interest rates are unconstrained.

     Inﬂation, πt , satisﬁes a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve,

                                     πt = γ ỹt + βEt πt+1 + μt ,                                 (3)

where μt can be interpreted as a markup shock, and γ and β are parameters.

     The one-period nominal interest rate is set by the central bank according to a Taylor-type

(1993) monetary policy rule, subject to the constraint that it must be nonnegative:

                           it = max { 0, πt + rt∗ + 0.5(πt − π̄) + 0.5ỹt },                      (4)

                                                      5
where π̄ denotes the central bank’s inﬂation target. Note that monetary policy is assumed to

respond to the current level of the natural interest rate. This implies that, absent the zero lower

bound, monetary policy perfectly oﬀsets the eﬀects of natural interest rate shocks on the output gap

and inﬂation. Of course, the presence of the zero lower bound implies that, in certain circumstances,

monetary policy will be unable to oﬀset such shocks.

     Consistent with the log-linearized structure of the economy implicit in equations (1)–(3), long-

term bond yields in the model are determined by the expectations hypothesis.5 Thus, the M -period

yield to maturity, iM
                    t , on a zero-coupon nominal bond is given by

                                                       M
                                                        −1
                                           iM
                                            t = Et            it+j + φM ,                                         (5)
                                                       j=0

where φM denotes a term premium that may vary with maturity M but is constant over time.

     We set α = 1.59, β = .99, and γ = .096, based on Woodford (2003), and we set π̄ to 2 percent.

The shocks rt∗ and μt are assumed to follow AR(1) processes,

                                               rt∗ = ρrt−1
                                                       ∗
                                                           + et ,                                                 (6)

                                               μt = δμt−1 + vt ,                                                  (7)

with persistences ρ = 0.85 and δ = 0.5. We calibrate the magnitude of the shocks to rt∗ and μt so

that they each generate a 5 bp response of the one-period interest rate it on impact in the absence

of the zero lower bound. This calibration is consistent with our empirical ﬁnding, below, that any

given macroeconomic announcement typically moves short-term rates by only a few basis points.

     We solve for the impulse response functions of the model under two scenarios: First, a scenario

in which the initial value of rt∗ is substantially greater than zero, so that the zero bound is not a

binding constraint on the short-term interest rate; and second, a scenario in which the initial value

of rt∗ is −4, which is suﬃcient for the zero bound to constrain the short-term nominal rate it for

several periods. In the latter case, we solve for the impulse response functions of the model using a

nonlinear perfect foresight algorithm, as in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), in which the private

sector assumes the realized values of all future innovations will be zero. In each scenario, impulse
   5
     Intuition for the behavior of long-term bond yields is most easily obtained by focusing on the expectations com-
ponent of those yields rather than the term premium, since risk premia on long-term bonds are not well understood.
Moreover, our empirical results can be understood without resorting to a story about risk premia, which also motivates
this modeling choice. We discuss the possible eﬀects of time-varying term premia in Section 5.3, below.


                                                          6
                               (a) Impulse Response of Short−term Interest Rate to Output Shock                                            E ,QLWLDO5HVSRQVHRI<LHOGVWR2XWSXW6KRFN
                                                                                                                           

               5
                                                                                                                           
                                                             No zero bound

               4
                                                             Zero bound initially binding                                  



               3
Basis points




                                                                                                           %DVLVSRLQWV
                                                                                                                           



               2                                                                                                           



                                                                                                                           
               1


                                                                                                                           
               0

                                                                                                                          í
                   0       2        4          6          8          10           12        14    16                                                                                      
                                                          Periods                                                                                           %RQG0DWXULW\




                       Figure 2. (a) Impulse response function of one-period interest rate it and (b) instantaneous
                       response in period 1 of the yield curve to an output shock. Shock is normalized to produce a 5 bp
                       eﬀect on the one-period nominal interest rate on impact. See text for details.


                       responses are computed as the diﬀerence between the path of the economy after the shock and the

                       baseline path of the economy absent the shock.

                            Figure 2 reports the response of the short-term interest rate and yield curve to a shock to

                       output, achieved through an innovation to rt∗ . (Responses to an inﬂation shock are reported in

                       Swanson and Williams, 2013a, and are very similar to those in Figure 2.) In the ﬁrst panel,

                       the solid black line depicts the impulse response function of the one-period nominal interest rate

                       it when the zero lower bound is not binding—i.e., the standard impulse response function to an

                       output shock in a New Keynesian model. The dashed red line depicts the impulse response function

                       for it to the same shock when the zero bound is binding—that is, when the initial value of rt∗ is set

                       equal to −4 percent. Note that the dashed red impulse response is computed relative to a baseline

                       in which rt∗ begins at −4 percent but is returning toward 0, so that the zero bound ceases to bind

                       it in the fourth period. From that point onward, the behavior of it is identical to what would occur

                       absent the zero bound—that is, the red and black lines in the left panel of Figure 2 are identical.

                       This is because output and inﬂation in this particular model are purely forward-looking. In more

                       general models with output or inﬂation inertia, the zero bound would have more persistent eﬀects

                       on output and inﬂation, which would lead to a more persistent diﬀerence in the path of it .

                            The second panel of Figure 2 plots the instantaneous response of the yield curve in the period

                       when the shock hits (i.e., period 1). Thus, the second panel of Figure 2 is not an impulse response


                                                                                                       7
function, but rather the instantaneous response of the entire yield curve at a single point in time.

       Figure 2 shows that, when short-term interest rates are constrained by the zero lower bound,

yields of all maturities respond less to economic announcements than if the zero bound were not

present; moreover, the reduction in the sensitivity of yields to news is greatest at short maturities

and is smaller for longer-term yields. This result is intuitive: for the shortest maturities, there

is a total lack of responsiveness to an output or inﬂation shock when the zero bound is binding.

According to equation (5), longer-term yields are an average of expected future short-term interest

rates over the life of the bond. Since the expected path of future short-term interest rates in the

model converges back toward steady state over time, short-term interest rates are expected to be

unconstrained by the zero lower bound at some point in the future. As a result, longer-term bond

yields are not as attenuated as shorter-term yields in their sensitivity to news.

       The second point to take away from the model is that the responses of yields to shocks are

essentially symmetric—that is, the sensitivity of yields to positive and negative announcements

falls by about the same amount when the zero bound is strongly binding on short-term rates.

Figure 2 plots the response of the model to small positive shocks, but the results for small negative

shocks are virtually identical in absolute value.6 This implication of the model can be surprising

at ﬁrst, since the zero bound is a one-sided constraint. Nevertheless, the intuition is clear: when

the zero bound is strongly binding—that is, policymakers would like to set it substantially below

zero for several periods—then short-term yields are completely unresponsive to both positive and

negative shocks, as long as those positive shocks are not large enough to bring short-term rates

above the zero bound. Longer-term yields are also about equally damped in response to positive

and negative shocks because: (a) longer-term yields are an average of current and expected future

short-term rates, (b) current short-term rates do not respond to either positive or negative shocks,

and (c) expected future short-term rates respond symmetrically to positive and negative shocks in

periods in which the zero bound is not binding. There are very few periods in which expected future

short-term rates are unconstrained by the zero bound for the positive shock but still constrained

for the negative shock, and even in those periods the interest rate diﬀerential between the two cases
   6
    This symmetry is perfect if the number of periods that policy is constrained by the zero bound does not change,
which is the case for small shocks. Even for shocks that are very large by empirical standards, Swanson and Williams
(2013a) show that the response of yields in the model is essentially symmetric, for the reasons discussed below.



                                                         8
is typically very small. These small diﬀerences are negligible compared to the response of the yield

curve as a whole, so the result is almost perfectly symmetric. We also test this restriction in our

empirical work below, and ﬁnd that it is not rejected by the data.

     The ﬁnal point to take away from the model is that the zero bound attenuates the sensitivity

of yields to news by similar amounts for diﬀerent types of shocks, as long as the eﬀects of those

shocks on short-term interest rates have similar persistence. Intuitively, the degree of attenuation

across maturities is determined primarily by the length of time the zero bound is expected to bind,

and not by the type of shock. If two diﬀerent shocks in the model have similarly persistent eﬀects

on short-term interest rates, then the attenuation across maturities is also approximately the same.

In our empirical work below, we assume that the zero bound attenuates the sensitivity of the yield

curve to news by the same amount for all shocks. In the model above, this would only be exactly

true if the shocks had identically persistent eﬀects on the short-term interest rate, but we view this

assumption as a reasonable empirical approximation. We also test this assumption below, and ﬁnd

that it is not rejected by the data.



3    Empirical Framework

We now seek to estimate the extent to which Treasury securities of diﬀerent maturities have been

more or less sensitive to macroeconomic announcements over time. We do this in three steps:

First, we identify the surprise component of major U.S. macroeconomic announcements. Second,

we estimate the average sensitivity of Treasury securities of each maturity to those announcements

over a benchmark sample, 1990–2000, during which the zero bound was not a constraint on yields.

Third, we compute the sensitivity of each Treasury yield in subsequent periods and compare it

to the benchmark sample to determine when and to what extent each yield was aﬀected by the

presence of the zero lower bound. Periods in which the zero bound was a signiﬁcant constraint on

a given Treasury yield should appear in this analysis as periods of unusually low sensitivity of that

security to macroeconomic news. We describe the details of each of these three basic steps in turn.




                                                  9
3.1     The Surprise Component of Macroeconomic Announcements

Financial markets are forward-looking, so the expected component of macroeconomic data releases

should have essentially no eﬀect on interest rates (Kuttner, 2001, tests and conﬁrms this hypothesis

for the case of monetary policy announcements). To measure the eﬀects of these announcements

on interest rates, then, we ﬁrst compute the unexpected, or surprise, component of each release.

       As in Gürkaynak et al. (2005b), we compute the surprise component of each announcement

as the realized value of the macroeconomic data release on the day of the announcement less

the ﬁnancial markets’ expectation for that realized value. We obtain data on ﬁnancial market

expectations of major macroeconomic data releases from two sources: Money Market Services

(MMS) and Bloomberg Financial Services. Both MMS and Bloomberg conduct surveys of ﬁnancial

market institutions and professional forecasters regarding their expectations for upcoming major

data releases, and we use the median survey response as our measure of the ﬁnancial market

expectation. An important feature of these surveys is that they are conducted just a few days

prior to each announcement—historically, the MMS survey was conducted the Friday before each

data release, and the Bloomberg survey can be updated by participants until the night before the

release—so these forecasts should reﬂect essentially all relevant information up to a few days before

the release. Anderson et al. (2003) and other authors have veriﬁed that these data pass standard

tests of forecast rationality and provide a reasonable measure of ex ante expectations of the data

release, which we have veriﬁed over our sample as well.

       Data from MMS for some macroeconomic series are available back to the mid-1980s, but are

only consistently available for a wider variety of series starting around mid-1989, so we begin our

sample on January 1, 1990.7 Bloomberg survey data begin in the mid-1990s but are available to us

more recently. When the two survey series overlap, they agree very closely, since they are surveying

essentially the same set of ﬁnancial institutions and professional forecasters. Additional details

regarding these data are provided in Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005b), Gürkaynak, Levin,

and Swanson (2010), and in Section 5.5, below.

   7
    MMS survey data for two of our series, consumer conﬁdence and initial claims, begin in 1991. All of our results
are essentially unchanged if we begin our analysis in 1991 rather than 1990.




                                                        10
3.2     The Sensitivity of Treasury Yields to Macroeconomic Announcements

In normal times, when Treasury yields are far away from the zero lower bound, those yields typically

respond to macroeconomic news. To measure this responsiveness, Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) estimate

daily-frequency regressions of the form

                                               Δyt = α + βXt + εt ,                                                  (8)

where t indexes days, Δyt denotes the one-day change in the Treasury yield over the day, Xt is a

vector of surprise components of macroeconomic data releases that took place that day, and εt is a

residual representing the inﬂuence of other news and other factors on the Treasury yield that day.

Note that most macroeconomic data series, such as nonfarm payrolls or the consumer price index,

have data releases only once per month, so on days for which there is no news about a particular

macroeconomic series, we set the corresponding element of Xt equal to zero.8

       Table 1 reports estimates of regression (8) for the 3-month, 2-year, and 10-year Treasury yields

from January 1990 through December 2000, a period in which we assume the zero lower bound

did not constrain these yields. We exclude days on which no major macroeconomic data releases

occurred, although the results are very similar whether or not these non-announcement days are

included. To facilitate interpretation of the coeﬃcients in Table 1, each macroeconomic data release

surprise is normalized by its historical standard deviation, so that each coeﬃcient in the table is in

units of basis points per standard-deviation surprise in the announcement.9

       The ﬁrst column of Table 1 reports results for the 3-month Treasury yield. Positive surprises

in output or inﬂation cause the 3-month Treasury yield to rise, on average, consistent with a Taylor-

type reaction function for monetary policy, while positive surprises in the unemployment rate or

initial jobless claims (which are countercyclical economic indicators) cause the 3-month Treasury

yield to fall. The data release that has the largest eﬀect on the 3-month Treasury yield is nonfarm
   8
      Thus, if we write X as a matrix with columns corresponding to macroeconomic series and rows corresponding to
time t, each column of X will be a vector consisting mostly of zeros, with one nonzero value per month corresponding
to dates on which news about the corresponding macroeconomic series was released. (For GDP, there is one nonzero
value per quarter, and for initial claims, one nonzero value per week.)
    9
      The historical standard deviations of these surprises are as follows: capacity utilization, 0.34 percentage points;
consumer conﬁdence, 5.1 index points; core CPI, 0.11 percentage points; real GDP, 0.76 percentage points; initial
claims for unemployment insurance, 18.9 thousand workers; NAPM/ISM survey of manufacturers, 2.04 index points;
leading indicators, 0.18 index points; new home sales, 60.6 thousand homes; nonfarm payrolls, 102.5 thousand workers;
core PPI, 0.26 percentage points; retail sales excluding autos, 0.43 percentage points; and the unemployment rate,
0.15 percentage points.


                                                           11
                                                               Treasury yield maturity
                                             3-month                   2-year                   10-year
        Capacity Utilization             1.68     (2.93)           2.10    (4.23)          1.47     (2.51)
        Consumer Conﬁdence               0.29     (0.59)           2.67    (5.84)          2.69     (5.40)
        Core CPI                         0.79     (2.55)           2.33    (4.38)          1.71     (3.38)
        GDP (advance)                    0.33     (0.71)          −0.18    (−0.19)        −0.67     (−0.62)
        Initial Claims                  −0.29     (−1.36)         −0.63    (−2.42)        −0.39     (−1.43)
        ISM Manufacturing                0.98     (1.47)           3.44    (7.23)          2.61     (4.99)
        Leading Indicators               0.83     (1.58)           1.20    (2.36)          0.69     (1.09)
        New Home Sales                   1.46     (3.56)           1.98    (4.84)          2.04     (4.30)
        Nonfarm Payrolls                 2.44     (4.41)           4.56    (7.02)          2.86     (4.03)
        Core PPI                         0.52     (1.40)           0.87    (1.78)          1.33     (2.60)
        Retail Sales ex. autos           1.19     (3.35)           1.83    (2.84)          1.18     (1.83)
        Unemployment rate               −1.54     (−2.19)         −1.98    (−2.60)        −0.96     (−1.23)

        # Observations                        1303                     1303                     1303
        R2                                     .07                      .19                      .09
        H0 : β = 0, p-value                  < 10−8                   < 10−16                  < 10−16

Table 1. Coeﬃcient estimates β from linear regression Δyt = α + βXt + εt at daily frequency on
days of announcements from Jan. 1990 to Dec. 2000. Change in yields Δyt is in basis points; sur-
prise component of macroeconomic announcements Xt are normalized by their historical standard
deviations; coeﬃcients represent a basis point per standard deviation response. Heteroskedasticity-
consistent t-statistics in parentheses. H0 : β = 0 p-value is for the test that all elements of β are
zero. See text for details.


payrolls, for which a one-standard-deviation surprise causes the yield to move by about 2.5 bp on

average, with a t-statistic of about 4.5. Taken together, the twelve data releases in Table 1 have a

highly statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on the 3-month Treasury yield, with a joint F -statistic above

5 and a p-value of less than 10−8 . The results for the 2- and 10-year Treasury yields in the second

and third columns are similar, with joint statistical signiﬁcance levels that are even higher than for

the 3-month yield.10 Thus, the high-frequency types of regressions conducted in Table 1 provide

a great deal of power and information with which to estimate time-variation in the sensitivity of

these yields to news in the next section.11
  10
     The response of the 2-year Treasury yield to news is often larger than the response of the 3-month yield. In other
words, the response of the yield curve to news tends to be hump-shaped. This is consistent with the standard result
in monetary policy VARs that the federal funds rate has a hump-shaped response to output and inﬂation shocks (e.g.,
Sims and Zha 1999), and the ﬁnding in estimated monetary policy rules that the federal funds rate has inertia, so
that the central bank responds only gradually to news (e.g., Sack and Wieland 2000). For simplicity, we considered
a noninertial monetary policy rule in the previous section, but the key observations from that model are essentially
unchanged if an inertial policy rule is used instead.
  11
     Although the magnitudes of the coeﬃcients in Table 1 are only a few basis points per standard deviation and the
  2
R less than 0.2, these results should not be too surprising given the low signal-to-noise ratio of any single monthly
data release for the true underlying state of economic activity and inﬂation. There are several reasons for this. For
one, our surprise data cover only the headline component of each announcement, while the full releases are much


                                                          12
3.3    Measuring the Time-Varying Sensitivity of Treasury Yields

In principle, one can measure the time-varying sensitivity of Treasury yields to news by running

regressions of the form (8) over one-year rolling windows. However, this approach suﬀers from

small-sample problems because most macroeconomic series have data releases only once per month,

providing just twelve observations per year with which to identify each element of the vector β.

      We overcome this small-sample problem by imposing that the relative magnitude of the ele-

ments of β are constant over time, so that only the overall magnitude of β varies as the yield in

question becomes more or less aﬀected by the presence of the zero lower bound. Intuitively, if a

Treasury security’s sensitivity to news is reduced because its yield is starting to bump up against

the zero bound, then we expect that security’s responsiveness to all macroeconomic data releases

to be damped by a roughly proportionate amount. This assumption is supported by the illustrative

model in Section 2 and by empirical tests we conduct below.

      Thus, for each given Treasury yield, we generalize regression (8) to a nonlinear least squares

speciﬁcation of the form:

                                             Δyt = γ τi + δτi βXt + εt ,                                              (9)

where the parameters γ τi and δτi are scalars that are allowed to take on diﬀerent values in each

calendar year i = 1990, 1991, . . . , 2012. (The reason for the notation γ τi , δτi rather than γ i , δi will

become clear shortly.) The use of annual dummies in (9) is deliberately atheoretical in order to “let

the data speak” at this stage; we will consider higher-frequency and more structural speciﬁcations

for the time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δ in Section 5.4, below. Note that regression (9) greatly

reduces the small-sample problem associated with allowing every element of β to vary across years,

because in (9) there are about 140 observations of βXt per year with which to estimate each

scalar δτi . Regression (9) also brings about twice as much data to bear in the estimation of β

relative to the 1990–2000 sample considered in Table 1.

      We must choose a normalization to separately identify the coeﬃcients β and δτi in (9). We
richer: e.g., the employment report includes not just nonfarm payrolls and the unemployment rate, but also how
much of the change in payrolls is due to government hiring, how much of the change in unemployment is due to
workers dropping out of the labor force, and revisions to the previous two nonfarm payrolls announcements. The
situation is very similar for all of the other releases in Table 1, and details such as these typically have a substantial
eﬀect on the markets’ overall interpretation of a release. The important point to take away from Table 1 is that
the large number of observations and extraordinary statistical signiﬁcance of the regressions implies that they are
extremely informative about the sensitivity of Treasury yields to economic news.


                                                           13
normalize the δτi so that they have an average value of unity from 1990–2000, which we take to

be a period of relatively “normal” or unconstrained Treasury yield behavior. An estimated value

of δτi close to unity thus represents a year in which the given Treasury yield behaved normally in

response to news, while an estimated value of δτi close to zero corresponds to a year in which the

given Treasury yield was completely unresponsive to news. Intermediate values of δτi correspond

to years in which the Treasury yield’s sensitivity to news was partially attenuated.

       To provide a ﬁner estimate of the periods during which each Treasury yield’s sensitivity was

attenuated, we also estimate daily rolling regressions of the form


                                             Δyt = γ τ + δτ X̂t + ετt ,                                          (10)


where X̂t ≡ β̂Xt denotes a “generic surprise” regressor deﬁned using the estimated value of β̂

from (9), and (10) is estimated over one-year rolling windows centered around each business day

τ from January 1990 through December 2012.12 When τ corresponds to the midpoint of a given

calendar year i ∈ {1990, 1991, . . . , 2012}, the estimated value of the attenuation coeﬃcient δτ

agrees exactly with δτi from regression (9). But we can also estimate (10) for any business day τ

in our sample, and plot the coeﬃcients δτ over time τ to provide a ﬁner estimate of the periods

during which each Treasury yield’s sensitivity to news was attenuated. When we plot the standard

errors in regression (10) around the point estimates for δτ , we account for the two-stage sampling

uncertainty by using the estimated standard errors of the δτi from regression (9) as benchmarks

and interpolating between them using the standard errors estimated in (10).13

       As an alternative to the sensitivity of Treasury yields, δτ , one could also consider the time-

varying unconditional volatility of those yields—that is, the six-month or one-year rolling standard

deviation of yield changes Δyt . Looking at the unconditional volatility of yields is simpler and

requires less data than our sensitivity-based approach above. The primary disadvantage of uncon-

ditional volatility is that it can vary due to changes in the variance of the εt in regressions (9) and
  12
     Toward either end of our sample, the regression window gets truncated and thus becomes smaller and less centered,
approaching a six-month leading window in January 1990 and a six-month trailing window in December 2012.
  13
     Nonlinear least squares regression (9) is a one-stage regression whose standard errors are estimated consistently
and eﬃciently under standard econometric assumptions. Thus, we use these standard errors for δ τi as benchmarks.
Let σ τ denote the OLS standard error for δ τ on date τ from daily rolling regression (10) (which ignores the sampling
uncertainty for β̂). Let ς τi denote the benchmark standard errors for δ τi from NLS regression (9). For τ between
                                                               τi+1 −τ     τi                 τi+1
                                                                                   τ −τi
benchmark dates τi and τi+1 , we scale up σ τ by a factor of τi+1  −τi
                                                                       · σς τi + τi+1 −τi
                                                                                          · σς τi+1 .



                                                         14
(10) because of factors such as liquidity and risk premia. If the unconditional volatility of a given

Treasury yield is greater than zero, that tells us little about whether monetary policy can aﬀect

that yield or not, because it could be that the residuals εt for that yield are large. In contrast, if the

sensitivity of a given Treasury yield to macroeconomic news, δτ , is substantially greater than zero,

then the case that monetary policy can aﬀect that yield is much stronger. Thus, the sensitivity

of yields to macroeconomic news is more relevant than unconditional volatility for monetary and

ﬁscal policy.



4        Main Results

Table 2 reports nonlinear least squares estimates for β in regression (9) for the 3-month, 2-year,

and 10-year Treasury yields over the sample January 1990 through December 2012. The results in

Table 2 are generally similar to those in Table 1, although the number of observations in Table 2

is more than twice as large as in Table 1, owing to the longer sample.

         At the bottom of Table 2, we report results for three speciﬁcation tests. First, we test the

hypothesis that the relative response coeﬃcients β in regression (9) are constant over time—and

only the scalar attenuation coeﬃcients δτi vary—against an alternative in which every element of

β is permitted to vary independently across calendar years, that is:

                                            Δyt = γ τi + β τi Xt + εt .                                        (11)

As can be seen in Table 2, the restricted speciﬁcation (9) is consistent with the data, with p-values

above .25 for each regression.14 As an additional robustness check on this restriction, we have also

run regression (9) with a smaller, more homogeneous set of announcements Xt , such as nonfarm

payrolls alone, or nonfarm payrolls, initial claims, and the unemployment rate. In the interest of

space, these results are reported in an online Appendix, but the estimated time-varying sensitivity

coeﬃcients δτi are very similar to those reported in this section (although the estimates are much

noisier when the number of regressors is reduced in this way).
    14
    In Swanson and Williams (2013a), we performed a Wald test of this restriction, which produced p-values of 1
to three decimal places. The results reported here are for a GMM J-test of overidentifying restrictions, which was
suggested by a referee as being a more robust test. Regression (9) has 57 coeﬃcients while there are 297 moment
conditions of the form Ext εt = 0 corresponding to the unrestricted model (11). (Recall that we do not have data for
two series in 1990.) The J-test p-values reported in Table 2 are for the continuous-updating GMM estimator, which
Hansen, Heaton, and Yaron (1996) ﬁnd gives the most reliable test statistics in ﬁnite samples.


                                                        15
                                                               Treasury yield maturity
                                              3-month                   2-year                   10-year
       Capacity Utilization               0.73     (1.56)          1.49     (2.89)          0.68      (2.02)
       Consumer Conﬁdence                 0.75     (2.90)          1.37     (3.71)          0.84      (2.43)
       Core CPI                           0.39     (1.88)          1.89     (5.00)          1.17      (3.60)
       GDP (advance)                      0.92     (3.15)          1.42     (2.40)          0.95      (1.69)
       Initial Claims                    −0.30     (−1.82)        −1.10     (−5.35)        −0.95      (−5.02)
       ISM Manufacturing                  1.23     (3.24)          2.72     (7.09)          1.98      (5.96)
       Leading Indicators                 0.20     (0.62)          0.28     (0.85)          0.28      (1.01)
       New Home Sales                     0.83     (2.65)          0.65     (1.99)          0.50      (1.93)
       Nonfarm Payrolls                   3.03     (7.67)          4.79     (9.54)          2.95      (6.79)
       Core PPI                           0.22     (0.79)          0.52     (1.54)          0.85      (3.14)
       Retail Sales ex. autos             0.83     (3.76)          1.86     (4.92)          1.62      (4.31)
       Unemployment rate                 −1.24     (−3.53)        −1.26     (−2.78)        −0.41      (−1.07)

       # Observations                          2829                     2829                      2829
       R2                                       .08                      .17                       .10
       H0 : β constant, p-value                .598                     .265                      .630
       H0 : δ symmetric, p-value               .095                     .310                      .319
       H0 : δ constant, p-value               < 10−16                  < 10−16                    .015

Table 2. Coeﬃcient estimates β from nonlinear regression Δyt = γ τi + δτi βXt + εt at daily
frequency from Jan. 1990 to Dec. 2012. Coeﬃcients indexed τi may take on diﬀerent values in
diﬀerent calendar years. Δyt and Xt are as in Table 1. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in
parentheses. H0 : β constant p-value is for the test that β is ﬁxed over time and only the δτi vary.
H0 : δ symmetric tests whether δτi is the same for positive and negative surprises βXt . H0 : δ
constant tests whether δτi = 1 for all years i. See text for details.


      Second, we test the hypothesis that the δτi in (9) are the same for positive and negative
                                                                                          τi      τi
surprises βXt , against an alternative in which we allow separate attenuation coeﬃcients δ+  and δ−

for positive and negative values of βXt in each calendar year i. In other words, we separate the

data into two groups—those announcements that have positive implications for Treasury yields,
                                                                                       τi    τi
and those that have negative implications—and test whether the attenuation coeﬃcients δ+  = δ−

for each i = 1990, . . . , 2012.15 As can be seen in Table 2, this restriction is also not rejected by the

data, with p-values typically substantially above ten percent. Although the symmetry restriction

appears to be marginally rejected for the 3-month Treasury yield, with a p-value of .095, that result

is entirely driven by a large outlier on October 20, 2008, when the 3-month T-bill yield jumped by

41 bp.16 Excluding that single observation, the p-value for the 3-month Treasury yield hypothesis
   15
      The ﬁrst group consists of all of the unemployment rate and initial claims surprises that are less than zero, and
all of the positive surprises in the other statistics. The second group consists of all of the unemployment rate and
initial claims surprises that are greater than zero, and all of the negative surprises in the other statistics.
   16
      The only macroeconomic data released that day was leading indicators, which had a positive surprise of about


                                                          16
test is .709. We conclude that this restriction is also consistent with the data.

     Third, we test the hypothesis that the time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δτi in (9) are con-

stant over time. That is, we test whether δτi = 1 for each calendar year i = 1990, . . . , 2012. In

contrast to the previous two tests, here the data strongly reject the restriction for the 3-month and

2-year Treasury yields, with p-values less than 10−16 . Clearly, the sensitivity of these two yields to

macroeconomic news has varied substantially over time. The constant-δ restriction for the 10-year

yield is also rejected, but less strongly, with a p-value of .015. Although the 10-year yield’s sensi-

tivity to news does appear to have varied over time, the assumption of constant sensitivity for this

yield is not nearly as inconsistent with the data as for the shorter-maturity yields.

     Figure 3 plots the time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δτ from regression (9) as a function of

time τ , using the daily rolling regression speciﬁcation (10). The six panels of the ﬁgure depict

results for the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury yields. The solid blue

line in each panel plots the estimated value of δτ on each date τ , while the dotted gray lines

depict heteroskedasticity-consistent ±2-standard-error bands, adjusted for the two-stage estimation

procedure as described in the preceding section. In each panel, horizontal black lines are drawn

at 0 and 1 as benchmarks for comparison, corresponding to the cases of complete insensitivity to

news and normal sensitivity to news, respectively.

     In each panel, the yellow shaded regions denote periods during which the estimated value

of δτ is signiﬁcantly less than unity at the one percent level. We use a conservative threshold

here so that the shaded regions represent periods in which the yield was clearly less sensitive to

news than normal. In addition, if the hypothesis δτ = 0 cannot be rejected, then the region is

shaded red.17 Thus, red shaded regions correspond to periods in which the Treasury yield was

essentially insensitive to news, while yellow shaded regions correspond to periods in which the yield

was partially—but not completely—unresponsive to news.

     Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows that the sensitivity of the 3-month Treasury yield to macroecon-
2 standard deviations. According to The Wall Street Journal, the major news that day was that J.P. Morgan
Chase and other large banks lent billions of dollars to their counterparts in Europe, which “spurred improvement
in the commercial paper market. . . With more appetite for risk came an exodus out of government debt. Treasury
bills suﬀered the most. . . Bills were also pressured by more than $80 billion in bill supply. . . from the Treasury
department.” (“Credit Markets: Bonds and Stocks Show Signs of Healing,” The Wall Street Journal, October 21,
2008, Romy Varghese and Emily Barrett, p. C1.)
  17
     We use a standard ﬁve percent threshold here. A one percent threshold would result in the red shaded regions
being slightly larger.


                                                        17
                 (a) 3-Month Treasury Yield Sensitivity to News                                     (b) 6-Month Treasury Yield Sensitivity to News
                                                                                     4
  4
                                                                                   3.5
3.5

                                                                                     3
  3


2.5                                                                                2.5


  2                                                                                  2

1.5
                                                                                   1.5

  1
                                                                                     1

0.5
                                                                                   0.5
  0
                                                                                     0
-0.5

                                                                                   -0.5
 -1

                                                                                    -1
       2002   2004              2006             2008                2010   2012          2002   2004              2006             2008                2010   2012



                     (c) 1-Year Treasury Yield Sensitivity to News                                      (d) 2-Year Treasury Yield Sensitivity to News
  4                                                                                  4


3.5                                                                                3.5


  3                                                                                  3


2.5                                                                                2.5


  2                                                                                  2


1.5                                                                                1.5


  1                                                                                  1


0.5                                                                                0.5


  0                                                                                  0


-0.5                                                                               -0.5


 -1                                                                                 -1
       2002   2004              2006             2008                2010   2012          2002   2004              2006             2008                2010   2012



                     (e) 5-Year Treasury Yield Sensitivity to News                                      (f) 10-Year Treasury Yield Sensitivity to News
  4
                                                                                     4

3.5
                                                                                   3.5

  3
                                                                                     3

2.5                                                                                2.5


  2                                                                                  2


1.5                                                                                1.5


  1                                                                                  1


                                                                                   0.5
0.5

                                                                                     0
  0

                                                                                   -0.5
-0.5

                                                                                    -1
 -1
       2002   2004              2006             2008                2010   2012          2002   2004              2006             2008                2010   2012



 Figure 3. Time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δτ from regression (10) for (a) 3-month, (b) 6-month, (c)
 1-year, (d) 2-year, (e) 5-year, and (f) 10-year Treasury yields. Dotted gray lines depict heteroskedasticity-
 consistent ±2-standard-error bands, adjusted for two-stage sampling uncertainty in (10). δτ = 1 corre-
 sponds to normal Treasury sensitivity to news; δτ = 0 to complete insensitivity. Yellow shaded regions
 denote δτ signiﬁcantly less than 1; red shaded regions denote δτ signiﬁcantly less than 1 and not signiﬁ-
 cantly diﬀerent from 0. See text for details.         18
omic news has varied between about 0 and 2 from 2001 through 2012. From the spring of 2009

through the end of 2012, the 3-month Treasury yield was either partially or completely insensitive

to news. It is natural to interpret this insensitivity as being driven by the zero lower bound, since

the federal funds rate and 3-month Treasury yields were both essentially zero from December 2008

through the end of our sample. At the shortest end of the yield curve, at least, Treasury yields

appear to have been substantially constrained by the zero bound from the spring of 2009 onward.

       What is perhaps more surprising in the ﬁrst panel of Figure 3 is that the 3-month Treasury

yield was also partially or completely insensitive to news throughout 2003 and 2004, a period

during which the federal funds rate target and 3-month Treasury yield never fell below 1 percent.

However, the Fed had recently lowered the funds rate to 1.25 percent in November 2002 and again

to 1 percent in June 2003, and at the time, a level of the funds rate below 1 percent was regarded as

costly for institutional reasons (Bernanke and Reinhart, 2004). Rather than try to lower the funds

rate below 1 percent, the FOMC opted instead to switch to a policy of managing monetary policy

expectations, using phrases such as “policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable

period.”18 Thus, even though the funds rate was not constrained by a ﬂoor of zero in 2003 and

2004, our results show that the 3-month Treasury yield behaved as if it had been constrained by a

ﬂoor of 1 percent. The fact that our empirical method picks up the constraints faced by monetary

policy in 2003–04, and the potential absence of crowding out of ﬁscal policy over the same period,

is a noteworthy feature of our approach.

       Panel (b) of Figure 3 reports analogous results for the 6-month Treasury yield, which are

generally similar to those for the 3-month yield: the sensitivity to macroeconomic news ranges

between 0 and 2, and from the spring of 2009 through the end of 2012, the 6-month yield was

either partially or completely unresponsive to news. In contrast to the 3-month yield, however, the

6-month yield’s sensitivity to news was much less attenuated in 2003–04. Thus, to the extent that

the eﬀective lower bound of 1 percent was a substantial constraint on monetary policy in 2003–04,

that constraint did not appear to extend out to maturities beyond 3 months in 2004.

       Results for 1- and 2-year Treasury yields are reported in the middle panels of Figure 3. The
  18
    The “considerable period” language was introduced into the FOMC statement on August 12, 2003, and continued
until the end of January 2004, at which point it was replaced with the phrase, “the Committee believes that it can
be patient in removing its policy accommodation.” The funds rate was ﬁnally raised on June 30, 2004.



                                                       19
sensitivity of these intermediate-maturity yields to news is less attenuated than that of 3- and

6-month yields throughout our sample. For example, both the 1- and 2-year yields behaved close

to normally throughout 2003–04, implying that they were relatively unaﬀected by the FOMC’s

implicit ﬂoor of about 1 percent during this period. Thus, to the extent that the FOMC can aﬀect

yields with a year or more to maturity, we would conclude that the eﬀectiveness of monetary and

ﬁscal policy were very close to normal in 2003–04.

     What is perhaps most surprising in the middle panels of Figure 3 is how little and how late the

zero bound seems to have aﬀected these intermediate-maturity yields after 2008. The sensitivity of

the 1-year yield to news was only signiﬁcantly less than unity beginning in 2010, and even then is

partially responsive to news until late 2011. Only beginning in late 2011 does the 1-year Treasury

yield cease responding to news. The 2-year Treasury yield’s sensitivity to news was generally not

signiﬁcantly attenuated until late 2011, and even then remained partially responsive to news until

late 2012. Thus, to the extent that the Fed can inﬂuence monetary policy expectations over a

horizon out to two years, we conclude that monetary and ﬁscal policy were likely to have been

about as eﬀective as usual until at least late 2011.

     The bottom two panels of Figure 3 report results for 5- and 10-year Treasury yields, which are

also remarkable. There are essentially no red or yellow shaded regions in these panels, because the

sensitivity of these yields to news is never signiﬁcantly less than one until the last few weeks of 2012.

Even in late 2011 and 2012, when Treasury yields out to two years were becoming substantially

constrained, 5- and 10-year yields remained largely unconstrained. However, the sensitivity of the

5-year yield to news declined throughout 2012, and given the substantial decline in the 5- and

10-year yields’ sensitivity to news toward the end of 2012, it would be very interesting to see how

this sensitivity evolves going forward.



5    Discussion

We now discuss the broader implications of our empirical ﬁndings and perform several extensions

and robustness checks. First, we compare our results to private-sector expectations of the time

until federal funds rate “liftoﬀ” from the zero bound. Second, we discuss the implications of our



                                                   20
                                                                               7 or more


                                                                               6


                                                                               5




                                                                                    Quarters
                                                                               4


                                                                               3


                                                                               2

                                       FOMC issues
                                    "mid-2013" guidance                        1


                                                                               0




Figure 4. Expected number of quarters until the ﬁrst federal funds rate increase above 25 bp,
from the monthly Blue Chip survey of forecasters. Data are top-coded at “7 or more” quarters due
to the forecast horizon length published by Blue Chip.


ﬁndings for the ﬁscal multiplier. Third, we show that time-varying term premia would not aﬀect

the interpretation of our main results. Fourth, we investigate to what extent a reduced sensitivity

of Treasury yields to news can be explained mechanically by a lower level of yields or by changes in

monetary policy uncertainty. Finally, we show that the distribution of our macroeconomic surprise

data from 2008 onward is not very diﬀerent from the distribution of those surprises before 2008.


5.1    Private-Sector Expectations of Federal Funds Rate “Liftoﬀ” from Zero

Our illustrative model in Section 2 implies that the sensitivity of medium- and longer-term Treasury

yields to news is closely related to the length of time that the federal funds rate is expected to

be at the zero lower bound. For example, if the funds rate is expected to be at zero for just

one quarter, then medium- and longer-term interest rates should be nearly unaﬀected by the zero

bound, whereas if the funds rate is expected to be at the zero bound for several years, then even

5- or 10-year Treasury yields should be noticeably aﬀected.

      Figure 4 plots the number of quarters until the private sector expected the funds rate to



                                                 21
be 25 bp or higher, as measured by the median, “consensus” response to the monthly Blue Chip

survey of professional forecasters. Prior to December 2008, the FOMC was not expected to lower

the funds rate below 25 bp. After the FOMC cut the target funds rate to about zero in December

2008, the Blue Chip consensus expectation of the length of time until the ﬁrst funds rate increase

then ﬂuctuated between two and ﬁve quarters until August 2011. On August 9, 2011, the FOMC

announced that it expected to keep the funds rate near zero “at least through mid-2013,” and

private-sector expectations of the time until liftoﬀ jumped to seven or more quarters (the Blue

Chip forecast horizon extends forward only six quarters).19

       The implication of the forecasts underlying Figure 4 is that, from about January 2009 until

August 2011, the sensitivity of Treasury yields with a year or less to maturity should have fallen close

to zero, while that for maturities of two years or more should have been only partially attenuated.

Only beginning in August 2011 would we expect to see yields with two years to maturity show

substantial attenuation with respect to news. And in fact, this corresponds closely to our time-

varying sensitivity results in Figure 3.

       Figure 5 provides an additional perspective on these results from the interest rate options

market. Using daily options data with a range of strike prices and ﬁve quarters to expiration, we

can estimate the entire implied distribution of the federal funds rate in ﬁve quarters’ time at daily

frequency.20 We can then use these estimated distributions to back out the implied probability that

the federal funds rate would be less than 50 bp in ﬁve quarters’ time, which we plot in Figure 5

from January 2008 to December 2012.

       The implied probabilities in Figure 5 corroborate the survey results in Figure 4 and our

sensitivity estimates in Figure 3. Before September 2008, options traders apparently viewed the

probability of the funds rate being less than 50 bp in ﬁve quarters’ time as very low—less than about
  19
      The Federal Reserve Bank of New York also surveys primary dealers in the Treasury market, with survey results
since January 2011 made available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer survey questions.html.
The results of this survey show a similar jump in the median primary dealer forecast, from 5 quarters in August 2011
to 9 quarters in September 2011.
   20
      We do not need to assume normality for these distributions because we observe option prices for multiple diﬀerent
strikes. On each day from January 2008 through December 2012, we use the range of available Eurodollar option put
and call prices with ﬁve quarters to expiration to estimate the implied distribution of the spot 3-month Eurodollar
rate in ﬁve quarters’ time, using a ﬂexible functional form. Eurodollar options are the most liquid options on a short-
term interest rate and thus provide the best measure of the distribution of possible short-term interest rate outcomes.
We use the spread between overlapping federal funds futures and Eurodollar futures rates at a one-year horizon to
convert these implied distributions for the 3-month Eurodollar rate into an implied distribution for the federal funds
rate. These probability estimates ignore risk premia and thus represent implied risk-neutral probabilities.


                                                          22
                            1


                          0.9


                          0.8


                          0.7


                          0.6


                          0.5


                          0.4


                          0.3


                          0.2


                          0.1


                            0
                          Jan 2008   Oct 2008   Jun 2009   Mar 2010   Dec 2010   Aug 2011 May 2012   Jan 2013



Figure 5. Probability the federal funds rate would be less than 50 bp in ﬁve quarters, estimated
from options data. See text for details.


10 percent. Between September 2008 and mid-2010, this probability rose modestly to somewhere

between 20 and 45 percent—larger than before, but still less likely than not. From mid-2010 to

mid-2011, this probability ﬂuctuated more widely between about 30 and 70 percent. Given the

relatively low level and substantial movements in these probabilities, it’s not surprising that 2-year

or even 1-year Treasury yields responded almost normally to news throughout much of this period.

Only beginning in August 2011 do we see the probabilities in Figure 5 increase to around 85 percent,

corresponding to a more reduced sensitivity of the 2-year Treasury yield to news.

       Figure 6 provides a ﬁnal robustness check on these results by applying regression (10) to

Eurodollar futures rather than Treasury yields. Eurodollar futures are the most heavily traded

futures contracts in the world and settle at expiration based on the spot 3-month term Eurodollar

deposit rate in London.21 Thus, a Eurodollar future with one quarter to expiration is closely related
  21
     See Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2007) for additional details regarding Eurodollar futures. They compare the
ability of a variety of ﬁnancial market instruments and econometric models to forecast the federal funds rate and ﬁnd
that Eurodollar futures perform as well as or better than any other measure at horizons of six months or more, which
is the most relevant for our present analysis. Figure 6 lists the expiration of each contract as 1–2 quarters ahead,
2–3 quarters ahead, etc., because contracts expire in March, June, September, and December of each year; thus the
number of quarters to expiration can lie anywhere between n and n + 1 quarters, depending on whether the current
date t is closer to the beginning or the end of the current quarter.




                                                                23
              (a) 1-to-2-Quarter-Ahead Eurodollar Future Sensitivity to News                        (b) 2-to-3-Quarter-Ahead Eurodollar Future Sensitivity to News
  4                                                                                     4


3.5                                                                                   3.5


  3                                                                                     3


2.5                                                                                   2.5


  2                                                                                     2


1.5                                                                                   1.5


  1                                                                                     1


0.5                                                                                   0.5


  0                                                                                     0


-0.5                                                                                  -0.5
       2002      2004            2006             2008             2010        2012          2002      2004            2006             2008             2010        2012



              (c) 3-to-4-Quarter-Ahead Eurodollar Future Sensitivity to News                        (d) 4-to-5-Quarter-Ahead Eurodollar Future Sensitivity to News
  4                                                                                     4


3.5                                                                                   3.5


  3                                                                                     3


2.5                                                                                   2.5


  2                                                                                     2


1.5                                                                                   1.5


  1                                                                                     1


0.5                                                                                   0.5


  0                                                                                     0


-0.5                                                                                  -0.5
       2002      2004            2006             2008             2010        2012          2002      2004            2006             2008             2010        2012



              (e) 5-to-6-Quarter-Ahead Eurodollar Future Sensitivity to News                        (f) 7-to-8-Quarter-Ahead Eurodollar Future Sensitivity to News
  4
                                                                                        4

3.5
                                                                                      3.5

  3
                                                                                        3


2.5
                                                                                      2.5


  2                                                                                     2


1.5                                                                                   1.5


  1                                                                                     1



0.5                                                                                   0.5


                                                                                        0
  0


                                                                                      -0.5
-0.5
       2002      2004            2006             2008             2010        2012          2002      2004            2006             2008             2010        2012




 Figure 6. Time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δτ from regression (10) for Eurodollar futures contracts
 with (a) 1–2 quarters, (b) 2–3 quarters, (c) 3–4 quarters, (d) 4–5 quarters, (e) 5–6 quarters, and (f) 7–8
 quarters to expiration. Eurodollar futures settle based on the spot 3-month Eurodollar deposit rate at
 expiration, and thus correspond to forward interest rates beginning at expiration and ending 1 quarter
 after expiration. See notes to Figure 3 and text for details.
                                                      24
to market expectations about the federal funds rate from 3 to 6 months ahead, a Eurodollar future

with 2 quarters to expiration closely reﬂects market expectations about future monetary policy

from 6 to 9 months ahead, and so on.

     The results in Figure 6 conﬁrm those for Treasury yields in Figure 3. Just like 3- and 6-month

Treasury yields, the sensitivity to news of Eurodollar futures with 1 to 2 quarters to expiration

was attenuated in 2003, and fell to essentially zero in 2010–12. Similarly, with 4 to 5 quarters

to expiration, Eurodollar futures’ sensitivity to news remained near normal levels until late 2011,

around the time of the FOMC’s announcement that it expected to keep the funds rate near zero

“at least through mid-2013.” This mirrors very closely the behavior of the 2-year Treasury yield in

Figure 3. Even longer-maturity Eurodollar futures, with 5 to 8 quarters to expiration, continued

to respond normally to news until the FOMC announced in January 2012 that it expected to keep

the funds rate near zero “at least through late 2014.”

     The results in this section suggest that ﬁnancial markets did not expect the zero bound to

constrain the funds rate for more than a few quarters until about August 2011, around the time

of the FOMC’s “mid-2013” forward guidance. Only then do we see interest rate expectations

more than four quarters ahead begin to behave in an attenuated fashion. An interesting question,

then, is to what extent the decline in Treasury yield sensitivity represents a voluntary, endogenous

commitment by the FOMC to keep interest rates low for a long time, rather than an exogenous

constraint? (As an example of the latter, the state of the economy could be so weak that the central

bank is simply not expected to raise rates above zero for a very long time, which could be true even

under perfect discretion.)

     Our empirical methods do not discriminate between these two diﬀerent ways in which mone-

tary policy expectations might be ﬁxed at zero. Nevertheless, the distinction between an exogenous

constraint and endogenous commitment by the FOMC matters very little for our results and con-

clusions. First, from the point of view of the ﬁscal multiplier (discussed below), the distinction

does not matter; the only relevant issue is whether or not monetary policy expectations respond to

changes in the economic outlook, regardless of the reason. Second, in periods when we estimate a

given Treasury yield is sensitive to news—including the case of partial sensitivity 0 < δτ < 1—our

results tell us that neither an exogenous constraint nor endogenous commitment is fully binding,


                                                25
so monetary policy can still try to operate through that yield. Third, in periods when we estimate

a given Treasury yield is not sensitive to news (δτ ≈ 0), it is still useful for policymakers to know

that that yield has come to the point where it can no longer be manipulated.

       Finally, we note that the distinction between an exogenous constraint and endogenous com-

mitment is not so sharp in practice. After all, it is precisely because of the zero lower bound that

the FOMC issued its “mid-2013”, “late 2014”, and “mid-2015” forward guidance.22 Even though

this forward guidance was in some sense voluntary, it was clearly driven by the (exogenous) presence

of the zero lower bound.


5.2     Implications for the Fiscal Multiplier

Our empirical results have important implications for the growing literature on the ﬁscal multiplier

at the zero lower bound, such as Christiano et al. (2011), Woodford (2011), and the other studies

cited in footnote 1. An important ﬁnding of that literature is that the ﬁscal multiplier is larger

the greater the fraction of the change in government spending that is expected to take place while

the short-term interest rate is at zero.23 Put diﬀerently, for a given path of ﬁscal stimulus, the

multiplier is larger the longer the zero bound is expected to constrain the short-term interest rate.

Intuitively, when the zero lower bound is expected to constrain the short-term rate for a longer

period of time, monetary policy is more constrained. The more constrained is monetary policy, the

less there is any “crowding out” of ﬁscal stimulus by changes in the private sector’s expected path

of future short-term interest rates.

       Our empirical results suggest that, until late 2011, ﬁnancial markets expected the federal funds

rate to rise above zero relatively quickly, within the next four quarters. By contrast, Christiano et

al. (henceforth CER) consider a scenario in which the zero bound is expected to bind for a longer

period of time—either 8 or 12 quarters—in their quantitative simulations using the Altig et al.
  22
      After its September 2012 meeting, the FOMC announced it expected to keep the funds rate near zero “at least
through mid-2015.”
   23
      For example, “Our basic result is that the multipliers are higher the larger the percentage of the spending that
comes on line when the nominal interest rate is zero” (Christiano et al. 2011, p. 112); “A key lesson from this analysis
is that. . . it is critical that the spending come on line when the economy is actually in the zero bound. Spending that
occurs after that yields very little bang for the buck and actually dulls the impact of the spending that comes on line
when the zero bound binds” (ibid., p. 112); and “Hence, while there is a positive eﬀect on output during the crisis
of increased government purchases at date t < T , an anticipation of increased government purchases at dates t ≥ T
has a negative eﬀect on output prior to date T ” (Woodford 2011, p. 22, emphasis original).



                                                          26
(2011) model. When CER consider a scenario in which the zero bound binds for only 4 quarters,

they ﬁnd that the ﬁscal multiplier is essentially no diﬀerent from normal—that is, no greater than

when the short-term interest rate is unconstrained (CER, footnote 12).

      Based on the results in CER and our own estimates of the length of time markets expected

the zero bound to constrain short-term interest rates, we conclude that the ﬁscal multiplier was

likely close to normal throughout 2008–10. Only beginning in late 2011, when markets began to

expect the federal funds rate would be stuck at zero for a longer period of time, would we expect

the ﬁscal multiplier to approach the larger values estimated by those authors.24

      More generally, our results suggest that the sensitivity of intermediate-maturity bond yields to

economic news is a good indicator of the relative size of the ﬁscal multiplier. Intermediate-maturity

yields are less sensitive to news when the zero bound is expected to constrain the federal funds rate

for a longer period of time. Thus, as a general rule, periods when the ﬁscal multiplier is larger are

also periods when intermediate-maturity bond yields are less sensitive to news, consistent with the

standard IS-LM intuition of a smaller degree of crowding out.


5.3     Time-Varying Term Premia and Treasury Yield Sensitivity

The simple, linearized New Keynesian model in Section 2 helps to motivate our analysis and

facilitate the interpretation of our results. However, it also implies that longer-term bond yields

satisfy the expectations hypothesis; that is, long-term yields equal the average expected short-term

rate over the lifetime of the bond, as in equation (5). While that equation allows for the existence of

a term premium φM that may vary with maturity M , the premium is assumed to be constant over

time. Contrary to this assumption, many empirical studies in ﬁnance ﬁnd that term premia vary

substantially over time (e.g., Campbell and Shiller, 1991; Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay, 1997).

      The eﬀects of any time-variation in term premia on the sensitivity of Treasury yields to major

macroeconomic announcements is unclear, however, and could be positive, negative, or zero.25
  24
     It is interesting that ﬁnancial markets’ expectation of a quick liftoﬀ from the zero bound in 2008–10 turned out to
be incorrect ex post. Nevertheless, as is clear from Woodford’s (2011) analysis, it is the private sector’s expectations at
time t regarding the future path of short-term interest rates and government spending that is crucial for determining
the eﬀect on output at time t.
  25
     For example, risk premia should increase when the economy is weak (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999; Piazzesi
and Swanson, 2008; and Lettau and Ludvigson, 2010). If risk aversion was higher during the ﬁnancial crisis, then
good news about the economy would tend to produce a larger decline in term premia to oﬀset the expected increase
in the path of the federal funds rate, producing a decreased Treasury yield sensitivity to news. Alternatively, the


                                                            27
Regardless, the interpretation of our main results is essentially independent of any such eﬀects.

Our main empirical ﬁndings are all consistent with the simple model of Section 2, and do not

represent a “sensitivity puzzle” that would require searching outside the model for an explanation.

Although we ﬁnd that Treasury yields with a year or more to maturity were surprisingly responsive

to news in 2008–10, that ﬁnding is consistent with survey-based expectations of a rapid liftoﬀ from

the zero bound, depicted in Figure 4; thus, even though that ﬁnding is surprising, it agrees with

measures of monetary policy expectations at the time and does not require an explanation based

on term premia. After the FOMC’s “mid-2013” forward guidance in August 2011, expectations of

funds rate liftoﬀ shifted out dramatically (Figure 4) and the sensitivity of intermediate-maturity

bond yields fell close to zero, again consistent with the simple model of Section 2 and not very

suggestive of an explanation based solely on term premia.

      Although time-varying term premia do not seem able to explain our main empirical results on

their own, they may help to explain some features of the data, such as why 5- and 10-year Treasury

yields were about as sensitive to news from 2008–12 as in normal times. This ﬁnding is particularly

surprising after August 2011, given that the sensitivity of the 2-year Treasury yield was so low, and

that the simple model of Section 2 predicts all yields should be attenuated by the zero bound to

some extent. An answer to this puzzle is that, if term premia on 5- and 10-year Treasuries varied

along with changes in market expectations about Fed purchases of long-term bonds, the increased

sensitivity of 5- and 10-year term premia to news could have oﬀset any dampening eﬀect from the

zero bound on those yields.26 The net result would be less attenuation in 5- and 10-year Treasury

yield sensitivity to news between 2008 and 2012, perhaps even no net attenuation.


5.4    Other Explanations for Time-Varying Treasury Yield Sensitivity

The sensitivity of Treasury yields to news could vary for reasons other than the zero lower bound

or time-varying term premia. For example, it is well known that interest rate volatility—and thus,
ﬁnancial crisis could have led to an increased demand for safe, liquid assets. In that case, bad news about the economy
might cause a “ﬂight to quality” that would drive Treasury yields below the expected decrease in the path of the
federal funds rate, producing an increased sensitivity of Treasury yields to news.
  26
     Between 2008 and 2012, the FOMC announced several rounds of long-term bond purchases, amounting to over
$3.2 trillion in total. Many authors, such as Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2012), Gagnon et al. (2011),
and Swanson (2011), estimate that such large-scale changes in the supply of long-term bonds aﬀect the yields on
those securities. Hamilton and Wu (2012) show how these purchases likely aﬀect term premia in particular.



                                                          28
presumably, interest rate sensitivity to news—declines along with the overall level of yields (e.g.,

Chan et al., 1992; Kim and Singleton, 2012). Thus, part of our estimated decline in Treasury yield

sensitivity since 2009 could simply reﬂect the decline in Treasury yields over that period.

     Changes in ﬁnancial market uncertainty about future short-term interest rates could also be

an important determinant of bond yield sensitivity to news. Suppose that ﬁnancial markets use

a Kalman ﬁlter or Bayesian updating to revise their expectations about the path of future short-

term interest rates. Then the ﬁnancial market sensitivity on day t to a macroeconomic data release

depends on the variance of the surprise component of that data release and the day t − 1 prior

variance of the variable being forecast—in this case, the future short-term interest rate. If the

market’s prior variance is very small, then market participants have a great deal of conﬁdence in

their expectation and will respond relatively little to any data release on day t. On the other hand,

if the market’s date t − 1 prior variance is very large, then markets will respond much more strongly

to any news on day t. This eﬀect could help to explain why our estimates of δτ in Figures 3 and

6 are sometimes signiﬁcantly higher than normal as well as lower than normal; for example, the

2-year Treasury yield’s sensitivity to news was more than twice as high in 2004 and from mid-2007

to mid-2008 as in the benchmark sample, 1990–2000.

     We investigate the importance of these explanations by considering a more structural speciﬁ-

cation for the time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δτ in regressions (9) and (10). In particular, we

consider a nonlinear regression of the form

                                     Δyt = γ + f (Zt )βXt + εt ,                                  (12)

where Zt denotes a vector of explanatory variables for Treasury yield sensitivity, such as the level

of yields or a measure of monetary policy uncertainty, and

                                          f (Zt ) = θ + φZt ,                                     (13)

where θ and φ are parameters to be estimated along with γ and β in (12). Thus, instead of

estimating δτi or δτ in an unrestricted way in (9) or (10), with annual dummies or rolling regressions,

the speciﬁcation (12)–(13) allows the sensitivity of Treasury yields to vary at daily frequency along

with variations in Zt . The constant θ in (13) is normalized so that the average sensitivity f (Zt ) is

equal to unity over the benchmark sample, 1990–2000, as in regression (9).

                                                  29
            Regressions with Treasury Yield Sensitivity a Function of Explanatory Variables
                                                    (1)                  (2)                   (3)
 (A) 3-month Treasury Yield
       own interest rate level                  .130      (3.49)                           .051      (0.93)
       monetary policy uncertainty                                   .526      (4.73)      .433      (2.58)
       time trend
       R2                                           .11                  .11                   .11

 (B) 2-year Treasury Yield
       own interest rate level                  .048      (2.09)                         −.023       (−0.72)
       monetary policy uncertainty                                   .292      (5.90)     .332        (4.58)
       time trend
       R2                                           .19                  .19                   .19

 (C) 10-year Treasury Yield
       own interest rate level                −.020       (−0.38)                        −.120       (−1.32)
       monetary policty uncertainty                                  .074      (0.81)     .248        (1.51)
       time trend
       R2                                           .11                  .11                   .11

Table 3. Coeﬃcient estimate φ from nonlinear regression Δyt = γ + (θ + φZt )βXt + εt at daily
frequency from Jan. 1990 to Dec. 2012. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses.
See text for details.


       Table 3 reports results for regression (12)–(13) for the 3-month, 2-year, and 10-year Treasury

yields. In the ﬁrst column, Zt includes just the level of that same yield. The sensitivity of the

3-month and 2-year yields to news is signiﬁcantly positively related to the levels of those yields, as

expected, although the relationship for the 10-year yield is insigniﬁcant and negative. A decline

in the 3-month Treasury yield of 1 percentage point is associated, on average, with a decrease in

the yield’s sensitivity to news of about 13 percent, relative to the benchmark sample. The R2 for

these regressions are a bit higher than for regression (9), indicating an improvement in ﬁt from the

higher-frequency variation in sensitivity allowed by the more structural speciﬁcation (13).

       The second column of Table 3 reports results when Zt includes a measure of monetary pol-

icy uncertainty. As described in Section 5.1, we use Eurodollar options to estimate the implied

probability distribution for the Eurodollar rate one year ahead, and take the distance between the

80th and 20th percentiles of that distribution as a measure of monetary policy uncertainty.27 This
 27
      Detailed options data are not available to us prior to 1996, so from 1990–1995, we compute the width of the



                                                          30
                   th   th
              (a) 80 -20 Percentile Eurodollar Rate 1 Year Ahead, from Options                       (b) Sensitivity Coefficient GW vs. f(Z ) for 2-year Treasury Yield
                                                                                                                                          t
4.5

                                                                                             2.5
 4


3.5
                                                                                              2

 3


2.5                                                                                          1.5


 2

                                                                                              1
1.5


 1
                                                                                             0.5

0.5


 0                                                                                            0
 1990           1995                 2000                2005                    2010         1990   1995                  2000                    2005                   2010




      Figure 7. (a) Diﬀerence between 80th and 20th percentiles of the 1-year-ahead Eurodollar rate
      distribution, derived from Eurodollar options; (b) Solid blue line and dashed black line plot time-
      varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δτ from regression (10) and f (Zt ) from (12)–(13), respectively, for
      the 2-year Treasury yield. Estimates for f (Zt ) are from column (2) of Table 3. See text and notes
      to Table 3 for details.


      interquintile range is depicted in the ﬁrst panel of Figure 7. The distance between the 80th and 20th

      percentiles of the one-year-ahead Eurodollar rate is about 3.5 percentage points at the beginning

      of 1990 and declines over time to about 25 bp by the end of 2012. This general downward trend in

      uncertainty (discussed in Swanson, 2006) is punctuated by increases in 1994 (when the Fed began

      to raise rates after the 1991 recession), 2002, 2004, and 2008–09.

           Monetary policy uncertainty is signiﬁcantly and positively related to the 3-month and 2-year

      Treasury yields’ sensitivities to news in Table 3, as expected, although the coeﬃcient for the 10-year

      yield is again insigniﬁcant. A decrease of 1 percentage point in the interquintile range is associated

      with a decrease in the 3-month Treasury’s sensitivity to news of about 53 percent, relative to the

      benchmark sample.

           The third column of Table 3 includes both the level of yields and monetary policy uncertainty

      as explanatory variables. In these regressions, the latter variable remains highly statistically signif-

      icant while driving out the former, indicating that the level of yields is not highly correlated with

      sensitivity once the eﬀect of monetary policy uncertainty is taken into account. The R2 from these

      regressions are likewise no higher than those from the ﬁrst two columns, suggesting little or no
      interquintile range using the implied volatility on Eurodollar options with one year to expiration, computed by staﬀ
      at the Federal Reserve Board assuming a lognormal distribution for the one-year-ahead spot Eurodollar rate.


                                                                                        31
additional gain to including interest rate levels in the regression once monetary policy uncertainty

is included.28

       Thus, an important takeaway from Table 3 is that bond yield sensitivity to news can vary for

reasons other than the zero lower bound. It’s even possible for our econometric test to reject normal

sensitivity to news when the zero lower bound is not a factor (e.g., Swanson and Williams (2013b)

ﬁnd one such example of a “false positive” for long-term gilts in the U.K. in 2005). However, this

does not reduce the validity of our test or imply that it is ﬂawed. It just means that—as with any

econometric test—we must inspect the results carefully and not leap to conclusions.

       In this spirit, Figure 7(b) compares the estimated sensitivity coeﬃcient δτ from regression (10)

to f (Zt ) from regression (12)–(13) for the 2-year Treasury yield, using the estimates from col-

umn (2) of Table 3 for f (Zt ). The solid blue line in the ﬁgure plots δτ , while the dashed black

line depicts f (Zt ). As can be seen in the ﬁgure, monetary policy uncertainty is highly correlated

with δτ in the 1990s, but has been much less so since 2000. For example, the very large spike in δτ

in 2007–08 is only partly explained by the rise in monetary policy uncertainty during this period,

suggesting that the extraordinary sensitivity of Treasury yields to news during that episode was

attributable to other factors as well. More recently, the 2-year yield’s sensitivity δτ falls much more

in 2011–12 than would normally be attributable to the drop in monetary policy uncertainty alone.

We interpret this last fact as reﬂecting the additional constraining eﬀects of the zero lower bound

and the Federal Reserve’s forward guidance on the sensitivity of the 2-year Treasury yield to news.

       Of course, we emphasize that the main reason monetary policy uncertainty fell to such low

levels in 2010–12 in the ﬁrst place is precisely because of the zero lower bound. In particular, the

presence of the zero bound constraint was what led the FOMC to issue its “mid-2013”, “late 2014”,

and “mid-2015” forward guidance, discussed above, which greatly reduced uncertainty about the

near-term path of monetary policy. Thus, even the declines in Treasury yield sensitivity in 2011–12

that can be explained by decreases in monetary policy uncertainty can still be attributed, in a

deeper sense, to the zero lower bound.

  28
    We also experimented with including a time trend in these regressions, since the steady decline in monetary
policy uncertainty over time in Figure 7(a) might be expected to have a diﬀerent eﬀect on yield curve sensitivity than
variations in uncertainty due to the business cycle or other factors. However, the time trend had essentially no eﬀect
on the results.




                                                         32
5.5    Post-2007 Distribution of Macroeconomic Data Release Surprises

In our main empirical regressions (9) and (10), the surprise component of each data release in Xt

can be regarded as strictly exogenous, under the assumption that our survey expectations data

incorporate all relevant information as of the day before the release. (Under this assumption,

the surprise component of each data release is independent of all past and future values of the

interest rate changes on the left-hand side of these regressions.) To the extent that regressions

(9) and (10) are correctly speciﬁed, strict exogeneity implies that the empirical distribution of the

macroeconomic surprise data Xt is irrelevant for our estimates of the relative response coeﬃcients

β or time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcients δ.

      Nevertheless, one might be concerned that regression speciﬁcations (9) and (10) are simpliﬁ-

cations that assume a linear structure with respect to Xt . As a result, it would be reassuring if the

distribution of data surprises Xt in 2008–12 was not dramatically diﬀerent from our benchmark

sample 1990–2000, or the pre-crisis sample 1990–2007.

      In fact, the distribution of these macro data surprises is similar across these samples. This

can be seen in Figure 8, which plots the surprise component of nonfarm payrolls and core CPI

announcements over the 1990–2007 and 2008–12 periods. Results for other macroeconomic data

releases and the 1990–2000 period are similar. This ﬁnding might seem puzzling at ﬁrst given the

severity of the 2007–09 recession, but one should bear in mind that ﬁnancial markets were quick

to realize the severity of the downturn, so ﬁnancial market expectations of the data fell about in

line with the decline in the data itself. As a result, the surprises in the data releases, relative to

the one-day-ahead expectations, do not look very diﬀerent from earlier periods.



6     Conclusions

In this paper, we have developed a novel method to measure whether and to what extent interest

rates of any maturity are aﬀected by the presence of the zero lower bound. Our method provides

both a quantitative measure of the severity of the zero bound constraint on each yield and a

statistical test for the periods during which that yield was aﬀected.

      We ﬁnd that interest rates with a year or more to maturity were surprisingly responsive to


                                                 33
                               (a) Nonfarm Payrolls Surprises, 1990-2007                                                           (b) Nonfarm Payrolls Surprises, 2008-2012
55                                                                                                   18


50
                                                                                                     16

45
                                                                                                     14
40

                                                                                                     12
35


30                                                                                                   10


25                                                                                                   8

20
                                                                                                     6

15
                                                                                                     4
10

                                                                                                     2
5


0                                                                                                    0
     -400      -300     -200         -100         0          100           200    300     400             -400     -300     -200         -100         0          100           200    300     400




                                  (c) Core CPI Surprises, 1990-2007                                                                   (d) Core CPI Surprises, 2008-2012
90                                                                                                   25


80


                                                                                                     20
70


60

                                                                                                     15
50


40
                                                                                                     10

30


20
                                                                                                     5


10


0                                                                                                    0
       -0.4      -0.3    -0.2         -0.1        0         0.1        0.2       0.3    0.4                 -0.4     -0.3    -0.2         -0.1        0         0.1        0.2       0.3    0.4




Figure 8. Top panels depict empirical distribution of the surprise component of nonfarm payrolls
announcements from (a) 1990–2007 and (b) 2008–12, rounded to the nearest 50 thousand workers.
Bottom panels depict the distribution of core CPI surprises from (c) 1990–2007 and (d) 2008–12,
rounded to the nearest 0.1 percent. The surprise distributions of these and other macroeconomic
data releases are relatively similar pre- and post-crisis. See text for details.


news throughout 2008–10. Only beginning in late 2011—around the time of the FOMC’s “mid-

2013” forward guidance—do we see the sensitivity of intermediate-maturity Treasury yields fall

closer to zero. There appear to be two main explanations for this ﬁnding: First, up until late 2011,

ﬁnancial markets consistently expected the federal funds rate to lift oﬀ from zero within about

four quarters. Second, the FOMC’s forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases—and private-

sector expectations of Federal Reserve policies along these lines—continued to move medium- and

longer-term interest rates even when short-term rates were stuck at zero.

              Our results have important implications for both monetary and ﬁscal policy. For monetary


                                                                                                34
policy, our ﬁndings imply that policymakers had substantial room to aﬀect medium- and longer-

term interest rates until at least late 2011, despite the federal funds rate being at the zero lower

bound. Indeed, on several occasions, the FOMC appears to have directly aﬀected those longer-term

yields by managing expectations of future monetary policy and conducting large-scale purchases of

longer-term bonds.

     For ﬁscal policy, taking the results in Christiano et al. (2011) as given, our ﬁndings suggest that

the ﬁscal multiplier was probably close to normal throughout 2008–10, because ﬁnancial markets

at that time expected the zero bound constraint to last only about four quarters or less. Only

beginning in late 2011, when the sensitivity of two-year Treasury yields to news was reduced—and

the expected time until the ﬁrst federal funds rate increase was lengthened to seven quarters or

more—would our results suggest that the ﬁscal multiplier approached the larger values estimated

by Christiano et al. (2012) and other authors.

     More generally, the methods we have developed in the present paper can be extended beyond

the United States and applied to any economy for which ﬁnancial markets are suﬃciently well

developed. For example, Swanson and Williams (2013b) consider bond yields and exchange rates

in the U.K. and Germany and ﬁnd that: 1) USD/GBP and USD/EUR exchange rates have been

essentially unaﬀected by the zero lower bound, 2) yields on German bunds were essentially uncon-

strained by the zero bound until late 2012, and 3) yields on U.K. gilts were substantially constrained

by the zero bound in 2009 and 2012, but were surprisingly responsive to news in 2010–11. It would

be very interesting to see these methods applied to other economies that have faced the zero lower

bound in recent years, such as Japan, Canada, Sweden, and other members of the Euro area.




                                                  35
References
Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Lindé (2011). “Firm-Speciﬁc
   Capital, Nominal Rigidities, and the Business Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 225–
   247.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega (2003). “Micro Eﬀects of
  Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” American Economic
  Review 93(1), 38–62.
Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2013). “Monetary Policy Expectations at the Zero
  Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2013–18.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Vincent R. Reinhart (2004). “Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low
  Short-Term Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 94(2), 85–90.
Blue Chip, Blue Chip Financial Forecasts, New York, NY: Aspen Publishers, various issues from
   2008–2012.
Campbell, Jeﬀrey, Charles Evans, Jonas Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). “Macroeconomic
  Eﬀects of FOMC Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 1–54.
Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane (1999). “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Expla-
  nation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–51.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller (1991). “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A
  Bird’s Eye View,” Review of Economic Studies 58(3), 495–514.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial
  Markets, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chan, K.C., G. Andrew Karolyi, Francis Longstaﬀ, and Anthony Sanders (1992). “An Empirical
  Comparison of Alternative Models of the Short-Term Interest Rate,” Journal of Finance 47,
  1209–1227.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). “When is the Government
  Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy 119, 78–121.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy,” Journal
   of Economic Literature 37, 1661–1707.
DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence Summers (2012). “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 233–274.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2009). “What Fiscal Policy is Eﬀective at Zero Interest Rates?” Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report 402.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman (2012). “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
  Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1469–1513.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). “The Zero Interest-Rate Bound and Optimal
  Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 139–211.
Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lindé (2010). “Is There a Fiscal Free Lunch in a Liquidity Trap?”
   Federal Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper 2010–1003.
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). “The Financial Market
  Eﬀects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases.” International Journal of Central
  Banking, 7(1), 3–43.

                                                36
Gorovoi, Viatcheslav, and Vadim Linetsky (2004). “Black’s Model of Interest Rates as Options,
  Eigenfunction Expansions, and Japanese Interest Rates,” Mathematical Finance 14(1), 49–78.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric T. Swanson (2010). “Does Inﬂation Targeting Anchor
   Long-Run Inﬂation Expectations? Evidence from the U.S., UK, and Sweden,” Journal of the
   European Economic Association, 8(6), 1208–1242.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2005a). “Do Actions Speak Louder than
   Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,” Interna-
   tional Journal of Central Banking 1(1), 55–93.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2005b). “The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest
   Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implication for Macroeconomic Models.” American
   Economic Review, 95(1), 426–436.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2007). “Market-Based Measures of Mone-
   tary Policy Expectations.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 25(2), 201–212.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright (2007). “The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve:
   1961 to the Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.
Hamilton, James, and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2012). “The Eﬀectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy
  Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44(S1),
  3–46.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, and Amir Yaron (1996). “Finite-Sample Properties of Some
  Alternative GMM Estimators,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14(3), 262–80.
Kim, Don H., and Kenneth J. Singleton (2012). “Term Structure Models and the Zero Bound: An
  Empirical Investigation of Japanese Yields,” Journal of Econometrics 170, 32–49.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). “The Eﬀects of Quantitative Eas-
   ing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity, Fall, 215–265.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). “The Aggregate Demand for Trea-
   sury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 120, 233–267.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001). “Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed
  funds futures market.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47(3), 523–544.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson (2010). “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-
   Return Trade-oﬀ,” Handbook of Financial Econometrics 1, 617–90.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Eric T. Swanson (2008). “Futures Prices as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of Mon-
   etary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 677–91.
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low
   Inﬂation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32(4), 936–966.
Sack, Brian, and Volker Wieland (2000). “Interest-Rate Smoothing and Optimal Monetary Policy:
   A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Economics and Business 52, 205–228.
Schaumburg, Ernst, and Andrea Tambalotti (2007). “An Investigation of the Gains from Commit-
   ment in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(2), 302–324.
Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha (1999). “Error Bands for Impulse Responses,” Econometrica
   67(5), 1113–1155.


                                               37
Swanson, Eric T. (2006). “Have Increases in Federal Reserve Transparency Improved Private Sector
  Interest Rate Forecasts?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38, 791–819.
Swanson, Eric T. (2011). “Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation
  Twist and Its Implications for QE2,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 151–188.
Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams (2013a). “Measuring the Eﬀect of the Zero Lower Bound
  on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working
  Paper 2012–02.
Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams (2013b). “Measuring the Eﬀect of the Zero Lower Bound on
  Yields and Exchange Rates in the U.K. and Germany,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
  Working Paper 2013–21.
Taylor, John (1993). “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Woodford, Michael (2011). “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 1–35.
Wright, Jonathan H. (2012). “What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the
  Zero Lower Bound?” Economic Journal 122, F447–F466.




                                              38
