                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             BANKS, LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT AND MONETARY POLICY

                                            Javier Bianchi
                                              Saki Bigio

                                        Working Paper 20490
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20490


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014




We thank the editor and several anonymous referees for helpful comments. We are also grateful
to Cristina Arellano, Andy Atkeson, Harjoat Bhamra, Luigi Bocola, John Cochrane, Dean
Corbae, Itamar Dreschler, Huberto Ennis, Xavier Freixas, Lars Hansen, Todd Keister, Nobu
Kiyotaki, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ricardo Lagos, Ellen McGrattan, Thomas Philippon, Chris
Phelan, Tomek Piskorski, Erwan Quintin, Ricardo Reis, Chris Sims, Harald Uhlig, Venky
Venkateswaran, Gianluca Violante, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Mike Woodford, Tao Zha, and
participants at various seminars and conferences for many useful comments. Jorge Mondragon
provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful for financial support by the Fondation
Banque de France, and the Smith Richardson Foundation. Bianchi acknowledges the support of
the National Science Foundation under Award 1324395. Bigio thanks the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Javier Bianchi and Saki Bigio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Banks, Liquidity Management and Monetary Policy
Javier Bianchi and Saki Bigio
NBER Working Paper No. 20490
September 2014, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E0,E4,E51,E52,G01,G1,G11,G18,G20,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a tractable model of banks' liquidity management and the credit channel of monetary
policy. Banks finance loans by issuing demand deposits. Loans are illiquid, and transfers of
deposits across banks must be settled with reserves in a frictional over the counter market. To
mitigate the risk of large withdrawals of deposits, banks hold a precautionary buffer of reserves
and government bonds. We show how monetary policy affects the banking system by altering the
tradeoff between profiting from lending and incurring greater liquidity risk. We consider two
applications of the theory, one involving the connection between the implementation of monetary
policy and pass-through to loan rates, and another considering a quantitative decomposition
behind the collapse in bank lending during the 2008 financial crisis. Our analysis underscores the
importance of liquidity frictions and the functioning of interbank markets for the conduct of
monetary policy.


Javier Bianchi
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
javieribianchi@gmail.com

Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction
The transmission and implementation of monetary policy operates through the banking system.
In practice, central banks set a target for the interbank market rate and implement that target
via open market operations and standing facilities. The ultimate goal is to affect the amount of
credit and thus overall economic activity. It is therefore of paramount importance to understand
how monetary policy affects the interbank market and, in turn, how the interbank market affects
the real economy.
    The leading macroeconomic framework used for monetary policy analysis, the New Keynesian
model, abstracts from the implementation and transmission of monetary policy through the
interbank market. In the New Monetarist framework, interactions between money and credit
are explicit, but the interbank market and its impact on credit have received little attention.1
Moreover, for the most part, the focus of analysis has been on a sole policy instrument, either
a nominal interest rate or the growth in the monetary base. During the 2008 financial crisis,
and more recently during the Covid-19 crisis, disruptions in interbank markets were met with a
broad set of policy responses designed to inject liquidity into the financial system and mitigate
contractions in credit. These events call for a model that can be used to analyze the effects of
frictions in the interbank market and the transmission of monetary policy through the banking
system.
    This paper provides a tractable general equilibrium model with a banking system that ar-
ticulates a notion of the credit channel of monetary policy. At the heart of the theory lies a
liquidity management problem that emerges from frictions in the interbank market. Liquidity
management concerns the trade-off between holding high-yield illiquid loans and holding low-
yield liquid assets. It is by influencing this trade-off that monetary policy affects the supply of
credit and gives rise to a credit channel. In support of this transmission channel, we document
a strong empirical relationship between measures of disturbances in the interbank market and
liquidity premia. We put this framework to work in two quantitative applications that showcase
the importance of examining the transmission of monetary policy through the banking system.
    In the theory, banks are competitive. Their portfolio is composed of deposits, loans, gov-
ernment bonds, and reserves. When a bank grants a loan and simultaneously issues deposits,
it gains intermediation profits. However, deposits circulate in an unpredictable way, and thus
banks face deposit withdrawal shocks. When a deposit is transferred out of a bank, another
bank absorbs that liability. As occurs in practice, that transfer is settled with reserves.2 If a
    1
     For a textbook treatment of the NK model, see Woodford (2004) or Galı́ (2015). New Monetarist models are
surveyed in Williamson and Wright (2010), and Lagos, Rocheteau, and Wright (2017).
   2
     The Federal Reserve Wire Network (Fedwire) is the real-time gross settlement (RTGS) funds transfer system
that electronically settles funds between any of the United States banks registered in the Federal Reserve System,
totalling approximately 10,000 banks. The amount of funds transferred daily is approximately USD 3.30 trillion.


                                                        1
deposit withdrawal is too large, the bank will end short of reserves. The bank can sell bonds
in exchange for reserves, but this may not be enough. At that point, the bank must incur in
expensive borrowing of reserves, either from the discount window at a penalty rate, or from the
interbank market.The interbank market is over the counter (OTC). The probability of finding a
counterpart in the interbank market depends on the scarcity of reserves: when few banks have
reserve surpluses, the interbank market rate is high—and hence a shortage is expensive. Thus,
the efficiency and tightness of the interbank market affect the degree of liquidity risk. By holding
a large buffer of liquid assets composed of bonds and reserves, a bank reduces its exposure to
liquidity risk, at the expense of intermediation profits. Tilting this trade-off, monetary policy
affects the supply of bank credit by affecting liquidity premia.
   From a methodological standpoint, a contribution of the paper is to integrate an OTC inter-
bank market into a dynamic general equilibrium model of the banking system. The interbank
market here is modeled after Afonso and Lagos (2015), who study the Federal funds market in a
repeated OTC setting and deliver predictions for the intraday volume of interbank market loans
and the distribution of interbank rates. That model takes the distribution of reserve balances as
a primitive. Here, the distribution of balances is endogenous, as it results from banks’ optimally
chosen portfolios, which are in turn influenced by monetary policy. We furthermore show how to
encode the effects of the liquidity frictions into a single object: a liquidity yield function. Despite
the non-linear nature of the liquidity yield function, the bank’s problem features aggregation,
and thus the economy features a representative bank. Being analytically tractable, this makes
the analysis transparent and amenable to various applications, both theoretical and quantitative.
    The analysis of the transmission of monetary policy through the banking system reveals
several insights. In contrast to models in which the demand for reserves is exogenously determined
by reserve requirements, monetary policy here affects the risk-return trade-off between holding
reserves and loans. The central bank alters this trade-off through open market operations, both
conventional and unconventional, and by setting the rate of interest on reserves and discount
window. We show that although the composition between bonds and reserves is indeterminate for
an individual bank, the composition matters at the macro level. This result has two implications.
First, it implies that the total holdings of liquid assets, and not only the holdings of reserves,
is the correct measure of the precautionary liquidity demand. Second, a policy that swaps
government bonds for reserves has aggregate effects by altering the interbank market tightness
and the liquidity premium. Moreover, by absorbing illiquid assets into the central bank’s balance
sheet, unconventional open market operations have even more potent effects. At the limit, when
the interbank bank market shuts down entirely, only unconventional open market operations
remain effective.
    A central insight of the paper is to show how the implementation of monetary policy matters
for macroeconomic outcomes. We first study how the pass-through from the interest on reserves

                                                  2
to credit is potentially non-monotone and depends critically on the interaction with capital
requirements. When the interest on reserves is low, deposits are in effect more costly and capital
requirements do not bind. As the interest on reserves increases, banks expand deposits, reserves,
and potentially credit. Once capital requirements bind, further increases in the interest on
reserves necessarily contract lending. The analysis reveals that reserves can be complements
to or substitutes for bank lending, depending on whether capital requirement constraints bind.
We then study how the interest on reserves and the size of the central bank’s balance sheet
are independent instruments, and we show how different configurations that achieve the same
interbank market rate target affect the level of credit and the pass-through. In particular,
configurations with a larger balance sheet induce a larger supply of credit, as well as a higher
pass-through from the interbank market rate to the loan rate.
    A final contribution is to employ the framework to quantitatively examine the credit crunch
during the US financial crisis. In particular, we examine the role of aggravated liquidity condi-
tions, as evidenced by the severe collapse in the interbank market and the increase in discount
window borrowing. We devise a procedure to reverse engineer the shocks that are required to
match the data, and then feed the model with alternative shock sequences to produce coun-
terfactuals. We find that disruptions to the matching efficiency of the interbank market and
to the volatility of funding played a substantial role around the time of the Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy. By 2010, loan demand becomes the dominant factor. Turning to the role of pol-
icy, we study the contribution of conventional and unconventional open market operations to
mitigating the credit crunch. We find that conventional operations had a negligible effect, while
unconventional ones had a sizable impact. In line with the theoretical insights highlighted above,
the quantitative analysis suggests that the move toward unconventional open market operations
during the crisis was critical for the attenuation of the credit crunch.


Related Literature.        Our paper relates to several branches of the literature in monetary
economics, banking, and macroeconomics. One branch studies monetary policy implementation
through banks’ reserve management in partial equilibrium. Seminal papers in this area are
Poole (1968) and Frost (1971), and many applications are found in Bindseil (2014). Building
on these works, several influential studies have analyzed recent proposed changes in monetary
policy frameworks (Ennis and Weinberg, 2007; Keister, Martin, and McAndrews, 2008; Keister
and McAndrews, 2009; Ennis and Keister, 2008; Martin et al., 2013; Bech and Keister, 2017).
There are two important differences in our approach. First, the interbank market here is OTC,
enabling us to study disruptions the interbank market that cannot be analyzed in a Walrasian
setup. Second, we embed the interbank market into a general equilibrium model. This feature
allows us to analyze credit, prices, and interest rates in a unified framework.
   The paper also builds on the banking literature. Important examples include Diamond (1984);

                                                3
Diamond and Dybvig (1983); Boyd and Prescott (1986); Allen and Gale (1998); Holmstrom and
Tirole (1998); and Gu et al. (2013). With some exceptions, for the most part, these theories have
evolved separately from macroeconomics. Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Curdia and Woodford
(2009) incorporate a banking sector into quantitative monetary models. Following these models, a
growing literature now studies how shocks to bank equity or leverage constraints disrupt financial
intermediation.3 A distinct approach is taken by Corbae and D’Erasmo (2013, 2018), who provide
a model with heterogenous banks and analyze the role of bank concentration and how it interacts
with capital requirements. The present paper emphasizes interbank market frictions and the
transmission of monetary policy through the liquidity premium.
    The OTC nature of the interbank market builds on monetary search theory. Seminal con-
tributions in this literature are Kiyotaki and Wright (1989) and Lagos and Wright (2005). The
interbank market here is a version of the OTC model developed by Afonso and Lagos (2015).4
Related studies also include Freeman (1996) and Smith (2002), who study environments where
inside money is used as a medium of exchange, as a result of spatial frictions. Williamson (2012)
studies an environment in which assets of different maturity have different properties as medi-
ums of exchange. Relative to this earlier work, we have little to say about the foundations that
bring about a banking architecture. Here, the focus is on the effects of trading frictions in the
interbank market and the transmission of monetary policy through the credit channel.
   Finally, following the framework developed in this paper, several recent studies have analyzed
the link between liquidity management and monetary policy, focusing on the effects on asset prices
(Piazzesi and Schneider, 2018), collateral values (De Fiore, Hoerova, and Uhlig 2018), shadow
banking (Chen, Ren, and Zha 2017), nominal rigidities (Arce, Nuño, Thaler, and Thomas 2019;
Piazzesi, Rogers, and Schneider 2019), insurance and productive efficiency (Bigio and Sannikov,
2019), and exchange rates (Bianchi, Bigio, and Engel 2019).


Outline. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model, and Section 3
provides theoretical results. Section 4 presents evidence on the correlation between interbank-
market spreads and the liquidity premium. Section 5 presents the calibration of the model and
the applications. Section 6 concludes. All proofs are in the appendix.
   3
      Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Prestipino (2016) present benchmark models and
references to many other papers in the literature. This literature also builds to a large extent on a broader
literature on financial frictions in firms and how they affect macroeconomic fluctuations. Notable examples include
Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)—and the literature’s related microfoundations in
Townsend (1979) and Williamson (1987).
    4
      See Weill (2020) for a survey of the recent OTC literature and Rocheteau and Nosal (2017) for a textbook
on monetary search theory.




                                                        4
2       The Model
We present a dynamic general equilibrium model of the banking system featuring an OTC inter-
bank market and analyze the transmission of monetary policy. The presentation of the model
begins with the liquidity management problem of an individual bank, followed by the descrip-
tion of the interbank market. We then introduce the non-financial block of the model, describing
households and firms, and analyze the policies of the central bank, which we refer to as the Fed.
After characterizing the problems of all agents, we define the general equilibrium.


2.1     Banks: Preferences and Budgets
Preferences. There is a unit-mass continuum of heterogeneous banks indexed by j and a final
consumption good. Banks’ preferences over a stochastic stream of dividend payments {cjt } are
given by
                                         X
                                      E0     β t u(cjt ),                                 (1)
                                                   t≥0

                                                                   c1−γ −1
where β < 1 is the time discount factor, and u (c) ≡                 1−γ
                                                                             is the utility function over the
consumption good with γ ≥ 0.5


Timing. Time is discrete, indexed by t, and of infinite horizon. Each period is divided into
two stages: a lending (l) and a balancing (b) stage. At the lending stage, banks make portfolio
decisions. At the balancing stage, banks experience random idiosyncratic withdrawals of deposits.
A deposit withdrawn from one bank is transferred to another bank. That transaction must be
settled with reserves. If banks lack reserves to settle that transaction, they can sell government
bonds, borrow reserves from other banks, or borrow reserves at a penalty rate from the Fed.
We describe next the two stages—a summary of the timeline of events is found in Figure 8 in
Appendix B.


Lending stage. Banks enter the lending stage with a portfolio of assets/liabilities and col-
lect/make associated interest payments. Among assets, banks hold loans, bt , and liquid assets
in the form of reserves, mt , or government bonds, gt . On the liability side, banks issue demand
deposits, dt , discount window loans, wt , and net interbank loans, ft (if the bank has borrowed
funds, ft is positive, and vice versa). All assets are nominal (denominated in units of reserves).6
Reserves are the numeraire and Pt is the price level.
    5
      Concave preferences generate slow-moving bank equity, as observed in practice. A rationale for endowing
banks with preferences is undiversified ownership or frictions that limit equity funding.
   6
     Absent aggregate shocks, having assets denominated in units of reserves or denominated in units of consump-
tion are equivalent.



                                                         5
    During the lending stage, banks choose real dividends, ct , and a portfolio. The portfolio
is a choice {b̃jt+1 , m̃jt+1 , g̃t+1
                                 j
                                     , d˜jt+1 }, which corresponds to holdings of loans, reserves, government
bonds, and deposits, respectively. We use x̃t+1 to denote a portfolio variable chosen in the
lending stage and xt+1 to denote the end-of-period portfolio variable in the balancing stage (and
the beginning-of-period portfolio variable for t+1). Aggregate holdings are denoted in uppercase
                                        
letters, for example, Bt+1 ≡ j bjt+1 dj. The bank’s budget constraint in the lending stage is


  Pt cjt + b̃jt+1 + m̃jt+1 − d˜jt+1 + g̃t+1
                                        j
                                            =
                                                                              f     j
          (1 + ibt )bjt + (1 + im   j         g j           d j                         w    j        j
                                t )mt + (1 + it )gt − (1 + it )dt − (1 + it )ft − (1 + it ) wt − Pt Tt , (2)


where ibt , igt and idt , denote the nominal returns on loans, government bonds, and deposits,
respectively. The policy rates im          w
                                    t and it are interest on reserves and discount window loans
set by the Fed. These rates must satisfy iw        m
                                              t ≥ it ; otherwise, there is a pure arbitrage to the
                                                                   f
detriment of the Fed. Outstanding interbank market loans earn it , which we label the fed funds
rate. The fed funds rate is the average rate at which banks borrow in the interbank market, a
market described below. All rates indexed with t are accrued between period t − 1 and t. The
term Ttj are taxes proportional to bank equity.
   Banks are subject to a capital requirement constraint
                                                                              
                                    d˜jt+1 ≤ κ b̃jt+1 + g̃t+1
                                                          j
                                                              + m̃jt+1 − d˜jt+1 .                        (3)

The upper bound κ on leverage can be motivated by regulation or agency frictions.
   The problem of the bank in the lending stage is to choose the portfolio and dividend payments,
subject to the budget constraint (2) and the capital requirement (3).


Balancing stage. Banks enter the balancing stage with {b̃jt+1 , m̃jt+1 , g̃t+1
                                                                           j
                                                                               , d˜jt+1 }. At the start of
the balancing stage, banks experience an idiosyncratic withdrawal shock ωtj . The shock induces
a random inflow/withdrawal of deposits ωtj d˜jt+1 . Given this shock, the end-of-balancing-stage
deposits, djt+1 , are
                                     djt+1 = d˜jt+1 (1 + ωtj ).                                       (4)

When ωtj is positive, the bank receives (net) deposits from other banks. When ω is negative, the
bank loses deposits. The ω shock has a cumulative distribution Φ (·) common to all banks. The
                                                 ∞
support of Φ is [ωmin , ∞), where ωmin ≥ −1 and ωmin ωt Φt (ω) = 0, ∀t. This distribution implies
that deposits are reshuffled but preserved within banks.
   The randomness of ω captures the unpredictability and complexity of the payment system.
The circulation of deposits is a fundamental feature of the payments system, because it enables
banks to facilitate transactions between third parties: When a bank issues a loan, a borrower is

                                                         6
credited with deposits. As the borrower makes payments to third parties, deposits are transferred
to other banks. The outflow of a deposit from one bank is an inflow to another. Because the
receptor bank absorbs a liability, an asset also must be transferred to settle the transaction. As
it occurs in practice, reserve balances at the Fed are the settlement instrument.7 We adopt the
convention that the bank that issues deposits pays for the interest on those deposits, and thus
a transfer of one unit of deposits is settled with 1 + idt+1 / 1 + im
                                                                      
                                                                    t+1 reserves. This guarantees
that the bank that receives the deposit is compensated for the interest on the absorbed deposits.
       By the end of the balancing stage, banks must maintain a minimum reserve balance,

                                                mjt+1 ≥ ρdjt+1 ,   ρ ∈ [0, 1]                                    (5)

If a bank receives a large withdrawal, it must raise reserves to be able to satisfy (5).8 While loans
are assumed to be illiquid, banks can exchange government bonds for reserves in a Walrasian
market at the beginning of the balancing stage.9 After trade takes place in that market, if
banks are still in deficit, they borrow reserves in an OTC interbank market or from the discount
window.10 By the opening of the interbank market, the surplus (or deficit) of reserves is:

                              1 + idt+1
                                               
                                           j ˜j
            sjt       j
                  ≡ m̃t+1 +               ωt dt+1   −       ρd˜jt+1 (1 + ωtj )             j
                                                                                      + (g̃t+1       j
                                                                                                − gt+1  )        (6)
                              1 + imt+1                     |       {z        }         |       {z      }
                   |            {z                }   required reserves after ω shock  sales of gov. bonds
                         reserve balance after ω shock


The excess balance of reserves at the Fed, (6), is determined by the portfolio chosen in the lending
stage, the withdrawal shock ωtj , and the trading of government bonds . The first term is the
end-of period reserve position brought from the lending stage plus/minus the reserves transferred
after the withdrawal. The second term is the required reserves. The third term is the change in
reserves accounted for by the trade in government bonds.11 The reserves with which the bank
ends the period are given by the reserves left after the withdrawal shocks, the sales of government
   7
     We do not explicitly model why reserves are used as the settlement instrument . For possible microfoundations,
we refer the reader to Cavalcanti, Erosa, and Temzelides (1999) or Lester, Postlewaite, and Wright (2012).
   8
     A requirement that reserves have to be positive is non-essential. What matters is that there is a lower bound.
An alternative regulation, a liquidity coverage ratio, imposes a minimum amount of liquid assets relative to illiquid
assets.
   9
     An earlier version of the paper considered a framework with a single liquid asset. That framework is nested
in the current one if we set the supply of government bonds to zero, or if we assume that government bonds
can also be used for settlements and pay the same return as reserves. In the latter, a conventional open market
operation would be irrelevant as in Wallace (1981).
  10
     The lack of a liquid market for loans during the balancing stage can be explained by informational frictions.
Reserves are instead special assets issued by the central bank and are fully liquid. The market for government
bonds is assumed to be Walrasian because it is a market for a homogeneous asset and easy to enforce. The
OTC nature of the interbank market is the empirically relevant assumption, as advocated by Ashcraft and Duffie
(2007), and in line with the bilateral and unsecured nature of the transaction. We take these features as given
and do not provide explicit microfoundations.
  11
     Implicit in the accounting is a result that shows that the price of government bonds must equal unity in the
balancing stage in equilibrium.


                                                             7
bonds, and the loans obtained in the interbank market and from the discount window.

                                               1 + idt+1
                                                          
                  mjt+1   =   m̃jt+1   +                       ωtj d˜jt+1 + (g̃t+1
                                                                               j      j
                                                                                   − gt+1      j
                                                                                          ) + ft+1    j
                                                                                                   + wt+1 .    (7)
                                               1 + im
                                                    t+1


The rate at which banks trade in the interbank market will be key to determine banks’ portfolios
in the lending stage. Below, we analyze how the rate and the volume in the interbank market
are determined.


Interbank market. Withdrawal shocks generate a distribution of reserve surpluses and deficits
across banks. When the interbank market opens, banks with a surplus want to lend, and banks
with deficit want to borrow. Because of the matching frictions, banks on either side of the market
may be unable to lend/borrow all of their balances. If a bank in deficit cannot obtain enough
funds in the interbank market, it must borrow the remainder from the discount window. If a
bank in surplus is unable to lend all of its surplus, it deposits the balance at the Fed and earns
the interest on reserves.12 In equilibrium, because interbank rates lie between the interest rates
on reserves and discount loans, banks will seek to trade in the interbank market before trading
with the Fed. All loans are repaid by the next lending stage.
    The interbank market is an OTC search market. We follow closely the basic formulation in
Afonso and Lagos (2015) but make some departures that render analytic solutions and allows us
to embed this friction into the dynamic model. A complete description of the interbank market
is intensive in notation, so here we provide only a brief description. Details can be found in the
companion paper (Bianchi and Bigio, 2017).
    The interbank market operates sequentially. At the beginning of the trading session, each
bank gives an order to a continuum of traders. If sjt > 0 (sjt < 0), the bank gives an order to
lend (borrow). Each trader must close an infinitesimal position, as in Atkeson, Eisfeldt, and
Weill (2015). This “large family” assumption simplifies the solution of the bargaining problem
by making the marginal value of the interbank loan depend only on the sign of the balance, and
not on the scale. Absent this assumption, it becomes necessary to keep track of the identity of
matching banks in their bargaining problems. The resulting combinatorial problem of determin-
ing the distribution of matches is intractable. Our approach, which combines Afonso and Lagos
(2015) and Atkeson et al. (2015) allows us to obtain analytic expressions for all of the objects.
   There are N trading rounds. The probability of a match at a given round depends on the
aggregate amount of surplus and deficit positions that remain open at each round. We consider
a Leontief matching function with efficiency parameter λ. When traders meet, they bargain over
  12
    Notice that we assume that the interest on required reserves is equal to the interest on excess reserves. It is
possible, however, to allow for different rates. For the applications, we will set ρ = 0, and as a result, only the
interest on excess reserves will be the relevant one.



                                                                    8
the rate and split the surplus according to Nash bargaining. Key for the determination of the
interbank market rate at any given round, are the rates and probabilities of finding a match
in future rounds. Let us define the interbank market tightness at the opening of the interbank
market as
                                              θt ≡ St− /St+
               1                                1
where St+ ≡ 0 max sjt , 0 dj and St− ≡ − 0 min sjt , 0 dj denote the aggregate surplus and
                                                        

deficit, respectively.13 The following proposition characterizes the split between interbank market
and discount window loans, {f j , wj }, as a function of θ as we take the limit of N rounds to infinity
(while keeping the overall number of matches at a given balancing stage constant):

Proposition 1. Given θ, the amount of interbank market loans and discount window loans for
a bank of surplus sjt is
                                         
                                         −sj · (Ψ− (θ), 1 − Ψ− (θ))         for sjt < 0
                          j      j          t     t           t
                        (ft+1 , wt+1 ) =                                                   ,                    (8)
                                            j
                                         −s · (Ψ+ (θ), 0)
                                               t       t                     for sjt ≥ 0

                                                   f
and the average interbank market rate is it (θ) = im                 w    m
                                                   t + (1 − φt (θ))(it − it ). Analytic expressions
              −
for {Ψ+
      t (θ), Ψt (θ), φt (θ)} are found in Appendix A.


    A bank short of reserves (sjt < 0) patches a fraction Ψ−t of its deficit with interbank loans and
                      −
the remaining 1 − Ψt with a discount window loan from the Fed. Similarly, a bank with surplus
lends a fraction Ψ+                                                                          +
                    t in the interbank market and keeps the remaining balance, 1 − Ψt , at the
Fed. These fractions are endogenous objects that depend on market tightness. If many banks
are in deficit (surplus), the probability that a deficit bank finds a match is low (high). Market
                                                              −       −
clearing in the interbank market requires Ψ+           +
                                               t (θt )St = −Ψt (θt )St . We say that the interbank
market is active if Ψ+        +
                      t (θt )St > 0 and inactive otherwise.
                                                                             f
    Proposition 1 also characterizes the mean interbank market, it (θ), as a function of the market
tightness. The fed funds rate is a weighted average of the corridor rates im           w
                                                                               t and it . The weight,
given by φt (θ), is an endogenous bargaining power, as in Afonso and Lagos (2015). If many
banks are in deficit, the fed funds rate is closer to iw , because this lowers the outside option and
the bargaining power of banks in deficit. Conversely, the fed funds rate is closer to im if more
banks are in surplus.14
  13
     Notice that market tightness vary within the balancing stage, as trading rounds are carried out.
  14
     The interbank market rate has actually traded below the interest on reserves for a large part of the post-
crisis period. This suggests a violation of arbitrage: a depository institution, in principle, could borrow in the
interbank market and lend to the Fed at a higher rate. An explanation for this pattern is related to the presence of
non-depositosry institutions and costs from leverage and deposit insurance premiums (Williamson, 2019; Martin
et al., 2013; Armenter and Lester, 2017). To keep the model parsimonious, we abstract from these issues for now,
but we address this in Section 5.3 when we turn to calibrate the model.



                                                           9
    As shown in Appendix A, the functional forms for φ(θt ) and {Ψ− (θt ), Ψ+ (θt )}, which deter-
mine the volume and the fed funds rate, depend on two structural parameters: the matching
efficiency λ and the bargaining power, η. In particular, for given θ, a higher efficiency leads to
higher fractions of matches {Ψ− , Ψ+ } , and a higher η increases the effective bargaining power of
banks in deficit, lowering the fed funds rate.
   A single function, which we call liquidity yield function, encodes all the activity in the inter-
bank market and simplifies the recursive bank problem.

Definition 1. The liquidity yield function is
                           (
                               χ+
                                t s     if s ≥ 0,
               χt (s) =                                                                                                        (9)
                               χ−
                                t s     if s < 0,
                                                                                                                      
                                f                                                                         f
                  χ−       Ψ−           im            Ψ−       (iw       im            χ+       Ψ+                im
                                                           
          where    t   =    t (it   −    t )   + 1−    t         t   −    t ),   and    t   =    t       it   −    t       .

    Here, χt represents the yield earned on a reserve surplus (when s ≥ 0) and paid on a reserve
deficit (when s < 0). The kink on χ generates a positive wedge between the marginal cost of
reserve deficits and the marginal benefit of surpluses. Notice that a bank that borrows from the
interbank market or from the discount window can hold reserves at the Fed and earn an interest.
As a result, the net cost of borrowing will be given by the difference between the borrowing rate
and the interest on reserves, as reflected in the formula for χ− . Leveraging on Proposition 1, the
liquidity yield function admits a closed-form solution, which allows us to conveniently embed it
in the dynamic recursive problem of the bank.
    It is useful to define the following real returns. We let Rtx ≡ 1 + ixt+1 / (1 + πt+1 ) be the
                                                                               

gross returns on asset x ∈ {w, m, g, b, d} and let 1 + πt+1 ≡ Pt+1 /Pt be the gross inflation
rate. We also define the liquidity cost function in real terms as a function of the portfolio as
χ̄t+1 (m̃, g, ˜ ω) ≡ χt+1 (st )/ (1 + πt+1 ).
           ˜ d,


2.2    Non-Financial Sector and General Equilibrium
The non-financial block is presented in detail in Appendix C. This block is composed of house-
holds that supply labor and save in deposits, currency, and government bonds. Firms produce
the final consumption good using labor and are subject to a working capital constraints. This
block delivers endogenous demand schedules for working capital loans, and households’ holdings
of deposits, government bonds, and currency. These household schedules emerge from asset-
in-advance constraints, as in Lucas and Stokey (1983). We purposefully work with quasi-linear
preferences, as in Lagos and Wright (2005), so that these schedules are not forward-looking.
The schedules asset-demand system for the non-financial block are derived in Appendix and
summarized by the proposition below:

                                                       10
Proposition 2. Given the non-financial sector block presented in Appendix C, we have that:(i)
                         Bf       b   b
                                           b                         y   b
                                                                               y
The firm loan demand is Pt+1t
                              = Θ t R t+1      and output is y t+1 = Θ t Rt+1      ; (ii) Households
deposits and government bond holdings are given by
                                        x
                                      x            x
                             
                              Θ Rt+1          if Rt+1 ≤ 1/β h ,
                      h
                             
                     Xt+1    
                                ¯ t , ∞)
                            = [X                   x
                                               if Rt+1 = 1/β h for x ∈ {d, g} ,
                       Pt    
                             
                             ∞
                             
                                               otherwise.

(iii) Households currency demand is
                                                  x
                                
                                 Θm
                                   t (1 + πt+1 )−1       if (1 + πt+1 )−1 ≤ 1/β h ,
                     h
                                
                    Mt+1        
                            =     [M̄t , ∞)              if (1 + πt+1 )−1 = 1/β h ,
                      Pt        
                                
                                ∞
                                
                                                         otherwise.

    The term β h is the household’s discount factor. The household demand schedules are iso-
elastic up to some the point where quantities reach scale parameters, X̄t for x ∈ {m, d, g} ,
which correspond to asset-satiation points. The parameters x are elasticity coefficients, and Θxt
scale coefficients, which depend on structural parameters regarding technology and households’
preferences (see Table 4 in Appendix C for the conversion from the structural to the reduced
form parameters).
    A convenient property of the model is that once we solve for the equilibrium real rates,
equating the asset supply and demand scheduled derived from banks and the reduced form
schedules obtained from non-financial sector, we can obtain the equilibrium output, employment,
and consumption of different goods. It is therefore by affecting the lending rate that monetary
policy affects output and employment in the model. For the rest of the paper, we do not make
further references to non-financial block and work directly with the iso-elastic portion of these
schedules—there always exists a β h that guarantees that this is the case.


2.3    Monetary and Fiscal Authority
The Fed’s policy tools are the discount window rate, the interest on reserves and open market
operations (conventional and unconventional). M̃ F ed and M F ed denote the money supply issued
by the Fed during the lending and balancing stages, respectively. On the asset side, the Fed holds
discount window loans, W F ed , private loans, B F ed , and government bonds, GF ed . Government
bonds are issued by the fiscal authority, which we denote by GF A . The supply of Fed liabilities
can be held as currency by households or as bank reserves—M F ed = M + M h .
   Here, we present the consolidated government budget constraint. Appendix D.1 presents the


                                                  11
corresponding constraints of the Fed and the fiscal authority. Consolidating the revenues/expenses
of the Fed and the fiscal authority, we have that

  (1 + im        h    F ed   FA     F ed    F ed
                                         
        t )Mt + Mt + Bt+1 − Gt+1 − Gt+1 + Wt+1 =
                 F ed
                      + (1 + ibt )BtF ed − (1 + igt ) GFt A − GFt ed + (1 + iw    F ed
                                                                                       + Pt (Tt + Tth ). (10)
                                                                    
                Mt+1                                                         t )Wt


The equation captures that the consolidated government generates operating profits/losses by
paying interest on government bonds (net of Fed holdings), reserves (but not on currency) and
collecting interest on discount window loans and private sector loans. Given these net revenues
and the evolution of its balance sheet, the government sets taxes on households and banks to
balance the budget constraint.
       We adopt the following protocol for taxes on banks:

                                      Mt     g        Gt             BtF ed          m Wt
                  Tt =   (im
                           t   − πt )    + (it − πt )       b
                                                         − it − π t          − (iw
                                                                                 t − it )    .                  (11)
                                      Pt              Pt               Pt                 Pt

That is, the Fed taxes banks to finance the real interest on their holdings of reserves and govern-
ment bonds and rebates the real interest income on its loans holdings and its operating revenues
from discount window. With this tax protocol, as we will see, the law of motion for aggregate
bank equity will depend exclusively on total loans and deposits, and their rates of return, allow-
ing us to isolate the credit channel. To balance the budget, taxes on households Tth are set as a
residual, in the spirit of passive fiscal policy.


2.4       Competitive Equilibrium
We adopt the convention of denoting aggregate bank variables by their corresponding capital
                                                              
letter—e.g. the aggregate holdings of loans is denoted by Bt = bjt dj. The competitive equilib-
rium is defined as follows:15

Definition 2. Given a distribution {dj0 , mj0 , bj0 , g0j , f0j , w0j } and a deterministic sequence of gov-
                                                                               w g
ernment policies GFt ed , GFt A , BtF ed , MtF ed , WtF ed , Tt , Tth , im
                   
                                                                         t , it , it t≥0 , a competitive equilib-
                                                           Dt+1 , Bt+1 , Wt+1 , Mt+1 , Gt+1 , Goht+1 , Dt+1
                                                                                                         h    h
                                                         
rium is a deterministic path for aggregates n                                                               Mt+1  , a
stochastic sequence of bank policies g̃t+1 , m̃t+1 , d˜t+1 , bt+1 , ct , ft+1 , wt+1 , mt+1
                                                j      j      j       j       j    j    j     j
                                                                                                      , a determinis-
                               n              o                                                   t≥0
                                            f
tic sequence of interest rates ibt , idt , it      , a deterministic sequence for the price level {Pt }, and
                                               t≥0
                                                          −
a deterministic sequence of matching probabilities {Ψ+
                                                     t , Ψt }, such that
  15
     As noted earlier, we do not make reference to the household sector only indirectly through the demand
for loans and supply of deposits. Appendix C covers the equilibrium conditions that follow from firms’ and
households’ problems, which in equilibrium give rise to the loan demand and deposit supply schedules. The
mathematical representation of the market clearing conditions is presented in full detail in Appendix B, together
with a summary of the equilibrium conditions of the model.

                                                         12
                                                                    j      j
    (i) bank policies solve the banks’ optimization problems, and {ft+1 , wt+1 }t≥0 are given by
        Proposition 1;

 (ii) the government’s budget constraint (10) is satisfied and the tax on banks follow (11);

(iii) households and firms are on their supply/demand schedules, as given by Proposition 2;

(iv) markets for deposits, loans and government assets (M and G) clear ∀t ≥ 0;
                                         −                              f
 (v) the matching probabilities Ψ+
                                
                                    t , Ψt t≥0 and the fed funds rate it are consistent with the
     surplus and deficit masses St− and St+ , as given by Proposition 1.

    We refer to a competitive equilibrium where the value of all nominal assets and the price level
Pt grow at a constant rate as a stationary equilibrium. A steady-state equilibrium is a stationary
competitive equilibrium in which the growth rate is zero.


3      Theoretical Analysis
Next, we proceed with the analysis. We first show that the bank’s portfolio problem aggregates
and can be reduced to two choices: leverage and liquidity. We then provide an aggregation result
and study the monetary-policy transmission.


3.1     Recursive Bank Problems
Denote by Vtl and Vtb the bank value functions during the lending and balancing stages, respec-
tively. To keep track of aggregate states, which follow a deterministic path, we index the policy
and value functions by t. To ease notation, we omit the individual superscript j and suppress
the time subscripts inside the Bellman equations.
    At the beginning of each lending stage, the individual states are {g, b, m, d, f, w}. Choices
                                                                                ˜ These portfolio
in the lending stage are consumption, c, and portfolio variables {b̃, g̃, m̃, d}.
variables together with the idiosyncratic shock, ω become the initial states in the balancing stage.
The continuation value is the expected value of the balancing stage Vtb under the probability
distribution of ω. We have the following bank problem in the lending stage

Problem 1 (Lending-Stage Bank Problem).
                                                                  h                     i
         Vtl (g, b, m, d, f, w) =        max                                        ˜ ω)
                                                         u (c) + E Vtb (g̃, b̃, m̃, d,         (12)
                                    {c,b̃,d,˜ m̃,g̃}≥0
                               subject to budget constraint (2) and capital requirement (3).


                                                                13
       In turn, the balancing-stage problem is

Problem 2 (Balancing Stage Bank Problem).

                    ˜ ω) = max βV l (g 0 , b0 , m0 , d0 , f 0 , w0 )
   Vtb (g̃, b̃, m̃, d,                                                                                         (13)
                            0    t
                             g ≥0


                    b0 = b̃                                                              (Evolution of Loans)
                    d0 = d˜ + ω d˜                                                     (Evolution of Deposits)
                                  1 + idt+1
                                           
                   m0 = m̃ +                   ω d˜ + f 0 + w0 + g̃ − g 0              (Evolution of Reserves)
                                  1 + imt+1
                                  1 + idt+1
                                           
                     s = m̃ +                  ω d˜ − (1 + ω) ρd˜ + (g̃ − g 0 )              (Reserve surplus)
                                  1 + imt+1
                         
                         −s(Ψ− , 1 − Ψ− )           for s < 0
                0   0              t         t
              (f , w ) =                                                      (Interbank Market Transactions)
                         −s(Ψ+ , 0)                 for s ≥ 0.
                                        t


In Problem 2, the bank chooses its purchase (sales) of government bonds after the withdrawal
shock, which in turn induces the balance position at the interbank market, s. In equilibrium,
we can show that as long as the supply of government bonds held by banks in deficit does not
exceed the surplus of reserves by banks in surplus, banks in deficit will sell their entire holdings
of government bonds to banks in surplus. When this is the case, an interbank market remains
active, as S + > 0 and S − > 0. Because the government bond market is Walrasian, this implies
that in equilibrium Rg = Rm + χ+ . If the return on government bonds were higher, banks in
surplus would bid up the price until the return falls. If the return on government bonds were
lower, banks would rather preserve their reserves and lend it in the interbank market rather than
purchase government bonds. For the rest of the paper, we consider only this case, but develop
results in greater generality in the appendix.16

       Toward a characterization, let us define a bank’s real equity as

                                                   g              f
       (1 + im            b           d                                         w
                                       
             t )mt + 1 + it bt − 1 + it dt + (1 + it ) gt − (1 + it )ft − (1 + it ) wt
  et ≡                                                                                 (1 − τt ), (14)
                                          Pt

where τ is a linear tax on bank equity tax rate (i.e., T j = τ · ejt ). Next, we present a characteri-
zation of the bank’s problem.

Proposition 3 (Homogeneity and Portfolio Separation). The bank’s problem has the following
features:
  16
    In Appendix E , we also examine the case in which the initial amount of reserve surplus is not enough to
purchase the bonds of banks in deficit. In that case, case banks in deficit do not sell their entire stock of bonds.
Specific conditions for either case in terms of initial asset holdings are presented in the appendix.

                                                                 14
  (i) Problems 1 and 2 can be, combined into a single Bellman equation with equity as the
      only individual state variable, and the holdings of government bonds and reserves can be
      consolidated into a single liquid asset ã ≡ m̃ + g̃,

                 Vt (e) =           max               u(c) + βE [Vt+1 (e0 )] , subject to                       (15)
                             {c,ã,b̃,d˜}≥0,d∈[0,κ]
                                            ˜

                           ã   b̃    d˜
                              +     −    +c=e
                           P    Pt P t
                           "t                                                               !#
                                 b̃     m ã         d˜                         ã d˜
                    e0        b
                         = Rt+1     + Rt+1       d
                                              − Rt+1    + χ̄t+1                   , ,ω           (1 − τt+1 ).   (16)
                                Pt         Pt        Pt                         Pt Pt


 (ii) The optimal portfolio in (15) is given by the solution to
                                        n                                                      1
                                                                                        1−γ o 1−γ
           ᾿Ω ≡ (1 − τt ) max               b         m         d   ¯              ¯
                                         E Rt+1 b̄ + Rt+1 ā − Rt+1 d + χ̄t+1 (ā, d, ω)           ,            (17)
                           {b̄,ā,d¯}≥0
             b̄ + ā − d¯ = 1, and d¯ ≤ κ.


(iii) The optimal bank dividend–equity ratio c̄ ≡ c/e is

                            1                                      1 h                            γ1 iγ
       c̄t =                                      where vt =           1 + β(1 − γ)1−γ Ω1−γ
                                                                                        t   vt+1         , (18)
               1 + [β(1 − γ)vt+1 Ωt 1−γ ]1/γ                      1−γ

     and the value of (15) is Vt (e) = vt (e)1−γ − 1/(1 − β)(1 − γ).

(iv) Policy functions x̃ ∈ {b̃, ã, d}˜ from (15) can be recovered from the optimal portfolio weights
     x̃ ∈ b̄, ā, d¯ obtained in (17) and consumption decisions {c̄} obtained in (18) via the
           

     relationship x̃t+1 (et ) = x̄t (1 − c̄t )Pt et . The individual holdings {m̃t+1 , g̃t+1 } satisfy m̃t+1 +
     g̃t+1 = ãt+1 .

    There are four elements in Proposition 3. Item (i) shows that we can synthesize the value
functions in (12) and (13) into a single Bellman equation with real equity as a single state. The
liquidity yield function, χ, shows in this Bellman equation summarizing parsimoniously all the
trades in the interbank market. Equation (15) is, in effect, a portfolio savings problem with a
leverage constraint: the bank starts with equity, e, which is distributed between dividends or
portfolio investments. Investments can be allocated into loans, b̃, and liquid assets, ã—the sum of
reserves and government bonds is determined, but not the individual composition. The bank can
                          ˜ The continuation value of the bank depends on next period equity e0 ,
lever by issuing deposits d.
which in turn depends on the portfolio return. The proposition establishes that although there is
a distribution of bank equity, all banks are replicas of a representative bank: item (ii) indicates
that banks choose the same portfolio weights, which solves an auxiliary problem; item (iii) shows

                                                            15
that all banks feature the same dividend rate; item (iv) shows that banks’ portfolio investments
are linear in equity.
    We highlight two key takeaways. First, the model aggregates. While aggregation is known
to hold under linear budget constraints and homothetic preferences, a contribution here is to
show that aggregation also holds despite a kink in the return function. This showcases how to
integrate search frictions into a standard dynamic model with a representative agent.
   As shown in Appendix D.2, this aggregation result allows us to express the real aggregate
equity law of motion as

                             b                        d
                                 − 1 b̄t + b̄Ft ed − Rt+1
                                                            
                 Et+1 = 1 + Rt+1                          − 1 d̄t Et (1 − c¯t ),                 (19)

where b̄Ft ed ≡ Bt+1
                 F ed
                      / (Pt · (1 − c¯t )Et ) . This equation says that next-period aggregate equity is
given by the current aggregate equity net of dividend payments times the aggregate return. The
aggregate return simply depends on the portfolio weights on loans and deposits chosen by the
representative bank and their respective returns. Implicit in this result is that (i) the returns on
interbank market loans cancel out on aggregate; (ii) operating Fed profits that originate from
the discount window or holding loans, and interest on government bonds are compensated by
taxes.
   The second takeaway from Proposition 3 is that at the individual level, the composition
between reserves and government bonds is indeterminate. Key to this result is that there is a
Walrasian market between reserves and government bonds that allows banks to freely reverse
any portfolio mix between reserves and government bonds once they face a withdrawal shock.
This is different for loans, which stay with the bank, and therefore the portfolio mix matters.
    Despite the fact that banks are individually indifferent regarding the composition of their
liquid assets, the composition of liquid assets matters at the aggregate level because it affects
the interbank market tightness θt . To obtain the equilibrium composition between reserves and
government bonds, we obtain ḡ as the residual of the market clearing condition,

                               Pt ḡt (1 − c̄t )Et = GFt+1
                                                         A
                                                           − GFt+1
                                                                 ed
                                                                    − Ght+1 .                    (20)

The weight on reserves m̄ is obtained via m̄ = ā − ḡ. A corollary of this result is that the cutoff
for the withdrawal shock that determines whether banks are in deficit or surplus depends on
their ratio of total liquid assets to deposits:

                               ω ∗ ≡ − ā/d¯ − ρ / Rt+1
                                                    d     m
                                                               
                                                        /Rt+1 −ρ .                               (21)

With this expression, we can solve for market tightness and all the relevant objects in the
interbank-market. As shown in Proposition E.6 given in Appendix E, the interbank market

                                                    16
tightness can be expressed as
                                ω∗      d 
                                           Rt+1
                                                                 
                                    ā +     m    ω ¯ − ρd(1
                                                    d     ¯ + ω) f (ω) dω
                               −1          R
                       θt =           d t+1
                                                                             .                  (22)
                             1          Rt+1     ¯      ¯
                             ω∗
                                 ā +   R m    ω d −  ρd(1 + ω)  f (ω) dω − ḡ
                                          t+1



Hence, for fixed liquid asset holdings ā, tightness increases with a greater portion of ḡ. This
result is an important lesson. It tells us that whereas reserves and government bonds are perfect
substitutes at the individual bank level, at a macroeconomic level, the composition of liquid
assets matters.


Discussion on aggregation property. Thanks to this aggregation property, the model pro-
vides a sharp characterization of the bank liquidity management. This renders a transparent
analysis of the transmission of monetary policy. In addition, a notable advantage is that the
model is straightforward to compute, as aggregate equity is the single state, and this makes the
model amenable to different extensions. The model, however, is not designed to address three
important features that emerge in quantitative models with an endogenous size distribution, as
in notable work by Corbae and D’Erasmo (2018). First, the model is not suited to analyze
heterogeneous responses to monetary policy, a feature documented in Kashyap and Stein (2000).
Second, the model is not suitable to study the effects of size-dependent policies such as capital
requirements or changes in policies that give rise to changes in concentration. Third, the model
does not speak to market power and changes in bank concentration. While these are important
aspects, we think there is much to gain from a benchmark banking model that aggregates into
a representative bank while featuring a rich liquidity management problem, in addition to being
modular and easy to compute.


3.2    Liquidity Management and Liquidity Premia
As outlined in Proposition 3 (item ii), a bank’s portfolio problem is to choose portfolio weights
on loans b̄, total liquid assets ā, and deposits d¯ to maximize the certainty equivalent of the bank’s
return on equity:
                                  Re ≡ Rb b̄ + Rm ā − Rd d¯ + χ̄(ā, d,
                                                                      ¯ ω).

Using the first-order conditions, we obtain the following relationship between the returns of all
assets and liabilities.

                                               ¯ b̄ > 0 be a solution to the problem in item (ii)
                                           
Proposition 4 (Liquidity Premiums). Let ā, d,
of Proposition 3. Then, we obtain the following equilibrium expressions for the liquidity premia




                                                  17
(LP) on loans, government bonds and deposits:

                                                            Eω (Re )−γ |ω < ω ∗
                                                                               
         b     m       +       −      +                ∗
                                          
       R − R = χ̄ + χ̄ − χ̄                   · F (ω ) ·                                                (Loan LP)
                                                               Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                         
                                                | {z }
                                               deficit prob |       {z          }
                                                            risk-aversion correction

       Rg − Rm = χ̄+                                                                            (Gov. Bond LP)
                                                              COVω (Re )−γ · χ̄, ω
                                                                                  
                                                       Rd
                                                           
       Rd − Rm = (1 + ρ) Rb − Rm +
                                
                                                          −ρ                         −µ             (Deposit LP)
                                                       Rm        Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                           
                                                              |        {z          }
                                                                         risk premium


where µ · κ − d¯ = 0. Furthermore, Rw ≥ Rb ≥ Rg ≥ Rm . The inequalities become equalities
                  

only if either θt = 0 or Rw = Rm .

    Proposition 4 displays the LP of each asset relative to reserves when the portfolio solution
is interior—when ā > 0.17 Consider the loan LP. Loans command a higher direct return than
reserves, Rb ≥ Rm , because reserves also yield an expected return in the interbank market: if the
bank ends in surplus, a marginal reserve is lent out at an average of χ̄+ ; in deficit, the marginal
reserve has a additional value of χ− − χ+ , the additional borrowing cost. The risk-adjusted
probability of a deficit state is the physical probability F (ω ∗ ) times an appropriate correction
for risk-aversion. The LP of loans is thus the risk-adjusted interbank market return.
    The gov. bond LP is also positive but lower than the premium on loans.18 In a deficit state, a
bank that holds a government bond sells it and saves the spread χ− . The bank therefore obtains
Rm + χ− the next period, which is the same as the return in a deficit state. By arbitrage, it
follows that the return on a surplus state must be equalized. In a surplus state, the bank is
indifferent about trading government bonds: the government bond yields Rg , and reserves yield
Rm + χ+ . Arbitrage requires Rg = Rm + χ+ . This positive premium reflects how payments clear
with reserves but not with government bonds.19
    We say that banks are satiated if the loan and bond liquidity premia are zero. The Fed can
induce satiation in two ways: by eliminating the spread in its policy rates, iw    m
                                                                              t = it , or supplying
reserves such that all banks end in surplus after any shock, st > 0. In either case, there is no
                                             f
role for the interbank market and we have i¯t = imt .
  17
      By convention,   we use the expectation operator Eω in this condition excludes the zero-measure point where
         ¯ ω /∂ d¯ is not defined, the point ω = ω ∗ . Since ω = ω ∗ has zero measure, we obtain can take first-order
             
∂ χ̄ m̄, d,
condition by partitioning the bank’s objective into the regions (ω < ω ∗ ) and (ω > ω ∗ ). Within those regions, the
bank’s objective is smooth.
   18
      In a generalization of Proposition 4 in Appendix E, it can occur that Rg < Rm and banks are at a corner
with g̃ = 0.
   19
      The model can be extended to include assets with intermediate liquidity. For example, we can introduce
assets for which only a fraction of their value can be traded at the balancing stage. It is straightforward to show
that the LP of these semi-liquid asset would be a weighted average of the LP of government bonds and the LP of
loans.


                                                           18
    Role    of Proposition
     Finally,  OTC frictions.  3 displays   The the
                                                  decomposition
                                                       deposit LP,ofwhich  the LP  canofbeloans,      bonds,
                                                                                               of either       and The
                                                                                                            sign.    deposit  clarifies
                                                                                                                          deposit   LP
hasthe   fundamental
      three  terms: The  rolefirst
                               of OTC termfrictions
                                               capturesforthe  theexpected
                                                                     transmission change of monetary        policy. considering
                                                                                              in the surplus,         As we take thethe
    efficiency
reserve         parameter λ →
          requirement—the            ∞, we
                                   effect        recover a Walrasian
                                             is proportional      to the interbank
                                                                             LP of loans   marketbecausealong the lines of are
                                                                                                            withdrawals     the mean
                                                                                                                                 Poole
                    22
    (1968)
zero,  and ismodel.
               thereforeTo positive.
                           understand       Thethesecond
                                                     differences,
                                                             term is Figure     1 presents apremium,
                                                                        a liquidity-risk           comparison     for the
                                                                                                              which       coefficients
                                                                                                                       captures   that
an of  χt andin
    increase    thedeposits
                     fed funds     rateliquidity
                              raises        as a function
                                                        risk. ofThe
                                                                 therisktightness
                                                                              premium θ, foris the    frictional
                                                                                                 present    evenOTC      market
                                                                                                                   if banks   are (left
                                                                                                                                   risk
    panel)   and the   Walrasian       limit    (right
neutral because the concavity in χ̄ produces endogenous  panel).   In   a Walrasian       market,       the costs   of deficits
                                                                                    risk-aversion. The final term, µ, is a      equals
                                          +        −                  f       m     +
    the  benefits  of  a surplus,
non-negative Lagrange multiplier      χ   t  =   χ   , and   thus   i   =
                                                ont the capital requirement
                                                                      t     i t  +χ t . constraint.
                                                                                         Furthermore, in Walrasian market,
    there are only two relevant regimes: either the banking system has excess reserves. (χ−                                     +
                                                                                                                         t =χt = 0)
    or a deficit of reserves, (χ+ = χ−                    w      m
                                                  t = i − i ). These observations showcase that a Walrasian
Role of OTC frictions. The decomposition                             of the LP of loans, bonds, and deposit clarifies
    interbank market produces counterfactual implications: First, it implies a fed funds rate that
the fundamental role of OTC frictions for the transmission of monetary policy. As we take the
    trades either at the floor or the ceiling of the corridor—unless the aggregate reserve balance is
efficiency parameter λ → ∞, we recover a Walrasian interbank market along the lines of the
    exactly zero, in which case the rate on reserves would be indeterminate. Second, it produces the
Poole (1968) model.20 To understand the differences, Figure 1 presents a comparison for the
    same LP for loans and government bonds, which would take one of two values depending on the
coefficients of χt and the fed funds rate as a function of the log inverse of market tightness θ,
    sign of aggregate reserves. This means that monetary operations, conventional or unconventional,
for the frictional OTC market (left panel) and the Walrasian limit (right panel). In a Walrasian
    or changes in withdrawal risk, would only have a effects on the LP of assets at thefpoint where
                                                                                                       −
market, the costs of deficits equals                the benefits of a surplus, χ+           t = χt , and        thus it = im         +
                                                                                                                               t +χt .
    aggregate reserves change sign.23 In the case of zero reserve requirements,                            ρ = 0, in fact,  monetary
Furthermore,
    operations inor Walrasian
                     withdrawal     market,
                                      risk would  therenotarehave
                                                              onlyeffects.
                                                                      two relevant       regimes:
                                                                                 In practice,           either
                                                                                                    it is clearthe
                                                                                                                 thatbanking
                                                                                                                       centralsystem
                                                                                                                                 banks
                                 f        m                                            f       w
hasalter
     excess   reserves   and   i    =   i t  or   a  deficit  of reserves       and  i t =   i t .
           interbank rates with open market operations even in countries where requirements are zero.
                                 t


                               (a) OTC Interbank Market                                                                (b) Walrasian Interbank Market
                f                                                                                             f
               i , χ̄+ , χ̄−                                                                                 i , χ̄+ , χ̄−




                idw                                                                                           idw




Effective Fed Funds                                                                           Effective Fed Funds



                                                           Fed Funds Rate          χ̄− + im

                                                                                   χ̄+ + im
                    im                                                                                            im




                                        Target Liquidity       Abundance of Reserves (log(θ−1 )                                        0      Abundance of Reserves (log(θ−1 )




                                                    Figure 1: OTC versus Walrasian Markets
                                                  Figure 1: OTC versus Walrasian Markets

    These observations showcase that a Walrasian interbank market produces counterfactual im-
      3.3    Policy Analysis
plications: First, it implies a fed funds rate that trades either at the floor or the ceiling of the
corridor—unless     the aggregate
    This section analyzes           reserve
                             the effects     balance ispolicy.
                                         of monetary      exactlyThe
                                                                  zero,  in which
                                                                       main  insightcase  the rate
                                                                                      is that       on reserves
                                                                                               Fed policies can
    alterbethe               21
               liquidity premium   and induce   real effects, a formalization    of the credit
would        indeterminate.     Second,   it produces    the same    liquidity premium     for channel.
                                                                                                loans andLet  us
                                                                                                           gov-
                                                       w     m
ernment
      22
         Seebonds,  which would
             the companion        be either
                           paper Bianchi and zero
                                             Bigio or i −fori a depending
                                                   (2017)       derivation ofon
                                                                              thethe sign oflimit
                                                                                  Walrasian   aggregate
                                                                                                  (λ → ∞)excess
                                                                                                          of the
    interbank market.
    2023 the companion paper Bianchi and Bigio (2017) for a derivation of the Walrasian limit (λ → ∞) of the
     See For related reasons, Burdett, Shi and Wright (2001) emphasize the importance of search frictions in smoothing
interbank
    marketmarket.
             outcomes.
  21
     Burdett, Shi, and Wright (2001) also emphasize the importance of search frictions in smoothing market
outcomes.
                                                                                                  19

                                                                                              19
reserves. This means that open market operations operations, or changes in withdrawal risk,
would not have any effects unless aggregate excess reserves change sign. Indeed, there would
be no effects in economies with zero reserve requirements, ρ = 0, since in fact, excess aggregate
reserves are always positive. Notwithstanding, central banks that do not impose reserve require-
ments, still alter interbank market rates by conducting open market operations. In section 4, we
present further evidence on the macroeconomic impact of an OTC interbank market.


3.3     Policy Analysis
This section analyzes the effects of monetary policy. The main insight is that Fed policies can
alter the liquidity premium and induce real effects, a formalization of the credit channel. Let us
first discuss the price level determination.


Price-Level determination. The price level is determined through a quantity-theory equa-
tion expressed in terms of liquid assets:

                  Pt āt · (1 − c̄t ) · Et =      M̃ F ed − M h            + GFt+1
                                                                                 A
                                                                                   − GFt+1
                                                                                         ed
                                                                                            − Ght+1 .        (23)
                     |        {z         }        | t+1 {z t+1}              |        {z          }
                     real liquidity (demand)   nominal reserves (supply)       nominal bond (supply)


Given Et , and a set of real rates, the portfolio demand for total real liquid assets is determined.
The price level must be such that at equilibrium real rates, the real supply of liquid assets equals
the real liquidity demand. Once we substitute the clearing condition for government bonds, (20)
and use m̄ = ā − ḡ, we obtain a quantity equation but now expressed in a more familiar way, in
terms of monetary balances:

                                 h                                                F ed
                               Mt+1 + Pt · m̄t · (1 − c̄t ) · Et =             M̃t+1        .                (24)
                               |            {z                 }               | {z  }
                                          money demand                       money supply


Although the demand for reserves is not determined at the individual level, the aggregate amount
is. As a result, the price level can be determined from the aggregate demand for reserves, based
on equation (24).22
    We note that the price level remains determined, even if banks are satiated with reserves. In
this regard, our paper relates to Ennis (2014), who analyzes the link between money and prices in
a perfect-foresight model with a static banking system. He shows that when capital requirements
are slack, a policy of paying interest on reserves equal to the market return of the risk-free asset
leads to an indeterminacy result, but when the capital requirement constraint binds, the real
  22
    As in much of the literature, we abstract away from the possibility of speculative hyperinflations and focus
on equilibria that transition toward stationary equilibria. Cochrane (2019, ch. 17) presents a detailed discussion
on conditions that allow to rule out speculative hyperinflations.


                                                          20
demand for reserves is determined, and hence the price level. One difference in our setup is that
the presence of equity constraints in our framework implies that the price level is determined
even absent binding capital requirements. In addition, the price level is determined through a
quantity theory equation involving both government bonds and reserves.


Classical monetary properties. The model features classic long-run neutrality: any increase
in the scale of M, GF A , GF ed , B F ed leads to a proportional increase in the price level without
                

any changes in real allocations. On the other hand, changes in the permanent growth rate of
the Fed’s the balance sheet do have real effects, unless all nominal policy rates are adjusted by
inflation to keep real rates constant—and when the demand for real currency balances is perfectly
inelastic. Both results are proven in Appendix G.


OMO. Policies that produce real effects operate through the liquidity premium. We define
conventional (unconventional) OMO as a swap between reserves for government bonds (loans).
Next, we consider OMO in which the Fed exchanges reserves for loans or government bonds at
time-zero, and reverses the operation the following period. The following proposition character-
izes the effects of such OMO.

Proposition 5 (Real Effects of OMO). Consider an original policy sequence with a Fed balance
       F ed F ed F ed
sheet Mo,t   , Go,t , Bo,t t≥0 and an OMO at t = 0. That is, consider an alternative policy
                                                              F ed     F ed
sequence that differs from the original one only in that Bs,1      = Bo,1   + ∆B F ed , GFs,1ed = GFo,1ed +
∆GF ed , and Ms,1
                F ed      F ed
                     = Mo,1    + ∆M F ed , for ∆M F ed = ∆GF ed + ∆B F ed ≥ 0. We have the following
two cases:
    i) Functioning interbank market: If λ > 0, then the OMO has effects on prices and aggregate
asset allocations if and only if banks are not satiated with reserves at t = 0 under the original
allocation.
    ii) Shut down interbank market: If λ = 0, and the operation is conventional, ∆B F ed = 0,
the OMO induces the same sequence of prices and real asset allocations; If the operation is
unconventional, ∆B F ed > 0, then the OMO has effects on prices and aggregate asset allocations
if and only if banks are not satiated with reserves at t = 0 under the original allocation.

    The proposition establishes that when banks are satiated with reserves, open market oper-
ations are irrelevant, as in Wallace (1981). In effect, when banks are satiated, all assets are
perfect substitutes. As a result, for every unit of loans (government bonds) that the Fed pur-
chases, banks reduce holdings loans (government bonds) by one unit and increase reserves in the
same amount. In effect, there are no changes in the real returns. Moreover, there are no changes




                                                    21
in the price level.23 Away from satiation, however, the operations alter the liquidity premium
and induce a change in the total amount of loans. When the Fed swaps government bonds or
loans for reserves, this increases the relative abundance of reserves and reduces the costs from
being short of reserves for an individual bank. As a result, for a given level of bank equity,
this contributes to reduce the liquidity premium. Ultimately, this increases the supply of bank
lending.
    Moreover, the swap of government bonds or loans for reserves leads to an increase in the
price level, but not one for one. Notice that for a given price level, a conventional OMO keeps
constant the total amount of liquid assets. At the same time, since the composition is tilted
toward reserves, market tightness θ falls, leading to a lower demand for total liquid assets. It
then follows from (23) that the price level increases, but less than proportional to the increase
in M F ed .
    Finally, an important result is that standard operations are irrelevant if the interbank market
is shut down (λ = 0) . When the interbank market is shut down, the benefits of holding liquid
assets are independent of the abundance of reserves on the aggregate, because reserves cannot be
lent to other banks. In particular, we have χ+ = 0, χ− = iw − im . As a result, a swap of reserves
for government bonds for reserves simply changes the composition of liquid assets without any
real effects. This result shows that in an extreme event of an interbank market shutdown, the Fed
should conduct unconventional OMO if it aims at reducing the liquidity premium and stimulate
credit.


Bounds loans rates and the Friedman rule. This section describes the set of rates that
can be induced by the Fed in a stationary equilibrium in connection with a banking version of
the Friedman rule. We define this version of the Friedman rule as monetary policy where the Fed
lends at the discount window without penalty, that is, when the discount window rate equals the
rate on reserves:

Definition 3 (Friedman Rule). Monetary policy is consistent with a Friedman rule if Rtm = Rtw .

   Under this rule, χ+ = χ− = 0. Hence, banks are satiated, not through large holdings of liquid
assets but through free borrowing from the discount window. As a result, there are no liquidity
premia. This rule is in the same vein as the common version of the Friedman rule, under which
the nominal interest rate on government bonds is zero and there is no opportunity cost of holding
currency. Likewise, in this banking version, there is no cost of being short of reserves. Moreover,
  23
     In the case of a conventional OMO, the fact that the price level remains constant can be clearly seen from
(23). In this case, the OMO changes the supply of only one liquid asset without a change in the total amount of
liquid assets or the market tightness, which is already at zero. The same logic applies to unconventional OMO
because banks’ real holdings adjust in response to the operations without causing any changes in returns.



                                                      22
with strictly positive liquid assets, there is also no opportunity cost of holding reserves, since
Rtb = Rtm .
    Notice that as defined here, there are many values of Rtm consistent with this Friedman rule,
and as we will show, there is a different loan rate associated with each value of Rtm .24 We denote
by Rb,F R the stationary loan rate that prevails if the monetary authority follows a Friedman rule
associated with a fixed stationary interest on reserves Rm . The following proposition characterizes
                                                                      F ed
this stationary loan rate, focusing on the case with Gss = 0 and Bss       = 0.25
                                                                                   F ed
Proposition 6 (Stationary loan rate under Friedman Rule). Assume that Gss = 0 and Bss   = 0.
Consider the following parameter condition:

                                              b                   d
                                     Θb (1/β) ≥ 1 + κ−1 Θd (1/β) .
                                                        
                                                                                                         (25)

Also, let R̄d be the unique solution to
                                                        1/b
                                         Θd
                                     
                                                 −1
                                                                       d /b       1
                                                                 R̄d                   + κR̄d .
                                                    
                           (1 + κ)          1 + κ                                =
                                         Θb                                          β

and
                                                       1 1 + κβ R̄d
                                               R̄b =                .
                                                       β 1+κ
We have that the following two cases:
       i) Slack Capital Requirements: If (25) holds, then capital requirements are slack and
                                                    
                                                    1/β      if Rm < 1/β,
                                         Rb,F R =                                                        (26)
                                                    R m      if Rm ≥ 1/β.

Moreover, if Rm ≤ 1/β, then ā = 0 (with a ≥ 0 binding strictly if Rm < 1/β). In all cases, the
deposit rate equals Rb,F R .
       ii) Binding Capital Requirements: If (25) does not hold, capital requirements are binding and
                                                 
                                                 R̄b           if Rm < R̄b ,
                                      Rb,F R   =                                                         (27)
                                                 Rm            if Rm ≥ R̄b ,

                                                             ¯ 0 strictly binding if Rm < R̄b ).
where R̄b < 1/β. Moreover, if Rm ≤ R̄b , then ā = 0 (with a ≥

   To characterize the stationary loans rate, Proposition 6 exploits the fact that in any stationary
equilibrium, the return on bank equity equals 1/β. There are two cases to consider depending
  24
     This contrasts with the common version of the Friedman rule, the non-banking version under which the real
rate is pinned down by the discount factor.
  25
     Recall that under the Friedman rule, unconventional and conventional open-market operations are neutral.

                                                         23
on whether capital requirements bind, as determined by (25). Consider first the case of slack
capital requirements. In this case, we know that the deposit rate must equal the loan rate. We
also have that if Rm < 1/β, banks are at a corner of liquid assets and Rb,F R = 1/β. Instead,
if Rm > 1/β, banks hold liquid assets in equilibrium, in which case Rb,F R = Rm . Notice that
because in general equilibrium the after-tax return of liquid assets is zero, a loan rate Rb,F R > 1/β
guarantees stationarity. When the capital requirement constraint binds, the characterization is
similar except that there is a spread between the loan rate and the deposit rate. As a result, we
have that Rb,F R becomes equal to Rm for lower values of Rm compared to the case with slack
capital requirements.26
   Observe that Rb,F R can be raised to any arbitrary level simply by raising Rm . Intuitively,
there is no upper bound on the loans rate because the Fed has the ability to crowd out loans by
paying a higher interest rate on reserves (financed with bank taxes). On the flip side, by lowering
the rate on reserves, the Fed lowers the loan rate, but only to the point where reserves are no
longer held in equilibrium. Once banks are at a corner with zero reserves, further declines in Rm
have no effects.
   Proposition 6 applies to stationary equilibria induced by the Friedman rule. Next, we discuss
how the characterization of Rb,F R allows us to obtain bounds on the loan rate that can be induced
by policies away from the Friedman rule.
                                                                               F ed
Corollary 1. Consider any stationary policy sequence such that Gss = 0 and Bss      = 0 and let
 m               b                                            b      b,F R   m
         
Rss ≥ min 1/β, R̄ . Then, the stationary loan rate satisfies Rss ≥ R       =R .

                                                                    m
                                                                       ≥ min 1/β, R̄b , then the
                                                                              
   The corollary says that if we consider any policy such that Rss
loans rate induced by the Friedman rule constitutes a lower bound on the loans rate. The
                m
                   ≥ min 1/β, R̄b is important, as it ensures that banks hold positive liquid
                          
qualification Rss
assets is in equilibrium. The idea is that considering equilibrium with strictly positive liquid
assets, a policy that raises the liquidity premium necessarily raises the loan rate above the one
that would prevail under the Friedman rule.27
    The Friedman rule is not only useful for understanding the set of rates that can be induced by
policies but also for characterizing efficiency. The following proposition establishes the Friedman
  26
     If condition (25) is violated, then capital requirements bind. If in addition, ā = 0, then Rb,F R = R̄b < 1/β.
The spread between Rb,F R and Rd,F R , is such that the total return on bank equity is 1/β, despite the return on
loans being less than 1/β.
  27
     For a low Rm such that banks find it strictly optimal to hold zero liquid assets, an increase in Rw may induce
                               b        d                  b
a greater spread between Rss     and Rss  , in which case Rss must fall to guarantee stationarity. In this case, the
                                            w
Fed can induce a lower rate by raising R .




                                                        24
rule is necessary to achieve efficiency when capital requirements do not bind.28

Proposition 7. If (25) holds, and households have the same discount factor as banks β h = β,
                                                                                         m     w
the stationary equilibrium is efficient if the Fed follows a Friedman rule policy where Rss = Rss =
1/β.


Discussion on normative issues. The results here regard positive analysis. Having estab-
lished that a version of the Friedman rule achieves efficiency, it is important to discuss what
frictions outside the model could motivate a deviation from the Friedman rule. First, because
of macroprudential concerns the Fed may want to reduce the amount of bank credit and use
monetary policy for such an objective, as advocated by Stein (2012). Another concern relates to
the costs of eliminating liquidity premia. For example, eliminating the LP may require the Fed
to hold a large balance sheet, exposing it to credit risk or interest-rate risk, features outside of
this model. Finally, there is a moral hazard consideration when lending reserves freely. There
is, in fact, a tradition that sees a penalizing discount rate as a disciplining device to sustain
the circulation of deposits (see Cavalcanti, Erosa, and Temzelides, 1999; Hoerova and Monnet,
2016).We leave for future work the assessment of the tradeoffs that emerge in the face of these
considerations. However, we believe our model provides a useful setup to study these normative
aspects.


4      Empirical Evidence
Over the last decade, a large empirical literature has developed conveying evidence that liquidity
frictions play an important role in financial markets. The goal of this section is twofold. First,
we provide new evidence that specifically point toward the importance of the interbank market.
Second, we discuss other available empirical evidence that support our key mechanism.
    A central prediction of the theory is that frictions in the interbank markets are translated,
at the macro level, into a premium for liquid assets. To examine whether this relationship is
present in the data, one needs measures both of the frictions in the interbank market and of
asset liquidity premia. As a measure of frictions in the interbank market, we use the dispersion
in interbank market rates. More precisely, using the daily distribution of the Fed Fund rates
provided by the NY Fed, we construct a monthly time series, labeled FF Range, as the monthly
  28
    Appendix H defines the set of Pareto optimal allocations. The Pareto optimal allocations feature equalization
of marginal utilities across agents and across goods and a non-binding working capital constraint for firms. When
households have a value for currency, this efficiency condition requires deflation so that the efficient real rate is
consistent with zero nominal rates on reserves. Appendix J proves conditions for monotone convergence toward a
stationary equilibrium under this specific Friedman rule. As long as deviations are not large from this Friedman
rule, we expect similar properties to hold in any stationary equilibrium.



                                                         25
average of the daily spread between the maximum and the minimum Fed funds range.29 In terms
of the liquidity premia, we use two measures constructed in Nagel (2016): the spreads between
the generalized collateral Repo rate (GC) and the certificate deposit (CD) with respect to the
three month T-Bill rate.30 It is worth noting that the liquidity premium is large, reaching 4%
percent around 2008. This is direct evidence of the quantitative relevance of the precautionary
demand for liquid assets. These large premia show that banks are willing to forgo large returns
to hold assets that are easy to sell in certain dates. In the theory, withdrawal risk and matching
efficiency in the interbank market produce greater dispersion in interbank rates. Equipped with
these measures, we proceed to test the relationship between the two.
    Panel (c) of Figure 2 presents the monthly-series for the GC and CD spreads and the FF
Range, from June 2000 and December 2011 whereas panels (a) and (b) present the scatter points
of the GC and CD against the FF Range series, respectively. Table 1 reports results from an
ordinary least squares regression. The positive correlation between the FF Range and the two
measures of liquidity premia is striking. Columns (1) and (4) present the results for the baseline
univariate regressions. Columns (2) and (5) show that the sign of the regression coefficients are
unchanged after the average Fed funds rate is included, an indication that dispersion in rates
captures information not contained in the policy target. Similarly, the correlation remains even
when we include the VIX index, which suggests that dispersion in rates is picking up uncertainty
inherent to the interbank market. The standard deviation of FF Range series is 60bps, so the
average impact on liquidity premia are 16bps and 36bps on the GC and CD spreads, respectively.
This average impact may seem small. However, the FF Range series is highly skewed (Hamilton,
1996, as pointed out earlier in). The FF Range series is above 200bps in 5 percent of the sample,
and these events produce an impact of 50bps and 120bps on the GC and CD spreads, respectively.
Recent independent work by Altavilla et al. (2019) provide similar evidence for the European
bank market and obtains similar effects in magnitude. Appendix L presents additional robustness
checks which similar correlations results for the correlations.
   These results should not come as a surprise in light of other available evidence. The scale of
the interbank market is large: banks in the US clear about 3.3 trillion USD transactions daily.
Moreover, according to Afonso and Lagos (2014), between 2005-2008, the annual dollar traded
volume of Fed funds was about twice the annual US GDP. Also, there is ample evidence of trading
  29
     The NY Fed provides historical data on the daily distribution of the fed fund rates: the data include the max
and min, 99, 75, 50, 25 and 1st quantiles, and the standard deviation of daily Fed funds rate for the years 2000
through 2012.
  30
     As a measure of liquidity premia, Nagel (2016) works with two time series for spreads, the spread between the
generalized collateral Repo rate and the T-Bill rate (the GC spread) and the spread between certificate deposit
and the T-Bill rate. The GC spread is an ideal counterpart for the spread between loans and government bonds
in the model because the GC has the same risk-profile as the T-Bill but according to that paper, “The GC repo
term loan is illiquid, as the money lent is locked in for three months and the bid-ask spreads between lending
and borrowing rates are relatively wide compared with government bonds.” Similarly, the CD to T-Bill rate is a
counterpart for the spread between deposits and the T-Bill in the model.


                                                       26
frictions in the Fed funds market (e.g. Ashcraft and Duffie, 2007). Bindseil and Jablecki (2011)
show that an increase in 100bps in the width of the policy corridor leads to greater volatility
in interbank rates for a cross-section of countries. At a narrative level, the August 2019 Senior
Financial Officer Survey reports that the primary reason why banks currently hold reserves is
meeting deposit outflows. In fact, 72% of the respondents regard as very important holding
reserves to meet deposit outflows (compared with 10% who regard as very important to earn the
interest on reserves).31
   Another prediction of the theory is that monetary policy affects the supply of loans through
the liquidity management of banks. In an early contribution, Bernanke and Blinder (1988)
provides evidence that expansionary monetary policy stimulates lending and deposits. Using
micro data, Kashyap and Stein (2000) found evidence that liquidity plays a key role in bank
lending while Jiménez et al. (2012; 2014) further corroborated this evidence using micro data on
bank-loan pairs. Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen
(2012) furthermore show that the supply of government bonds impact liquidity premia.
   To conclude, a large body of empirical evidence points to the importance of liquidity frictions.
Adding to the existing literature, we provide new evidence that point specifically toward the
importance of frictions in the interbank market to determine liquidity premia. In the next section,
we calibrate our model and show how these frictions matter for the monetary transmission.


                           Table 1: Liquidity Premia and Interbank Spreads
                      (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
                   GC Spread       GC Spread       GC Spread        CD Spread       CD Spread       CD Spread
 FF Range            0.208∗∗∗        0.175∗∗∗        0.159∗∗∗         0.672∗∗∗        0.721∗∗∗        0.587∗∗∗
                     (12.57)         (11.08)          (9.75)          (10.17)         (10.32)          (8.95)
 FF Rate                             0.0291∗∗∗       0.0374∗∗∗                       -0.0428∗          0.0232
                                       (5.95)          (6.87)                         (-1.98)          (1.06)
 VIX                                                 0.0857∗∗                                         0.687∗∗∗
                                                      (3.10)                                           (6.17)
 Constant             0.0395∗        -0.00523        -0.272∗∗         0.0330          0.0988         -2.038∗∗∗
                       (2.53)         (-0.33)         (-3.11)         (0.53)          (1.41)          (-5.79)
 Observations           138               138           138             138             138             138
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
  31
    The complete ranking is as follows: meeting potential deposit outflows (73%), meeting routine intraday
payment flows (57%), satisfying internal liquidity stress metrics (63%), satisfying the bank’s reserve requirements
(50%), managing liquidity portfolio (30%) seeking to earn IOR rate (10%). See the Senior Financial Officer
Survey.


                                                        27
               Figure 1: Interest on Reserves and Balance Sheet as Independent Instruments
            Note: the figure is constructed with the parameters obtained from the baseline calibration.




              (a) Repo T-Bill Spread                                              (b) CD T-Bill Spread                                          (c) Spreads/FF Range (timeseries)

 .8                                                                       4                                                                4




 .6                                                                       3                                                                3




 .4                                                                       2                                                                2




 .2                                                                       1                                                                1




 0                                                                        0                                                                0
      0          1                     2                     3        4       0    1                     2                     3       4   2000m1          2002m1          2004m1         2006m1       2008m1         2010m1          2012m1
                     Average Fed Funds Rate Range (%)                                  Average Fed Funds Rate Range (%)                                                                    month

                 95% CI      Fitted values   Repo T-Bill Spread (%)                95% CI       Fitted values   CD T-Bill Spread (%)                CD T-Bill Spread (%)      Repo T-Bill Spread (%)    Average Fed Funds Rate Range (%)




                                                          Figure 2: Liquidity Premia and Fed
                                                                                         Fed Funds
                                                                                             Funds Range
                                                                                                   Range
          Note this one: Panels (a) and (b) presents a scatter plot corresponding to the data points in Panel (c).
          Appendix K.1 provides details of the data series.

                                                                                                       1


5           Applications
We now provide two applications of our model to address key questions at the intersection of
monetary policy and banking. We use a version of the model calibrated to the US banking
system, as we explain next.


5.1           Calibration
We calibrate the steady state of the model using data from 2006 as a reference period. In Section
5.3, we then extend the calibration analysis here to the crisis and post-crisis period. Appendix
K.1 provides the details of data measurements and sources.


Model period. We define the time period to be a month and use annualized rates to describe
the calibration. The choice of a month is guided by several factors. On the one hand, the
federal funds market operates daily, and reserve requirements are computed based on a two-
week window average over end-of-day balances. On the other hand, bank portfolio decisions and
loan sales typically take longer than two weeks to materialize.32 In addition, shocks and overall
positions in the interbank market are likely to be persistent, whereas they are not in the model.
Capturing these institutional details would require a more complex model, one with multiple
balancing stages, and additional state variables to keep track of lagged reserve requirements. We
  32
    Given that the period length of the model is one month, one can think about the structure of the model such
that the sale of a loan takes one month to materialize. Stigum and Crescenzi (2007) provides a clear account of
the securitization process.


                                                                                                     28
view a monthly model as a parsimonious compromise between the daily nature of the federal
funds market, the bi-weekly nature of regulation, and the lower frequency of bank portfolio
adjustments. The choice of a monthly model is also practical. Once we turn to the application
in Section 5.3, most data are available monthly. We do not expect that the quantitative results
of the calibrated model would change significantly with a different length of the model period.


Additional features. We extend the environment with two additional features to enrich the
quantitative applications. These features only modify the portfolio problem (17) without altering
any other condition in the model. First, we allow for Epstein-Zin preferences. We assume a unit
intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES), which implies that the dividend rate is c̄t = 1 − β,
and set the risk aversion, denoted by γ to 10. Second, we introduce credit risk. In particular, we
assume that the return of loans is given by (1 + δ)Rb , where δ follows a log-normal distribution
with standard deviation σ δ and zero mean. The shock δ is distributed identically across banks
and is independent of ω. By the law of large numbers, the average return across banks is Rb —
hence the law of motion for aggregate equity remains the same. We introduce this second feature
because it allows us to devise a procedure to match key moments in the data and to provide
an exact decompositions of the decline in credit in Section 5.3. The volatility that we need to
replicate the asset portfolio is small. In scale, it is about 6% of the liquidity premium.


Distribution of withdrawal shocks. For the distribution of withdrawal shocks, Φ, we as-
sume it is a log normal distribution with standard deviation σ ω and zero mean. A log-normal
distribution approximates well the empirical distribution of excess reserves.


External calibration We set ρ, β, γ, b , d , g , im , iw , π, B F ED , GF ED , GF A externally. We
                                   

list their values in Table 2. Regarding preferences, we set the IES equal to one, as mentioned
above, and the risk aversion to 10, both common values in macroeconomics. With a unit IES,
                                                 e
stationarity of aggregate bank equity implies Rss  = 1/β. As a target for the return on equity,
   e
Rss , based on Atkeson et al. (2018, Table 2,), reports a return on equity for banks with the
highest asset quality ratings of 8 percent. Accordingly, we set β equal to (1/1.08)1/12 = 0.993.33
    Regarding regulatory policies, we set ρ = 0. While regulatory reserve requirements were about
10 in the reference period, the use of sweep accounts has implied that the most relevant constraint
is that reserves cannot go negative. For that reason, we calibrate the effective requirement to
  33
    Notice that while the return on equity in the data has implicitly risk premia, our model does not. With risk
premia, however, we would have the same stationarity condition, except that the steady state return on equity
would be replaced by the mean of return on equity over time.




                                                      29
zero.34
    In line with the pre-crisis landscape, im and B F ed are set to zero as baseline values, but we
then vary these variables as we analyze policies. The relevant value for the discount window
rate incorporates the well-documented stigma associated with discount loans. We deduce the
stigma by considering the difference between the highest interbank market rate observed and
the statutory discount window rate. This approach is reasonable because the fact that many
banks borrow at interbank rates above the discount rate implies there are non-pecuniary costs
associated with the discount window. Accordingly, we construct a time series for the maximum
observed interbank market rate and average out the differences with respect to the statutory
discount window rates. The procedure yields a stigma of 5% amounting to a de facto discount
window rate of 11%.
    We set the consolidated government bonds to be consistent with the holdings of government
bonds by banks and households. In particular, based on Call Report data, we have that holdings
of government bonds represent about 10 percent of banks’ assets, whereas households hold about
56 percent of total holdings (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen, 2012). The growth rate of
money balances is set to be consistent with a steady state annual inflation of 2 percent per year.
    Finally, we set loan demand elasticity with respect to the annualized loan rate to 2.5, which
is in the range of empirical studies (see, e.g., Gilchrist et al., 2009), and use the same value for
the elasticity of the supply of deposits and the household’s government bonds demand.35 Neither
elasticities matter for the stationary equilibrium, they only matter for transitional dynamics.


Deduced parameter. The remaining set of parameters is λ, σ ω , η, σ δ , κ, Θd , Θb , Θg . This set
                                                             

is obtained by targeting a set of moments from the data. The data that we employ are the size of
interbank loans relative to deposits, F/D; an average Federal Funds rate; the discount window
loans relative to deposits, W/D; a measure of the loans liquidity premium, LP ; and banks’
                                             
loan, bond, and reserve portfolio holdings, b̄, ḡ, m̄ . Our procedure allows us to sequentially
determine each of these parameters.
   A summary of the procedure to obtain these parameters is as follows; details are relegated
to Appendix K.3. We use x̂ to refer to parameter or variable x deduced from the equilibrium
equations in the model. If a variable enters without that symbol, it is measured directly from
  34
     For banks with net transactions over USD 48.3 million as of 2006, the reserve requirement is 10 percent (see
Federal Reserve Bulletin, Table 1.15). No corresponding sources in references. However, since the introduction
of sweep accounts in the US, banks are able to circumvent reserve requirements by transferring funds overnight
to accounts not subject to requirements. All the results are quantitatively similar for small levels of reserve
requirements, for example, 2.5%.
  35
     The parameter  is a semi-elasticity: in terms of the monthly calibration, this implies b = 35. Notice that we
do not need to specify the elasticity of currency to solve for all the allocations and loan returns. This is because
of quasi-linearity; namely, households preferences are linear in the good that does not require cash or deposits to
be consumed.



                                                        30
                                            Table 2: Calibration
 External Parameters            Value                                            Reference
 Discount factor                β = 0.993                               Return on Equity
 Risk aversion                  γ = 10                                  Standard
 Interest on reserves           im = 0                                  Observed
                                 w
 Discount window rate           i = 11%                                 Measured Stigma
 Steady state inflation         π = 2%                                  Inflation Target
 Fed holdings of loans          B F ED = 0                              Observed
 Government bonds                                   ¯
                                GF A − GF ed = (1 + d)0.1 × (1 + Gh /G) Observed
 Reserve requirement            ρ=0                                     Observed
                                 b      d     g
 Elasticities                    = − = − = 35                        Literature
 Deduced Parameters             Value                                            Target
 Matching friction              λ̂ = 7.9                                         W/(W + F ) = 0.035%
 Volatility of withdrawals      σ̂ ω = 0.12                                      W/(D + E) = 0.0011%
 Bargaining powers              η̂ = 0.15                                        īf = 4.4%
 Credit Risk                    σ̂ δ = 6% × LP                                   b̄/(b̄ + ā) = 97.5%
 Capital requirement            κ = 8.8                                          Bank Leverage
 Deposit supply intercept       Θ̂d = 9.4                                        Rd = 2%
 Loan demand intercept          Θ̂b = 10.9                                       Loan LP= 50bps
 Bond demand intercept          Θ̂g = 0.275                                      Gh /G = 0.56


the data.
    The first step is to obtain a matching efficiency, λ̂, deduced from observed activity in the
interbank market relative to discount window loans. We first infer the probability that a reserve
deficit position is matched in the interbank market, using Ψ̂− = F/ (W + F ). When the model’s
implied market tightness is θ̂ < 1, we obtain:
                                                           −1
                                           λ̂ = log 1 − Ψ̂−     .

This relationship follows from by inverting (A.1) under the assumption that θ < 1.36 The
condition θ < 1 is verified in a later step.
    The second step is to obtain the volatility of withdrawals, inferred from observed banks’s
liquidity holdings and activity in the discount window. To do so, we first deduce the cutoff ω̂ ∗
from the definition (21). Then, we use that W = (1 − Ψ̂− )S − to deduce σ̂ ω as the implicit
solution to
                                                      Rd
                                                                              
                W     
                             −
                               
                                     ∗  ω    m̄ + ḡ                ∗       κ
                    = 1 − Ψ̂ Φ (ω̂ ; σ̂ )            + m E [ω|ω < ω̂ ; σ̂]       .
                A                            κ+1      R                    κ+1
  36
    Under a Leontief matching technology, if deficit positions are less than surplus positions, i.e. when θ < 1,
thenΨ̂− = 1 − exp (−λ).



                                                      31
   The third step is to obtain the bargaining power. We infer η from the interbank market rate,
taking into consideration the matching efficiency and aggregate liquidity holdings . That is, we
obtain η̂ using                                                  
                                 if = im + (iw − im ) φ θ̂; λ̂, η̂ .

This step uses the effective bargaining power φ(θ̂; λ̂, η̂) defined in Appendix A and a measurement
of the market tightness consistent with the previous steps θ̂.37
    The fourth step is to obtain a value for credit risk, σ̂ δ , which we infer by rationalizing the
banks portfolios given the returns of assets and liabilities, and the liquidity yield function χ.
Given all the objects we have so far, we can compute directly χ̄+ and χ̄− .38 The return on loans
is deduced using the equilibrium condition Rb = Rm + χ̄ˆ+ + LP , where LP is observed in the
data as constructed by Del Negro et al. (2017).
   We can then deduce the parameter controlling credit risk, σ δ , and a leverage requirement κ,
such that the bank optimization problem delivers the observed portfolios in the data
                                         n                                                         o 1
          b̄, d¯ =                                                                 ¯ ω)|σ̂ δ , σ̂ ω 1−γ 1−γ .
                                          E (1 − δ) Rb b̄ + Rm ā − Rd d¯ + χ̄(ā, d,
                
                        argmax
                        ¯
                     b̄,d≤κ,ā+    ¯
                                b̄−d=1


where the expectation E is over δ and ω.39
   Finally, given total credit supply in the model, the value for Θb is chosen to guarantee that
                                      Bf                b
Rb is the equilibrium return using Pt+1         b   b
                                                                                          d d
                                         t
                                           = Θ  t R t+1     . We proceed analogously for  Θ ,R
and for {Θg , Rg } using the targets for deposits and the fraction of government bonds owned by
households.


5.2     Implementation of Monetary Policy and Pass-Through
In the first application, we examine the implementation of monetary policy and the pass-through
from policy rates to lending rates. We address the following questions: What are the effects of
varying the interest on reserves (IOR) on bank credit? What are the different policy configura-
tions that can implement a target for the Federal funds rate? What are the implications of these
different configurations for the lending rate and pass-through of interest rates?
  37
     By definition,

                            Rd                                                    Rd
                                                                                                       
           ∗    ω                         ∗    ω ¯              ∗    ω                          ∗    ω ¯
 θ̂ = Φ (ω̂ ; σ̂ ) m̄ + ḡ + m E [ω|ω < ω̂ ; σ̂ ] d / (1 − Φ (ω̂ ; σ̂ )) m̄ + ḡ + m E [ω|ω > ω̂ ; σ̂ ] d − ḡ .
                            R                                                     R
                                                                                                 
  38
     We use Ψ̂+ = Ψ̂− · θ̂, and deduce χ̄
                                       ˆ+ = Ψ̂+ · (Rf − Rm ) and χ̄
                                                                 ˆ− = Ψ̂− · (Rf − Rm ) + 1 − Ψ̂− · (Rw − Rm ).
  39
     The procedure leverages upon the feature the capital requirement binds in the model for any κ lower or equal
than the observed leverage.




                                                             32
IOR and capital requirements. We first examine the effects of changes in the IOR. In the
US, interest on reserves was introduced in October 2008. Since then, it has generated many
policy discussions along different fronts, specifically on whether it contracts or expands bank
lending.40 The following analysis shows that the effects on bank lending may be non-monotonic.
In particular, whether credit increases or decreases with the IOR depends on whether capital
requirements bind.
    We study how the stationary equilibrium changes as we vary the steady state IOR, while
keeping all other policies and model parameters constant. Figure 3 presents the results.41 In
panel (a), we display the steady state lending rate as a function of the IOR. The figure shows a
non-monotone pass-through. For low IOR, increases in the IOR lead to a slight decline in the
lending rate and stimulate credit. For high IOR, increases in the IOR lead to a sharp increase
in the lending rate and depress credit. In panel (b), we also display the portfolio weights as
we change the IOR. As the figure shows, the change in the sign of the pass-through from the
IOR to the lending rate occurs at exactly the point in which the deposit portfolio share becomes
constant and the capital requirements begins to bind.
   To understand the intuition behind this non-monotonicity consider the Loan LP. If we let Ẽ
be the bank’s risk-adjusted expectation, this premium can be written as

                                           Rb = Rm + Ẽ χ̄ ā, d¯ .
                                                                
                                                                                                              (28)

One can see from equation (28) that an increase in Rm has a direct one-for-one change in Rb , given
                       ¯ Notice also that capital requirements bind when the IOR is high. This
portfolio weights (ā, d).
is because in effect, a high IOR makes it less costly to issue deposits. When capital requirements
bind, d¯ = κ and is therefore invariant to the IOR, but ā increases with Rm . The increase in
the liquidity ratio lowers the liquidity premium, but only partially offsets the direct effect of
the increase in Rm . This means that when capital requirements bind, reserves and loans are
substitutes and an increase in the IOR is necessarily contractionary.
   When the IOR is low, by contrast, the capital requirements are non binding. Capital require-
ments do not bind for low IOR because a low IOR increases the costs of insuring against deposit
withdrawals, hence making deposits in effect more costly. Starting from a point where capital
requirements do not bind, an increase in the IOR increases the incentives to issue deposits. The
  40
     See a fascinating discussion between George Selgin and John Taylor, one one side and Robert Eisenbeis, and
Todd Keister on the opposite side in a testimony on the House Financial Services Hearing on the Fed‘s Balance
Sheet and Interest on Reserves, May 17, 2016, https://www.sifma.org/resources/general/house-financial-services-
hearing-on-the-fed-s-balance-sheet-and-interest-on-reserves/.
  41
     We follow the baseline calibration with two modifications to better illustrate the results. First, we set κ so
that the capital requirement constraint holds with equality but does not bind in the stationary equilibrium with
the baseline values. This allows us to better highlight the importance of the capital requirement for the sign of
the pass-through. Second, we mute the response of the interest rate on deposits by considering a perfectly elastic
supply of deposits.


                                                        33
                                       (a) Lending Rate                                            (b) Portfolios
                                                                              35

                      0.8
                                                                              30


                                                                              25
                     0.78
  Lending rate (%)




                                                                              20


                     0.76                                                     15


                                                                              10
                     0.84

                                                                              5


                     0.82                                                     0
                            -0.25   -0.15   -0.05   0.05   0.15   0.25             -0.25   -0.15     -0.05   0.05   0.15   0.25




                            Figure 3: Stationary equilibrium lending rate and portfolios as a function of IOR
                 Note: We use the the benchmark calibration, except that we set κ = 31, implying that the
                 capital requirement holds with equality but it does not bind for im = 0. We also use a perfectly
                 elastic supply of deposits to mute the effects on the interest rate on deposits.


increase in the IOR also stimulates banks to hold more liquidity, but if the deposit increase is
greater, the increase in the IOR will stimulate lending, as occurs in Figure 3. This showcases
that when capital requirements do not bind, reserves are potentially complements to lending.
Proposition 8 below formalizes the non-monotonicity that appears in Figure 3. Namely, the
proposition shows that when capital requirements bind, the effect of an increase in the IOR is
necessarily contractionary, under any parameter configuration. When capital requirements do
not bind, the effect of the lending rate is generically ambiguous.

Proposition 8. Consider the set of stationary equilibria. If capital requirements bind, then
 drb              drb
drm
     ∈ [0, 1] and dr m = 1 when banks are satiated with reserves. If capital requirements do not

bind and the deposit supply is perfectly elastic at rd , the pass-through is ambiguous.

    These results highlight how the interaction between capital requirements and liquidity fric-
tions plays a key role for the transmission of monetary policy. We next explore how the corridor
rates and the balance sheet can be jointly managed to achieve monetary policy objectives.42


Fed balance sheet and policy pass-through. A central feature of the model is that, away
from satiation, the interest on reserves and the size of the balance sheet of the monetary authority
are independent instruments. Namely, the monetary authority can target a given interbank rate
(FFR) via different configurations of the IOR and a size of its balance sheet. We argue next
  42
    For recent interesting related analysis with a focus on negative interest rates, see Brunnermeier and Koby
(2019), Wang (2019), and Eggertsson et al. (2019).



                                                                         34
that how the FFR is actually implemented matters for the level of the lending rate and for the
pass-through.
    We consider stationary equilibrium, in which we fix a corridor spread, ∆ ≡ im − iw , and
then construct menus of im , B F ed that implement a given target for the FFR.43 We label this
                          

menu the “iso-Fed Funds curve.” Panel (a) of Figure 4 displays the iso-Fed Funds rate curve for
two different Fed funds targets; each point in the straight-red curve is consistent with a target
of 2.5%, whereas the dashed-blue is consistent with a target of 2.75%. We display B f ed in the
x-axis and im is in the y-axis. Since bank equity is normalized to 1, at steady state, B F ed should
be interpreted as Fed holdings of loans relative to bank equity.
   Panel (a) shows that the iso-Fed funds curve is upward sloping. This positive relationship
emerges because the FFR is increasing in the IOR and decreasing in the balance sheet. To see
why, recall from Proposition 1 that the Fed funds can be expressed as

                                             f
                                            i = im + ∆ · φ (θ) ,                                           (29)

where φ is an endogenous weight that increases with θ. From this expression, we observe that
                                                       f
an increase im has a direct one-for-one effect on i . This effect is coupled with an indirect effect
that partly mitigates the direct effect: the increase in the IOR generates more abundant reserves,
leading to a lower θ and hence a lower φ. In other words, as reserves become more abundant, the
FFR moves to the floor of the corridor, but because the floor increases, the FFR also increases.
In terms of the iso-Fed Funds curve, an increase in B F ed is warranted to keep the FFR at a
target. Indeed, a higher B F ed generates a decline in θ, as the monetary authority absorbs a
larger fraction of the illiquid assets. It also interesting to note that as B F ed increases, the iso-Fed
funds curve eventually becomes horizontal. This reflects that in a satiation regime, the size of
the Fed’s balance sheet has no effect on the liquidity premium, and the iso-Fed funds is flat at
 f
i .
   What are the implications for credit of these different configurations? Panel (b) shows that
as we move along the iso-Fed funds—by increasing B F ed and im to keep the FFR constant—the
lending rate falls (and credit expands). The logic can be explained through a reformulation of
the Loan LP:                                                 e −γ          ∗
                                                                              
                                                         Eω  (R )  |ω <   ω
                     ib = im + χ+ + χ− − χ+ · F (ω ∗ ) ·
                                            
                                                                                .          (30)
                                                             Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                       

Notice that because we are moving across stationary equilibria with the same inflation, the real
lending rate moves one-to-one with ib . Equation (30) highlights that the reduction in liquidity
premia can offset the increase in the IOR, and hence configurations with higher IOR and balance
sheet may stimulate lending.
  43
    We keep the rest of the parameters at the baseline values, listed in Table 2. Notice the difference with the
exercise above in which we changed only the IOR.

                                                      35
                                  (a) Isoquant                                    (b) Lending Rate along Isoquants
                                                                          5
             1.5
                                                                                                                     Low FFR
                                                                                                                     High FFR

                                                                          4


                 1
                                                                          3




                                                                          2
             0.5


                                                                          1




                 0                                                        0
                     0        2         4       6     8   10                  0        2       4      6          8              10


                                                f                                                            f
                         (c) Pass-through (i → ib )                                 (d) Pass-through (im → i )
        1                                                            1




       0.8                                                          0.8




       0.6                                                          0.6




       0.4                                                          0.4




       0.2                                                          0.2




        0                                                            0
             0            2         4       6       8     10              0           2       4       6          8              10




                     Figure 4: Interest on Reserves and Balance Sheet as Independent Instruments
      Note: the figure is constructed with the parameters obtained from the baseline calibration.


    In Panels (c) and (d), we turn to analyze pass-through. Specifically, we change the IOR to
achieve a 25bps increase in the FFR and show how the lending rate and the FFR vary depending
on the level of the Fed balance sheet. In the figure, we measure the pass-through as the changes
in the lending rate and the FFR relative to the increase in the IOR. As the figure shows, both
the pass-through for the FFR and the lending rate are increasing in the size of the balance sheet.
Moreover, as the balance sheet reaches a level close to satiation, the pass-through becomes close
to one, as anticipated in Proposition 8.


Discussion. This section’s analysis is useful for framing ongoing policy discussions on the
reform of the monetary policy frameworks in the US and Europe.44 Following the large-scale
asset purchases that started in 2008, policy circles (see e.g. Potter, 2017; Logan, 2019) have
been discussing whether to operate in a system where the Fed Funds rate trades slightly above
the interest on reserves or to return to the pre-2008 corridor system, where it traded closer
 44
      See the Fed’s Review of Monetary Policy Strategy Tools and Communication.


                                                               36
to the discount window. These central banks are also re-evaluating whether to maintain their
large balance sheets, or to unwind their large asset holdings. Importantly, these discussions have
taken place in the context of a change in the regulatory landscape, including increases in capital
requirements and the liquidity ratios. As important disruptions occurred first in October 2019,
with the repo market freeze, and more recently, a renovation of large-scale asset purchases by
these central banks in the context of the Covid-19 crisis the design of their operating frameworks
will likely continue to be a macroeconomic priority in the coming years.
    These discussions cannot be framed in the context of the New Keynesian model, where
once a policy target is set, there is a unique balance sheet consistent with that target and the
pass-through from policy to credit rates is always one. By contrast, the model here provides
a unified framework to assess these issues. A key takeaway from this section is that the same
interbank target can result from multiple configurations of balance sheet size and interest on
reserves. For example, we can obtain the same interbank rate with a lower interest on reserves
and a lean balance sheet (in a corridor system) or with a higher interest on reserves and a large
balance sheet (nearer to satiation in a floor system). We highlight that these configurations have
different implications for bank credit. A floor system produces lower lending rates, increases bank
credit, and results in a higher policy pass-through than a corridor system that implements the
same interbank target. Furthermore, both systems interact differently with capital requirements:
higher interest on reserves can actually expand credit in a corridor system with lax capital
requirements—although it always contracts credit near satiation.
   In practice, central banks have to deal with many policy objectives, including price, macroe-
conomic, and financial stability. Our model suggests that perhaps a monetary policy should
not tie its hands to either a floor or a corridor system. Doing so inhibits the ability to balance
multiple objectives.


5.3    Inspecting the Decline in Lending during the Great Recession
We now examine the sources of the credit crunch that occurred during the 2008 financial crisis.
Motivated by the severe collapse of the interbank market and the rise in discount window facilities,
we ask: What was the contribution of liquidity factors to the lending decline? What was the
contribution of unconventional open market operations in helping to mitigate the credit crunch?


Additional institutional features. In order to map the model to the data in the period of
study, it is important to take into account two additional institutional features of the interbank
market. First, many participants in the Fed funds market (i.e., “non-depository institutions”)
did not have access to interest on reserves at the Federal Reserve. As has been well observed,
this feature has a created a “leak” in the corridor system (i.e., the Fed funds rate was below


                                                37
the IOR) once the Fed started paying interest on reserves in October 2008.45 Considering that
the Fed funds rate is actually an average of all interbank market rates, what this data pattern
reveals is that trades have been dominated by non-depository institutions lending below the
IOR. Basic arbitrage, however, indicates that the remaining trades that are performed between
banks still trade above the IOR. In order to have a data analogue to the FFR in the model,
we therefore need to reconstruct a FFR series that excludes transactions with non-banks. A
second related feature is that government bonds provide collateral for many trades within the
repo market where depositary and non-depositary institutions participate. As a result, the rate
on government bonds has often traded below the interest on reserves. While we abstract from
these practical features in our baseline model, mapping the model to the data for some of the
post-crisis period requires taking these features into account. In Appendix K.3, we present an
extension of the model with non-depository institutions and a collateral value for government
bonds and show how the calibration can be adjusted to incorporate these features.


Measurement procedure. We present an estimation procedure to infer the sequence of the
underlying structural parameters. The estimation procedure is in the spirit of the business cycle
accounting methodology in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007), but here we seek to account
for the source of the credit decline. We take 2006.1-2014.12 as a sample period. The procedure
follows the basic approach we used for the calibration of the steady state in Section 5.1, which
we now repeat by feeding in the data inputs for each point in time. In addition, we need to
incorporate three factors concerning dynamics. First, we account for the fact that equity may
be away from steady state and that equity growth is not necessarily zero. To capture these
dynamics, we feed in the path of real bank equity growth obtained from the data, then compute
a residual between the observed equity growth and the one predicted by the model, which we
denote by ξt .46 Second, we feed the path for the nominal quantity of reserves, as well as the other
changes in the Fed balance sheet resulting from conventional and unconventional open market
operations.47 Third, inflation may also be away from the steady state value. To determine the
real demand for assets, one-period ahead inflation expectations are needed. (Notice that thanks
to a unitary IES, the dividend rate is a constant fraction of equity, and future bank values do not
affect the real demand for assets). In the data, we observe only the nominal rates and the ex-post
real rates. Since inflation expectations were anchored around a target, we assume a constant
  45
      This so-called leak held for most of the post-crisis period, and after March 2019, the FFR again started
trading strictly above the IOR.
   46
      At each point in time, the procedure generates
                                                 a bank
                                                         equity return, given    banks’ portfolios
                                                                                              and returns. The
                                                                                  d
residual equity growth equation is ξˆt ≡ β 1 + R̂tb − 1 1 + d¯t + b̄Ft
                                                                       ed
                                                                          − āt  −  R̂ t − 1 κt − Et+1 /Et .
   47
      Notice that to compute the steady state we do not have to specify the level of nominal balances to determine
allocations since the model has a long-neutrality property; (i.e., the nominal balances only matter for the price
level).




                                                       38
           (a) Volatility Shock σω              (b) Matching Shock λ              (c) Credit Demand Shock Θb




             (f) Equity Losses ξ                  (g) Credit Risk σz                 (h) Bargaining Power η




                                             Figure 5: Deduced shocks
Note: This figure presents the shocks that generate the simulations in the model that replicate the data
counterparts as described in the text.


expectation of inflation equal to 2 percent in the simulations.48 Importantly, this does not mean
that the model mechanically produces a constant inflation. The price level in the model is still
determined endogenously based on (23).


Deduced shocks. In Figure 5, we report the key deduced shocks that fit the data. The
series for these shocks are stable until the financial crisis: Around Lehman, we see both a sharp
decline in the matching efficiency and an abnormally high volatility of withdrawals. These shocks
gradually return to their pre-crisis levels, with matching technology coming back at a slower pace
compared to volatility. On the other hand, credit demand rises in the run-up to the crisis, and
begins to fall in mid 2009, experiencing a substantial decline that continues for years. Credit
risk also begins at a low level, and experiences an upward trend, with spikes around Lehman.
The evolution of η points to a rise in the bargaining power of borrowers: this possibly captures
changes in the outside options which the simple bargaining problem does not capture explicitly
(see Afonso and Lagos, 2015). Likewise, the accounting produces moderate equity losses at the
pre-Lehman phase, which also spike around that period.
  48
       Results would be similar if we consider expectations of inflation equal to the realized inflation.




                                                            39
Price level. It is important to highlight that we are matching exactly the path of the price
level. In fact, we are matching the banks’ portfolios in the data for real reserves while we also
feed the nominal amount of reserves to the model. Considering that the amount of nominal
reserves increased by more 50 times in the data and that the price level was fairly constant, this
implies an increase in the nominal holdings of reserves of around 50 times.49 Overall, holdings of
liquid assets had a much more modest increase. Thus, the model rationalizes the fairly constant
price level partly through an increase in the real demand for liquid assets and partly through an
increase in the share of liquid assets held as reserves.50


Lending Decline Decomposition. Equipped with the estimated shocks, we can feed in dif-
ferent combinations of shocks and recompute the model. In particular, we proceed to shut down
a subset of shocks at a time. Because our baseline parameters exactly match the data by con-
struction, the difference in a given simulation relative to the baseline is a measure of the partial
contribution of each shock to the observed time-series. The counterfactuals are generated as
follows. We take the estimated parameters for 2006.1 as the starting point.51 For each date,
we input the bank equity and the deduced parameter values. We then ask, What would be
the equilibrium outcome if a particular subset of shocks did not occur (i.e., if the value of the
parameter for that subset were the same as the 2006.1 value)?52 Figure 6 reports the results.
We present four variables: credit (panel a), the liquidity premium (panel b), discount window
loans (panel c) and interbank market (panel d). We consider three counterfactual scenarios: (i)
no liquidity shocks (i.e., no shocks to σ or λ), (ii) no credit demand shocks (no change to Θb ),
and (iii) no equity losses and no credit risk (ξ = 0 and no change in σ δ ).
    The importance of allowing for interbank market shocks can be seen from panels (c) and (d).
Absent the matching shock, one would have observed an increase in trade in interbank market
loans around the Lehman episode. Similarly, the model would predict very little activity in the
discount window absent the volatility shock. Panel (a) shows that these interbank markets shocks
indeed played a role in reducing credit. In the peak of the crisis, credit would have been about
5 percent higher without liquidity shocks. After 2011, the effects of interbank market frictions
become very small, consistent with the reduction in liquidity premia and in response to the Fed
  49
      The 50-fold increase is measured using Total Reserves of Depository Institutions (Totressns), which includes
vault cash. Excluding vault cash, the jump increases by more than 100 times, reflecting that the Fed remuneration
of reserves does not apply to vault cash.
   50
      Recall also that the model predicts that conventional open market operations have no effects on quantities
or prices either when the interbank market shuts down or when banks are satiated. The period around Lehman
and the period post 2010, respectively, come close to those two scenarios.
   51
      Alternatively, we could take an average of pre-crisis values and obtain very similar effects.
   52
      To solve for the counterfactual equilibrium  outcome, we can obtain, for given structural parameters, the
beginning of period equity and policies Rm , Rw , B f ed , Gf ed , the values for (Rtb , θt ) consistent with the market
                                         

clearing for loans and market tightness in the interbank market. We do this fall for every period in the simulating
sample. Notice that if we use the original parameters estimated, we recover the observed data series.



                                                          40
                                            (a) Credit                                                  (b) Liquidity Premium




                   Bear Stearns
                                   Lehman




                                                                                         Bear Stearns
                                                                                                         Lehman
                                     (c) Discount Window                           (d) Interbank Market Volume
                 Bear Stearns
                                  Lehman




                                                                                       Bear Stearns
                                                                                                        Lehman




                                                           Figure 6: Counterfactuals
  Note: This figure presents the simulations of the model for the following four scenarios: (i) baseline sim-
  ulations with all shocks that replicate the data; (ii) simulations without interbank market shocks; (iii)
  simulations without credit demand shocks; (iv) simulations without equity losses and credit risk.


policies which alleviated liquidity risk.
    Loan demand plays a modest role in explaining the decline in credit in the early stages of the
crisis. However, after 2010, it becomes the dominant factor in explaining a persistent reduction in
the level of bank credit. Finally, the combination of credit risk and equity losses has a relatively
moderate impact around the crisis, and its importance is reduced gradually through 2011-2012.


From conventional to unconventional OMO. Next, we investigate the quantitative role
of unconventional open market operations. We ask two questions: First, what would have been
the decline in total credit absent loan/MBS purchases by the Fed?53 Second, we ask what would
have been the decline had the Fed conducted purchases of government bonds instead of MBS?
 53
      Technically, the Fed purchased MBS among other assets, which take to be analogous to loans in the model.


                                                                      41
                 (a) OMO Counterfactuals                                    (b) Btf ed in the data




                      Figure 7: Role of unconventional open market operations
   Note: Panel (a) presents the declines in credit for the benchmark simulations if the Fed had not carried
   unconventional open market operations (i) and if the Fed had used conventional open market operations
   instead of unconventional ones. Panel (b) presents the data counterpart for B f ed .


    Figure 7 shows that around mid-2010 the drop in lending would have been 1.8 percent larger
should the Fed have not engaged in unconventional OMO. This result showcases that open market
operations were important to mitigate the collapse in total credit, notwithstanding the crowding
out effect—notice that the amount of loans purchased by the Fed reaches about 10 percent of
the stock. It is also interesting to note that while the size of the operations continues to increase
after 2010, the overall effect is smaller. In fact, the interventions contribute to expand credit by
reducing the liquidity risk of banks. Once, the interbank market shocks return to more normal
conditions, these operations have a modest impact.54
    Figure 7 also shows that if the Fed had purchased government bonds instead of loans, the
decline in total credit would have been about the same as if the Fed had not conducted open
market operations at all. In other words, it was key that the Fed engaged in unconventional open
market operations to mitigate the decline in credit. Essentially, through unconventional open
market operations, the Fed absorbs more illiquid assets in its balance sheet, which is especially
stimulating when interbank market frictions are severe. On the other hand, conventional open
market operations exchange assets of similar degrees of liquidity and have more modest effects.


Taking stock. An important quantitative lesson from the analysis is that liquidity shocks can
indeed be important determinants of credit supply. In our model, these shocks manifest as a
more severe matching friction between banks and by a larger volatility in deposit withdrawals.
These shocks do not have to be interpreted literally: in practice, they can be associated with
  54
     The importance of interbank market frictions resonated again in the recent “repo” crisis of October of 2019
and amid the COVID-19 crisis. Even in a regime with large excess reserves, increases in liquidity demand triggered
interbank rates to hit the ceiling of the corridor rate, until the Fed activated a program of large-scale OMO.



                                                       42
an increase in counterparty risk, resulting from, for example, from imperfect information on
risk exposure. It is also important to note that while we treat these shocks as independent, they
could have a common source. For example, the liquidity shocks that we uncover in the estimation
could have been triggered by equity losses. Our analysis reveals that that while equity losses
per se may have had modest impact on lending during the crisis, there were potentially major
indirect effects through the amplification of liquidity frictions. Similarly, the large decline in
credit demand is suggestive of a deeper phenomenon by which an initial contraction in the the
level of credit eventually translates into a decline in the loan demand. More research is needed to
shed light on these interactions. A key takeaway for policy is the importance of unconventional
open market operations for tackling instability in the interbank market. Failure to address such
instability may lead liquidity frictions to spread to the rest of the financial system and ultimately
to the real economy.


6    Conclusion
Historically, the topics of money and banking have been studied and taught together. Despite
this historical connection, modern monetary models developed, to a large extent, independently
from banking. The financial crises of the last decades in the United States, Europe, and Japan,
however, have revealed the need for a unified framework.
    This paper presents a new tractable framework for studying money and banking within a
unified setup. Frictions in the interbank market give rise to a bank liquidity management problem
and a credit channel of monetary policy. In the model, banks engage in maturity transformation,
which exposes them to liquidity risk. To insure against unexpected deposit withdrawals, banks
hold reserves as a precautionary buffer. Banks that face large withdrawals deplete their reserves
and resort to a frictional OTC interbank market and discount window borrowing. Monetary
policy has the power to alter the liquidity premium and, in that way, to affect real economic
activity.
    We consider two applications of the model. In one application, we use the model to study
aspects related to monetary policy pass-through and the implementation of monetary policy. In
the second one, we study the contribution of liquidity factors to the decline in credit in the 2008
financial crises. There are other possible applications, ranging from historical episodes like the
Friedman and Schwartz (2008)’s hypothesis of the liquidity contraction of the Great Depression to
modern policy questions regarding interactions between monetary policy and financial regulation.




                                                 43
References
Afonso, G. and R. Lagos (2014): “An Empirical Study of Trade Dynamics in the Fed Funds
 Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department, Working Paper 708.

——— (2015): “Trade Dynamics in the Market for Federal Funds,” Econometrica, 83, 263–313.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1998): “Optimal Financial Crises,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1245–
 1284.

Altavilla, C., G. Carboni, M. Lenza, and H. Uhlig (2019): “Interbank Rate Uncertainty
 and Bank Lending,” ECB Working Paper 2311.

Arce, Ó., G. Nuño, D. Thaler, and C. Thomas (2019): “A Large Central Bank Balance
 Sheet? Floor vs Corridor Systems in a New Keynesian Environment,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics.

Armenter, R. and B. Lester (2017): “Excess reserves and monetary policy implementation,”
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 23, 212–235.

Ashcraft, A. B. and D. Duffie (2007): “Systemic Illiquidity in the Federal Funds Market,”
 American Economic Review, 97, 221–225.

Atkeson, A. G., A. d’Avernas, A. L. Eisfeldt, and P.-O. Weill (2018): “Government
 Guarantees and the Valuation of American Banks,” .

Atkeson, A. G., A. L. Eisfeldt, and P.-O. Weill (2015): “Entry and Exit in OTC
 Derivatives Markets,” Econometrica, 83, 2231–2292.

Bech, M. and T. Keister (2017): “Liquidity Regulation and the Implementation of Monetary
 Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 92, 64–77.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctua-
 tions,” .

Bernanke, B. S. and A. S. Blinder (1988): “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand,”
 American Economic Review, 78, 435–439.

Bianchi, J. and S. Bigio (2017): “OTC Settlement Frictions and Portfolio Theory,” Mimeo,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bianchi, J., S. Bigio, and C. Engel (2019): “Banks, Payments, and Exchange Rates,”
  Mimeo, Minneapolis Fed.

Bigio, S. and Y. Sannikov (2019): “A Model of Intermediation, Money, Interest, and Prices,”
  Unpublished Manuscript.

Bindseil, U. (2014): Monetary Policy Operations and the Financial System, Oxford University
  Press, first ed.

Bindseil, U. and J. Jablecki (2011): “The Optimal Width of the Central Bank Standing
  Facilities Corridor and Banks’ Day-to-Day Liquidity Management,” ECB Working Paper 1350.

                                            44
Boyd, J. H. and E. C. Prescott (1986): “Financial Intermediary-Coalitions,” Journal of
 Economic Theory, 38, 211–232.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Koby (2019): “The Reversal Interest Rate,” Mimeo, Prince-
 ton.

Burdett, K., S. Shi, and R. Wright (2001): “Pricing and Matching with Frictions,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 109, 1060–1085.

Cavalcanti, R., A. Erosa, and T. Temzelides (1999): “Private Money and Reserve
 Management in a Random Matching Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 929–945.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Accounting,”
 Econometrica, 75, 781–836.

Chen, K., J. Ren, and T. Zha (2017): “The Nexus of Monetary Policy and Shadow Banking
 in China,” NBER Working Paper 23377.

Cochrane, J. H. (2019): “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Preliminary Book Draft.

Corbae, D. and P. D’Erasmo (2013): “A Quantitative Model of Banking Industry Dynam-
 ics,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No 14-13.

——— (2018): “Capital Requirements in a Quantitative Model of Banking Industry Dynamics,”
 Mimeo, Wisconsin.

Curdia, V. and M. Woodford (2009): “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,”
 Staff Report 404, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

De Fiore, F., M. Hoerova, and H. Uhlig (2018): “Money Markets, Collateral and Mone-
 tary Policy,” NBER Working Paper 253190.

Del Negro, M., G. Eggertsson, A. Ferrero, and N. Kiyotaki (2017): “The Great
 Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed’s Liquidity Facilities,” American Economic
 Review, 107, 824–857.

Diamond, D. W. (1984): “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” The Review
 of Economic Studies, 51, 393–414.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983): “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401–419.

Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2017): “The Deposits Channel of Monetary
 Policy,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1819–1876.

Eggertsson, G. B., R. E. Juelsrud, L. H. Summers, and E. G. Wold (2019): “Negative
 Nominal Interest Rates and the Bank Lending Channel,” NBER Working Paper 254160.

Ennis, H. M. (2014): “A Simple General Equilibrium Model of Large Excess Reserves,” Working
 Paper 14-14, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.



                                            45
Ennis, H. M. and T. Keister (2008): “Understanding monetary policy implementation,”
 Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 94, 235–263.

Ennis, H. M. and J. A. Weinberg (2007): “Interest on reserves and daylight credit,” FRB
 Richmond Economic Quarterly, 93, 111–142.

Freeman, S. (1996): “The Payments System, Liquidity, and Rediscounting,” The American
 Economic Review, 86, 1126–1138.

Friedman, B. M. and K. N. Kuttner (1993): “Why Does the Paper-Bill Spread Predict
 Real Economic Activity?” in Business Cycles, Indicators and Forecasting, ed. by J. H. Stock
 and M. W. Watson, University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (2008): A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-
 1960, Princeton University Press.

Frost, P. A. (1971): “Banks’ Demand for Excess Reserves,” Journal of Political Economy, 79,
 805–825.

Galı́, J. (2015): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
 New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications, Princeton University Press.

Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011): “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 58, 17–34.

Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
 Business Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and
 M. Woodford, North-Holland, vol. 3, 547–599.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Prestipino (2016): “Wholesale Banking and Bank
 Runs in Macroeconomic Modeling of Financial Crises,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed.
 by J. B. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, vol. 2, 1345–1425.

Gilchrist, S., V. Yankov, and E. Zakrajsek (2009): “Credit Market Shocks and Economic
 Fluctuations: Evidence from Corporate Bond and Stock Markets,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 56, 471 – 493.

Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajšek (2012): “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
 American Economic Review, 102, 1692–1720.

Gu, C., F. Mattesini, C. Monnet, and R. Wright (2013): “Banking: A New Monetarist
 Approach,” The Review of Economic Studies, 80, 636–662.

Hamilton, J. D. (1996): “The Daily Market for Federal Funds,” Journal of Political Economy,
 104, 26–56.

Hoerova, M. and C. Monnet (2016): “Money Market Discipline and Central Bank Lending,”
 Mimeo, ECB.

Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1998): “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 106, 1–40.

                                            46
Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró, and J. Saurina (2012): “Credit Supply and Mon-
  etary Policy: Identifying the Bank Balance-Sheet Channel with Loan Applications,” American
  Economic Review, 102, 2301–2326.

——— (2014): “Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank
 Loans Say about the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?” Econometrica, 82,
 463–505.

Kashyap, A. K. and J. C. Stein (2000): “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say
 about the Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review, 90, 407–428.

Keister, T., A. Martin, and J. McAndrews (2008): “Divorcing Money from Monetary
 Policy,” Economic Policy Review, 14, 41–56.

Keister, T. and J. McAndrews (2009): “Why Are Banks Holding So Many Excess Re-
 serves?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 380.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
 211–248.

Kiyotaki, N. and R. Wright (1989): “On Money as a Medium of Exchange,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 97, 927–954.

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jørgensen (2012): “The Aggregate Demand for Trea-
 sury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 233–267.

Lagos, R., G. Rocheteau, and R. Wright (2017): “Liquidity: A New Monetarist Per-
  spective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 55, 371–440.

Lagos, R. and R. Wright (2005): “Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy
  Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 463–484.

Lester, B., A. Postlewaite, and R. Wright (2012): “Information, Liquidity, Asset Prices,
  and Monetary Policy,” The Review of Economic Studies, 79, 1209–1238.

Logan, L. K. (2019): “Observations on Implementing Monetary Policy in an Ample-Reserves
 Regime,” Remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York City.

Longstaff, F. A., S. Mithal, and E. Neis (2005): “Corporate Yield Spreads: Default Risk
 or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market,” Journal of Finance, 60,
 2213–2253.

Lucas, R. E. and N. L. Stokey (1983): “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy
 without capital,” Journal of monetary Economics, 12, 55–93.

Martin, A., J. McAndrews, A. Palida, and D. R. Skeie (2013): “Federal Reserve Tools
 for Managing Rates and Reserves,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 642.

Nagel, S. (2016): “The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 131, 1927–1971.


                                            47
Piazzesi, M., C. Rogers, and M. Schneider (2019): “Money and Banking in a New
  Keynesian Model,” Working Paper, Stanford.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2018): “Payments, Credit and Asset Prices,” Mimeo, Stan-
  ford.
Poole, W. (1968): “Commercial Bank Reserve Management in a Stochastic Model: Implica-
 tions for Monetary Policy,” Journal of Finance, 23, 769–791.
Potter, S. (2017): “Money Markets at a Crossroads: Policy Implementation at a Time of
 Structural Change,” Remarks at the Master of Applied Economics’ Distinguished Speaker
 Series, University of California, Los Angeles, April 05, 2017.
Rocheteau, G. and E. Nosal (2017): Money, Payments, and Liquidity, MIT Press, second
 edition ed.
Smith, B. D. (2002): “Monetary policy, banking crises, and the Friedman rule,” American
 Economic Review, 92, 128–134.
Stein, J. C. (2012): “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 127, 57–95.
Stigum, M. and A. Crescenzi (2007): Stigum’s Money Market, McGraw-Hill Education,
  fourth ed.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1989): “New Indices of Coincident and Leading Economic
  Indicators,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 4.
Townsend, R. (1979): “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Veri-
 fication,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265–293.
Wallace, N. (1981): “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,” The Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 71, 267–274.
Wang, O. (2019): “Banks, Low Interest Rates, and Monetary Policy Transmission,” Mimeo,
 MIT.
Weill, P.-O. (2020): “The Search Theory of Over-the-Counter Markets,” Annual Review of
 Economics, 12.
Williamson, S. (1987): “Costly Monitoring, Loan Contracts, and Equilibrium Credit Ra-
 tioning,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 135–146.
——— (2012): “Liquidity, Monetary Policy, and the Financial Crisis: A New Monetarist Ap-
 proach,” American Economic Review, 102, 2570–2605.
——— (2019): “Interest on reserves, interbank lending, and monetary policy,” Journal of Mon-
 etary Economics, 101, 14–30.
Williamson, S. and R. Wright (2010): “New Monetarist Economics: Models,” in Handbook
 of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3, 25–96.
Woodford, M. (2004): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
 Princeton University Press.

                                            48
      Online Appendix
“Banks, Liquidity Management,
    and Monetary Policy”
                    Javier Bianchi
   Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and NBER


                  Saki Bigio
                UCLA and NBER
                    June 2020
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                                                1

2 The    Model                                                                                                                                5
  2.1    Banks: Preferences and Budgets .    . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  2.2    Non-Financial Sector and General    Equilibrium     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
  2.3    Monetary and Fiscal Authority .     . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
  2.4    Competitive Equilibrium . . . . .   . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12

3 Theoretical Analysis                                                                                                                       13
  3.1 Recursive Bank Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                  13
  3.2 Liquidity Management and Liquidity Premia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                    17
  3.3 Policy Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                              20

4 Empirical Evidence                                                                                                                         25

5 Applications                                                                                  28
  5.1 Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
  5.2 Implementation of Monetary Policy and Pass-Through . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
  5.3 Inspecting the Decline in Lending during the Great Recession . . . . . . . . . . . 37

6 Conclusion                                                                                                                                 43
                                   f
A Expressions for {Ψ+ , Ψ− , φ, i , χ+ , χ− } in Proposition 1                                                                                2

B Compendium: Equilibrium Conditions                                                                                                         3
  B.1 Transitional Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                3
  B.2 Stationary Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                 5

C Non-Financial Sector (Proof of Proposition 2)                                                                                               9

D Law of Motion for Aggregate Equity and Transfers                                                                                           15
  D.1 Disaggregate and Consolidate Government Budget Constraints . . . . . . . . . .                                                         15
  D.2 Law of Motion for Bank Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                  16
  D.3 Household Transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                17

E Proof of Proposition 3                                                                                                                     18
  E.1 Proof of Item (i) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
      E.1.1 Steps in the Proof of Item (i) of Proposition 3                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
  E.2 Proofs of Lemma E.1 and Propositions E.1-E.5 . . . .                   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
  E.3 Proof of Corollaries E.2 and E.3 . . . . . . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
  E.4 Proof of Items (ii)-(iv) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
F Derivation of Liquidity Premia (Proof of Proposition 4)                                                                              36

G Proofs of Policy Analysis (Section 3)                                                                                                40
  G.1 Proof of Lemma G.1 (Conditions for Satiation)        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   41
  G.2 Proof of Proposition G.1 Item (i) . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   41
  G.3 Proof of Proposition G.1 Item (ii) . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42
  G.4 Proof of Proposition 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   45
  G.5 Proof of Proposition 6 and Corollary 1 . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   49

H Efficient Allocations and Proof of Proposition 7                                     55
  H.1 Decentralization and the Friedman Rule (Proof of Propositions H.1 and H.2) . . . 56

I   Proof of Proposition 8                                                                                                             58

J Existence, Uniqueness, and Convergence under Friedman Rule                                   63
  J.1 Dynamical Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
  J.2 Proof of Proposition J.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

K Calibration                                                                                  69
  K.1 Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
  K.2 Construction of Bank and Non-bank Fed Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
  K.3 Calibration Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74

L Appendix to Section 4: Robustness Analysis                                                                                           76

M Algorithms                                                                                   79
  M.1 Stationary Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
  M.2 Transitional Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
                                  Table 3: Model Variable List
Interest rates
īf                           average interbank market rate
ib                            nominal interest rate on loans
id                            nominal interest rate on deposits
ig                            nominal interest rate on bonds
Individual bank variables
Portfolios
b̃                            bank loans in lending stage
m̃                            reserves held by banks at end of lending stage
d˜                            bank deposits at end of lending stage
g̃                            government bonds at end of lending stage
b                             loans at beginning of lending stage
m                             reserves held at beginning of lending stage
d                             deposits owed at beginning of lending stage
g                             government bonds at beginning of lending stage
b̄                            portfolio share in loans
m̄                            portfolio share in reserves
d¯                            portfolio share in deposits
ḡ                            portfolio share in bonds
Others
c                             bank consumption
Ω                             risk-adjusted value of bank equity
Re                            return on equity
e                             real equity
µ                             Lagrange multiplier on capital requirement constraint
V l .V b                      value of the bank at lending/balancing stage
V                             value of the bank as a function of bank equity
Interbank market
ω                             withdrawal shock
s                             surplus at beginning of balancing stage after shock ω
θ                             market tightness in interbank market
f                             interbank market loans
w                             discount window loans
Ψ+                            probability that a bank with surplus finds a match
Ψ−                            probability that a bank with deficit finds a match
Aggregates
E                             aggregate reak bank equity
Θxt                           intercept demand x ∈ {g, b, d, m}
x                            elasticity of demand x ∈ {g, b, d, m}
B,B f                         bank loan supply / firm demand
D, Dh                         bank / household deposits
M, M h                        reserve / currency holdings
G, Gh                         bank / household gov. bond holdings
P                             price level
π                             inflation
Government and Fed Policies
im                            nominal interest rate on reserves
iw                            nominal interest rate on discount window loans
GF A                          Total Supply of government bonds
GF ed                         Fed holding of government bonds
M F ed                        supply of reserves
B F ed                        Fed holdings of private loans
W F ed                        discount window loans




                                                  1
                                                     f
A        Expressions for {Ψ+, Ψ−, φ, i , χ+, χ−} in Proposition 1
Here we reproduce formulas derived from Proposition 1 in the companion paper, Bianchi and
Bigio (2017). The companion paper includes the market structure that delivers these functional
forms. This proposition gives us the formulas for the liquidity yield function and the matching
probabilities as functions of the tightness of the interbank market. The formulas are the following.
   Given θ, the market tightness after the federal funds trading session is

                                        1 + (θ − 1) exp (λ)    if θ > 1
                                 (
                            θ̄ =                 1             if θ = 1 .
                                            −1              −1
                                     (1 + (θ − 1) exp (λ))     if θ < 1

Trading probabilities are given by
                    (                                      (
                      1 − e−λ                                   1 − e−λ θ−1
                                                                       
                                   if θ ≥ 1          −                        if θ > 1
             Ψ+ =             −λ
                                            ,        Ψ =                               .      (A.1)
                                                               1 − e−λ
                                 
                      θ 1−e        if θ < 1                                   if θ ≤ 1

The reduced-form bargaining parameter is
                              η        
                          θ
                         θ−1
                        
                                   θ̄
                                   θ
                                        − 1 (exp (λ) − 1)−1           if θ > 1
                   φ≡ η                                               if θ = 1 ,
                                      η    
                         θ(1−θ̄)−θ̄    θ̄
                                            − 1 (exp (λ) − 1)−1       if θ < 1
                        
                              θ̄(1−θ)   θ

     f
and i = (1 − φ)iw + φim . The slopes of the liquidity yield function are given by
                     η  η 1−η                                η  η 1−η
                                    −θ                                          −1
                                                                                  
      +     w    m    θ̄    θ θ̄                 −     w     m    θ̄    θ θ̄
     χ = (i − i )                         and χ = (i − i )                           .        (A.2)
                      θ        θ̄ − 1                             θ        θ̄ − 1




                                                 2
B       Compendium: Equilibrium Conditions
B.1       Transitional Dynamics
Here we present the set of equilibrium conditions of the model. Given a sequence of government
              w g
policy im               F ed
         t , it , it , Bt    , MtF ed , GFt A , GFt ed , Tth , Tt that satisfies the Fed’s and fiscal authorities
budget constraint,  the system that characterizes equilibrium yields a solution for individual
bank variables, b̄t , āt , d¯t , c̄t , Ωt , vt , aggregate variables, {Bt , Mt , Dt , Gt , Et }, and a system of
prices and real returns {Pt , Rtb , Rtm , Rtg , Rtd , χ̄t + , χ̄t − }. The system features 18 unknowns to be
determined for all t. There is only one endogenous aggregate state variable, Et from which the
entire equilibrium is solved for.

Individual Bank Variables. The portfolio solution to b̄t , āt , d¯t and the values of {Ωt , vt }
                                                      

are the solutions and value of the following problem:
                                          n                                                1
                                                               d¯
                                                                                    1−γ o 1−γ
                     Ωt ≡ max                  b       m                      ¯
                                           Eω Rt b̄ + Rt ā − Rt d + χ̄t (ā, d, ω)            ,           (B.1.1)
                             {b̄,ā,d¯}≥0
                     b̄ + ā − d¯ = 1,
                     d¯ ≤ κt .

The value of the bank’s problem is
                                       1 h              1−γ
                                                                γ1 iγ
                                 vt =      1 + β(1 − γ)Ωt vt+1         .                                   (B.1.2)
                                      1−γ

Dividends depend on {Ωt , vt } via
                                                             1
                                     c̄t =                                     .                           (B.1.3)
                                             1 + [β(1 − γ)vt+1 Ωt+1 1−γ ]1/γ

This block of equations
               b m yields        the equations needed to obtain {b̄t , āt , d¯t , c̄t , Ωt , vt } for a given path
                          d
for real rates Rt , Rt , Rt , χ̄t .

Aggregate Banking Variables.                  Next, homogeneity in policy functions gives us the aggre-
gate bank portfolio:

                                           Bt+1 = Pt b̄t (1 − c̄t )Et                                      (B.1.4)
                                           Dt+1 = Pt d¯t (1 − c̄t )Et                                      (B.1.5)
                                           At+1 = Pt āt (1 − c̄t )Et .                                    (B.1.6)

Real aggregate equity evolves according to

         Pt (1 + ibt+1 )b̄t + (1 + im                g                d    ¯                        w
                                                                             
                                    t+1 )m̄t + (1 + it+1 )ḡt − (1 + it+1 )dt (1 − c̄t ) Et − (1 + it+1 )Wt+1 − Pt Tt
Et+1   =                                                                                                              .
                                                              Pt+1
                                                                                                        (B.1.7)



                                                         3
This block of equations determines {Bt , Gt , Dt , Et } given a path for inflation and nominal rates—
which together determine real rates—and transfers.

Market Clearing Conditions. The real rates and the path for prices follow from the market
clearing conditions in all the asset markets:
                                        F ED
                               Bt+1 + Bt+1             
                                               =Θbt Rtb b ,                                                             (B.1.8)
                                    Pt
                                       Dt+1            
                                               =Θdt Rtd d ,                                                             (B.1.9)
                                         Pt
                                          F ed                  m m
                                       Mt+1    =Mt+1 + Pt Θmt (Rt )  ,                                                 (B.1.10)
                                                                                               g 
                                           Gt+1 =GFt+1
                                                     A
                                                        − GFt+1
                                                              ed
                                                                 + Pt Θgt (Rtg )                                       (B.1.11)
                                                  1 + imt
                                            Rtm =          .                                                           (B.1.12)
                                                  Pt+1 /Pt

Using these market clearing conditions, we can determine {m̄, ā}

                                                    F ed    h
                       Pt āt · (1 − c̄t ) · Et = M̃t+1  − Mt+1 + Gt+1 − GFt+1
                                                                             ed
                                                                                − Ght+1 .                              (B.1.13)

                                     h                               F ed
                                    Mt+1 + Pt · m̄t (1 − c̄t )Et = M̃t+1  .                                            (B.1.14)

The last term is the definition of Rtm . This block determines {Pt , Rtb , Rtm , Rtd } given aggregate
bank variables. The return for the government bond comes from the clearing of government
bonds at the balancing stage. This condition is:
                                                              g
                         Rtm + χ+ t        if Pt Θgt Rtm + χ+
                                                             t     ≤ Gst − GFt ed
                    g
                   Rt = h Gs −GF ed i1/g
                          t tg
                              Pt Θ
                                           otherwise
                                       t


To close the system, we need the equations that determine χt .

Interbank Market Block.                We need to determine χ̄t .This follows from the conditions ob-
tained from Proposition 1:
                                                  ωt∗                                                 ∞
                S̃t−   = (1 − c̄t ) Et ·                 s̃(ω)dΦ and    S̃t+   = (1 − c̄t ) Et ·             s̃(ω)dΦ
                                               1                                                       ωt∗

complete set of where we employ the definition of reserve balances prior to the exchange of
government bonds:
                                         1 + idt+1
                                                  
                         s̃(ω) = āt +               ω d¯t − ρd¯t (1 + ω).
                                         1 + im
                                              t+1

The market tightness is defined as
                                                                      S̃t−
                                                           θt =              ,
                                                                  S̃t+ − ḡt
and the deposit threshold:

                                                                   4
                                                               āt
                                                               d¯t
                                                                     −ρ
                                               ωt∗   ≡ − Rd                     .
                                                            t+1
                                                            m
                                                           Rt+1
                                                                     −ρ
From here, discount-window loans are
                                                                                          
                                                       −
                                      Wt = (1 − Ψ (θt ))                 S̃t−   −   ḡ −
                                                                                       t       ,         (B.1.15)
                                       ¯
and the average interbank market rate, ift , is
                                         f
                                        it = φ(θt )im                w
                                                    t + (1 − φ(θt ))it .

This system of equations gives us
                                                               
           −     −   f    m       −
                                     w   m        +    +   f   m
          χt = Ψt it − it + 1 − Ψt (it − it ) and χt = Ψt it − it .                                      (B.1.16)

Note that here we take the probabilities Ψ−                  +
                                                      t and Ψt as given functions of market tightness, as in
the main text. This block determines χ̄t and the amountof discount window loans, Wt . Note that
so far, we have provided enough equations to solve for b̄t , āt , d¯t , c̄t , Ωt , vt , {Bt , Mt , Dt , Gt , Et },
and {Pt , Rtb , Rtm , Rtd , Rtg , χ̄t }. The value of Wt enters in the Fed’s budget constraint.

Law of Motion for Aggregate Equity. A useful expression is obtained combining the indi-
vidual laws of motion with the Fed’s budget constraint:
                                b
                                   − 1 b̄t + b̄Ft ed − Rt+1
                                                        d
                                                              
                 Et+1 = 1 + Rt+1                            − 1 d̄t (1 − c¯t )Et (B.1.17)

where b̄Ft ed ≡ Bt+1
                 F ed
                      / (Pt · (1 − c¯t )Et ) . Equation (B.1.17) shows that portfolio choices, market
returns, and next-period Fed policies and price level determine next-period aggregate real equity.

Consolidated
       m w Government          Budget Constraint.        The government’s budget policy se-
                      F ed F ed    h
quence i , it , Wt , Bt , Mt , T, T satisfies the following constraint:

  (1 + im           h       F ed      FA        F ed     F ed
                                                     
        t )Mt + Mt + Bt+1 − Gt+1 − Gt+1 + Wt+1 =
            F ed
                 + (1 + ibt )BtF ed − (1 + igt ) GFt A − GFt ed + (1 + iw    F ed
                                                                                  + Pt (Tt + Tth ). (B.1.18)
                                                               
          Mt+1                                                          t )Wt

and the tax on banks satisfy

                               Mt               Gt             BtF ed          m Wt
            Tt = (im − π) β       + (igt − πt )    − ibt − πt          − (iw
                                                                           t − it )    .                 (B.1.19)
                               Pt               Pt               Pt                 Pt

B.2      Stationary Equilibrium
Consider now the equilibrium conditions for a stationary equilibrium. Inflation is constant.
These are summarized by replacing time subscripts for steady state subscripts ss. Individual




                                                           5
Bank Variables. For the individual bank variables, we have
                                     1
                  css = 1 − β γ Ω1/γ−1                                                                                       (B.2.1)
                                ss           γ
                           1          1
                  v ss =                                                                                                    (B.2.2)
                         1 − γ 1 − βΩ1−γ  γ1
                                                       ss
                                                 n                                             1
                                                                        d ¯
                                                                                        1−γ o 1−γ
                  Ωss                ss
                          ≡ (1 − τ ) max              b        m                      ¯
                                                  Eω Rss b̄ + Rss ā − Rss d + χ̄(ā, d)                                     (B.2.3)
                                    {b̄,ā,d¯}≥0
           b̄ + ā − d¯ = 1                                                                                                  (B.2.4)
                     d¯ ≤ κ                                                                                                  (B.2.5)

where {b̄ss , āss , d¯ss } are the optimal choices of {b̄, ā, d}
                                                                ¯ in the problem above.


Market Clearing Conditions. The real rates and the path for prices follow from the market
clearing conditions in all the asset markets:
                                        F ED
                               Bt+1 + Bt+1             
                                               =Θbt Rtb b ,                                                                  (B.2.6)
                                    Pt
                                       Dt+1            
                                               =Θdt Rtd d ,                                                                  (B.2.7)
                                         Pt
                                          F ed                  m m
                                       Mt+1    =Mt+1 + Pt Θmt (Rt )  ,                                                       (B.2.8)
                                               Gt+1 =GFt+1
                                                         A
                                                                   GFt+1
                                                                       ed
                                                                                Pt Θgt   (Rtg )g
                                                                                                    
                                                            −               +                                                (B.2.9)
                                                      1 + imt
                                                Rtm =          .                                                            (B.2.10)
                                                      Pt+1 /Pt
                                     m
The last term is the definition of Rss . This block determines {Pt , Rtb , Rtm , Rtd } given aggregate
bank variables. The return for the government bond comes from the clearing of government
bonds at the balancing stage. This condition is:
                     
                          m                                    
                            + χ+                     m
                                           if Θgss (Rss + χ+  ) g ≤ Pt GFssA − GFssed
                                                                                      
                     Rss         ss                       ss
                 g
               Rss = h GF A −GF ed i1/g
                      ss g ss
                            Pt Θss
                                          otherwise

                                                                                  F ed
Notice that in a stationary equilibrium, the price level is pinned down by Mt+1        , using the
demand for reserves and currency. This is because, reserves are obtained as a residual, given the
indifference. To close the system, we need the equations that determine χt .
   Interbank Market Block. We need to determine χ̄ss .This follows from the conditions
obtained from Proposition 1:
                                               ∗
                                               ωss                                                          ∞
              S̃ −
                 ss   = (1 − css ) Ess ·             s̃(ω)dΦ and    +
                                                                   Sss   = (1 − css ) Ess ·                       s̃(ω)dΦ
                                           1                                                                 ∗
                                                                                                            ωss




                                                             6
where we employ the definition:

                                                         1 + idss
                                                                   
                                     s(ω) = āss +                      ω d¯ss − ρd¯ss (1 + ω).          (B.2.11)
                                                         1 + imss

    The market tightness is defined as
                                                                    −
                                                                  S̃ss
                                                     θss =                .                              (B.2.12)
                                                                + − ḡ
                                                              S̃ss     ss

and the deposit threshold:
                                                                    āss
                                                    ∗               d¯ss
                                                                           −ρ
                                                   ωss   ≡ −        d
                                                                                .                       (B.2.13)
                                                                    Rss
                                                                     m
                                                                    Rss
                                                                           −ρ
From here, discount window loans are

                                                Wss = (1 − Ψ− (θss ))S̃ss
                                                                       −
                                                                          ,                              (B.2.14)

and the average interbank market rate
                                            f
                                            iss = φ(θss )im                  w
                                                          ss + (1 − φ(θss ))iss .

This system of equations gives us
                                                                                     
                       f                                                       f
         χ−     −             m           −
                                              w        m         +     +             m
          ss = Ψss   i ss − i ss   + 1 − Ψss  (i ss − i ss ) and χss = Ψss   i ss − i ss .               (B.2.15)

Note that here we take the probabilities Ψ−        +
                                           ss and Ψss as given functions of market tightness, as
in the main text. This block determines χ¯ss and the amount of discount window loans, Wss .
    Law of Motion for Aggregate Equity. The steady state condition for the law of motion
of bank equity is:
                                     b
                                       − 1 b̄ss + b̄Fssed − Rss
                                                              d
                                                                − 1 d¯ss
                                                                  
                       1/β = 1 + Rss                                                   (B.2.16)
                 F ed
where b̄Fssed ≡ Bt+1  / (Pt · (1 − c̄ss )Ess ) .

Consolidated government budget constraint. The policy sequence satisfies the following
consolidated budget constraint:

                                                        GFt+1
                                                            A
                                                              − GFt+1
                                                                    ed              B F ed
                                                                                                               
        h                           Mt+1                                                              m Wt+1
  Tss +Tss   =       (im
                       ss   − πss )          g
                                         + (iss − πss )                   b
                                                                       − iss − πss              w
                                                                                            − (iss − iss )
                                     Pt                       Pt                      Pt                    Pt
                                                                                                           (B.2.17)

    and the tax on banks, replacing market clearing, satisfies


  Tss = Ess (1 − c̄ss ) (im                   g                  b
                                                                         F ed   w     m
                                                                                                
                          ss − πss ) m̄ss + (iss − πss ) ḡss − iss − πss bss − (iss − iss )w̄ss . (B.2.18)




                                                                7
                                                                                 ω d˜                   f0
                                                                m̃ + ω d˜                                    m0
                                         Surplus
                                                                                                                          d0         Balance Sheet
                                                                                 d˜                                                   of Bank with
                                                                                                                                     Deposits Inflow
                                                                    b̃                                       b0
                                                                                  ẽ                                       ẽ
                                   m̃

                Balance Sheet                   d˜
                at the End of
                Lending Stage       b̃
                                                ẽ                               ω d˜                                 w0 f 0
                                                                                                             m0
                                                                m̃ + ω d˜
8




                                                                         (1 + ω) d˜                                       d0          Balance Sheet
                                                                                                                                      of Bank with
                                         Deficit                    b̃                                       b0                      Deposits Outflow
                                                                                  ẽ                                       ẽ


                                 Lending Stage                                          Balancing Stage

                 Beginning of       Portfolio        Deposits       Surplus &           Interbank   End of Period Beginning of Next
                 Period Equity      Choices         Shock          Deficits            Market  Assets & Liabilities Period Equity
                      e             c, m̃, b̃, d˜       ω                s (ω)          ı̄f , χ+ , χ−   (m0 , b0 , d0 , f 0 , w0 )         e0


    Figure 8: Timeline diagram and banks’ balance sheet. For illustration purposes, it is assumed that banks do not accumulate
                                             ˜
    tovernment bonds g 0 = 0 and that (m̃ = ρd)
    .
C     Non-Financial Sector (Proof of Proposition 2)
This Appendix describes the non-financial sector of the model, which closes the general equi-
librium. The non-financial sector is composed of a representative household that supplies labor
and stores wealth in deposits, government bonds, currency, and owns shares a representative
firm. The firm uses labor for production and is subject to a working capital constraint. This
block delivers an endogenous demand schedule for loans, a supply for deposits, and a demand
for government bonds. Preference and technology assumptions are such that the equilibrium has
no feedback from future state variables to the asset demands at period t. The assumptions make
all the schedules static and autonomous. This formulation has two virtues: First, we can solve
the equilibrium allocations by solving the equilibrium in the deposit market and loan markets,
by solving the bank’s problem that takes these schedules as given. From then, since quantities
are consistent with an equilibrium demand equation from the non-financial sector, we know it
is satisfying market clearing in the labor market. If all asset markets clear, the goods market
also clear. The formulation is convenient because it allows us to focus on the banking system,
as we can effectively treat these schedules as exogenous functions with exogenous shocks to their
intercepts. We exploit this feature in the application.
    The non–financial sector is populated by a representative household that saves in deposits,
currency, government bonds, and own shares of a productive firm. Assets are special, because dif-
ferent goods are bought with different assets. Similar assumptions are common in new-monetarist
models (Lagos et al., 2017). We see this formulation as a convenient way to obtain asset de-
mands. The firm is subject to a working capital constraint, that delivers a demand for loans.
The household’s Bellman equation is:

                                                  X                      h1+ν
      Vth   (G, M, D, Υ) =       max                         x       x
                                                            U (c ) + c − h
                                                                              + β h Vt+1
                                                                                      h
                                                                                         (G0 , M 0 , D0 , Υ0 )
                             {cx ,X 0 ,Υ0 ,h}                            1+ν
                                                x∈{d,g,m}


subject to the budget constraint:
                    
       X                  X                                          X
             cx + ch  +          X 0 + qt Υ0 =                              1 + iX   X + qt + Pt rth Υ + zt h − Pt Tth ,
                                                                                                    
Pt                                                                               t
    x∈{d,g,m}            X∈{G,M,D}                            X∈{G,M,D}
                                                                                                                   (C.1)
and the following payment constraints:

                     Pt cd ≤ 1 + idt Dh , Pt cg ≤ (1 + igt ) Gh , Pt cm ≤ M.
                                     
                                                                                                                   (C.2)

In the problem, the household supplies h hours and consumes four types of goods: cd are goods
subject to a deposits in advance constraints, (C.2): cg goods subject to a bond-in-advance
constraint, cm goods subject to a currency-in-advance constraint. The ch goods that are not
subject to any constraint and yield linear utility. The quasi-linearity in ch is key to produce
the static nature of demand schedules, because it allows to fix marginal utility to one in any
Euler equation. Labor supply is h and has an inverse Frisch elasticity of ν, the key parameter
for the effect of the loans rate on output. Also, note that β h is the household’s discount factor,
that can differ from the bankers discount factor. Equation (C.1) is the household’s nominal
budget constraint. The right hand side includes the value of the households portfolio of assets,

                                                                 9
G, M, and D. These assets earn nominal interest rates paid by banks, the government—currency
has no interest. The term Υ are firm shares, which can be normalized to 1.The nominal price
of the firm is qt , firm profits (in real terms) are rth . The wage is zt is earned on hours worked.
Finally, households pay a lump-sum tax Tth .
    The portfolio G, M, and D matters because each asset is a store of wealth in the budget
constraint (C.1), but also, because each asset is a special medium of exchange in the corresponding
deposit, bond and currency goods markets. The preference specification (quasi-linear preferences)
is identical to the one in Lagos and Wright (2005). Furthermore, the fact that some goods must
be bought with specific assets, the transaction technology, is akin to the transaction technology
in new monetarist models (Lagos et al., 2017), but the trading protocol stemming from random
search is replaced by a Walrasian market. We employ the following utility specification for each
good:
                                 d
                               d 1−γ                         m                              g
               d
                        γ d c          m
                                               γ m (cm )1−γ           g
                                                                              γ g (cg )1−γ
             U ≡ D̄t                 , U ≡ M̄t                 , and U ≡ Ḡt                  ,
                             1 − γd                  1 − γm                         1 − γg
where γ d , γ g , γ m > 0. This specification delivers an iso-elastic asset demand with D̄t , M̄t , Ḡt
                                                                                           

as demand shifters. Notice that if cd = D̄t ,we have ∂U d /∂cd = 1 . The presence of the linear
term ch in the utility function implies that at the household optimum, we must have cd ≤ D̄t .
This bound will be achieved, in effect, when the household is satiated in deposits. The same
holds for cm and cg .
    Next, we present the firm’s problem. The firm has access to a production technology that uses
hdt units of labor that are transformed into t + 1 output via a production function yt+1 = At+1 hαt .
Production is scaled by At+1 , a productivity shock that works as a loan demand shifter. The
term At+1 is known at t. The firms uses bank loans to pay workers in the first period to maximize
shareholder value:
Problem 3 (Firm’s problem).

                Pt+1 rth =                Pt+1 yt+1 − 1 + ibt+1 Bt+1
                                                                d
                                                                     + 1 + idt+1 Bt+1
                                                                                 d           
                               max                                                    − zt ht
                               d ,h }≥0
                             {Bt+1 t


                                                    d
subject to the working capital constraint, zt ht ≤ Bt+1 .

   In the firm’s problem, the firm maximize, profits the sum of sales minus financial expenses.
                      d
The firm borrows Bt+1   from banks and uses these funds to finance payroll, zt ht . What the firm
does not spend, is saved as deposits. Notice that in equilibrium, the firm does not save. The next
proposition is a generalized version of Proposition 2.55 It is more general because it describes
the equilibrium solution to the asset demands when asset markets for the household are not
necessarily satiated:
Proposition C.1 The household demand for loans, deposits, and government bonds are given
by,                   
                            x   x
                                     x   x
                   h
                       = Θ t R t+1      Rt+1 ≤ 1/β h
                 Xt+1 
                                           x
                        ≥ X̄t            Rt+1 = 1/β h for x ∈ {m, d, g} .
                  Pt 
                        =∞               otherwise.
                      

 55
      We use the superscript h to indicate the aggregate household holdings of a specific asset.

                                                         10
                  Reduced          Θx              x               Θb                   b
                                       x
                                     h 1/γ     1                    −( α−(ν+1)
                                                                         ν+1
                                                                               )
                                                                                   
                                                                                         ν+1
                                                                                                 
                  Structural X̄t β            γx
                                                   −1        (αAt+1 )                  α−(ν+1)


                         Table 4: Structural to Reduced form Parameters

The firm’s loan demand is:
                                          d
                                         Bt+1            b
                                              = Θbt Rt+1
                                                     b
                                          Pt
Output and hours are given by:
                       α
                  α−(ν+1)                                             1
                                                                     α−(ν+1)
                 1            (ν+1)
                             ν+1−α   b
                                              α
                                          α−(ν+1)              1              b
                                                                                        1
                                                                                    α−(ν+1)
       yt+1   =             At+1    Rt+1           and ht =                   Rt+1           ,
                 α                                            αAt+1

and profits and the value of the firm are given by:
                   (ν+1)        α           ν+1
                                                              α                  s
                           α− α−(ν+1) − α− α−(ν+1) · Rt+1
                                                                             X
           h                                          b
                                                                               β h rsh .
                  ν+1−α
                                                           α−(ν+1)
          rt+1 = At+1                                               and qt =
                                                                                         s≥0

                                   x
   One important note is that Rt+1     for x ∈ {m, d, g} refers to the real return of each asset
                                                    m
correspondingly. In the context of the household, Rt+1  is the inverse inflation, not the real rate
on reserves. Table 4 is the conversion table from structural parameters to the reduced form
parameters of the non-financial sector demand functions.
   The rest of the appendix proceeds with the proof.


Proof of Proposition 2.
Derivation of household deposit, bond and currency demands To ease the notation,                  we
                                                                                    h          d
remove the h superscripts from Problem C. Define the household’s net worth e = 1 + it D +
                   g
(1 + im                                 h
      t ) M +(1 + it ) G+(qt + rt ) Υ−Tt , as the right-hand side of its budget constraint, excluding
labor income. Then, substitute c from the budget constraint and employ the definition eh . We
                                    h

obtain the following value function:

                                                                                     h1+ν
         Vth (G, M, D, Υ) =                         U d cd + U g (cg ) + U m (cm ) −       + eh
                                                          
                                        max                                                          (C.3)
                               {c ,c ,h,G ,D ,Υ }
                                 d  g    0    0 0                                    1 + ν
                               zt h − Pt cg + Pt cd + D0 + G0 + M 0 + qt Υ0
                                                                                
                             +
                                                         Pt
                             + β Vt+1 (G , M , D , Υ0 )
                                h h         0     0    0


subject to the payment in advance constraints in (C.2).

Step 1 - derivation of the deposit,    currency, and bond-goods demand. The step is
to take the first-order conditions for cd , cg , cm . Since {G, D, M } enter symmetrically into the
problem, we express the formulas in terms of x ∈ {d, g, m}, an index that corresponds to each


                                                        11
                                                                                   D G           M
asset. From the first-order conditions in the objective of (C.3) with respect to     ,
                                                                                   Pt Pt
                                                                                           and   Pt
                                                                                                    ,   we
obtain that:
                                          (Ucxx ) = 1 + µxt
where µxt ≥ 0 are associated multipliers payment in advance constraints in (C.2). The mul-
tiplier is activated when Ucxx ≤ 1, and thus, cx ≤ Rtx · PX  t−1
                                                                 . Solving for the multiplier to
          n                    o
µxt =max Ucxx Rtx · PX
                     t−1
                           − 1, 0 . Combining this multiplier yields:
                                                      
                  x               x −1        x    X
                 c (X, t) = min (Ucx ) (1) , Rt ·        for x ∈ {d, g, m} .                      (C.4)
                                                  Pt−1

The expression shows that the deposit- and bond-in-advance constraints bind if the marginal
utility associated with their consumption is less than one. Note that
                                         γ x −γ x
                            Ucxx X̄ = X̄
                                   
                                             x     for x ∈ {d, g, m} ,                            (C.5)

marginal utility is above 1, for X/Pt < X̄. Then, the marginal consumption as a function of real
balances is:                           (
                            ∂cx         Rtx X/Pt < X̄
                                     =                 for x ∈ {d, g, m} .
                        ∂ (X 0 /Pt )    0   otherwise
We return to this conditions below to derive the demand for deposits and bonds by the non-
financial sector.

Step 2 - labor supply. The first-order condition with respect to labor supply yields a labor
supply that only depends on the real wage:

                                           hνt = zt /Pt .                                         (C.6)

   Step 3 - deposit and bond demand. Next, we the derive household demand for deposits,
government bond and currency. By taking first-order conditions with respect to D0 /Pt , G0 /Pt ,
and M 0 /Pt the real balances of deposits, bonds and currency:
                       h
                                   x
                h ∂Vt+1                     ∂cx      ∂U h      ∂ch
                                                                        
                                 h ∂U
      1 = β                   =β        ·           + h ·                 for x ∈ {d, g, m} .
                 ∂ (X 0 /Pt )      ∂cx ∂ (X 0 /Pt )   ∂c   ∂ (X 0 /Pt )

The first equality follows directly from the first-order condition and the second uses the envelope
Theorem and the solution for the optimal consumption rule. If we shift the period in (C.4), by
one period, the first-order condition then becomes:
                               ( x
                                 ∂U
                         1       ∂cx
                                     Rtx X/Pt < X̄
                            =                          for for x ∈ {d, g, m} .
                         βh      Rtx      otherwise

Finally, once we employ the definition of marginal utility, we obtain:
                    ( γ x                x
                1      X̄   (Rtx X/Pt )−γ Rtx X/Pt < X̄
                  =                                          for for x ∈ {d, g, m} .
               βh     Rtx                      otherwise


                                                12
Inverting the condition yields:
                                   x x 1x −1
                                  h 1/γ
                         
                           X̄  β       (Rt ) γ               Rtx < 1/β h
                 X/Pt = [X̄, ∞)                               Rtx = 1/β h for x ∈ {d, g, m} .
                         
                            ∞                                 Rtx > 1/β h
                         

Thus, we have that
                                        1/γ x                    1
                        Θxt = X̄t β h            and x =            − 1 for x ∈ {d, g} .
                                                                  γx
This verifies the functional form for the household demand schedules. Next, we move to the
firm’s problem to obtain the demand for loans.

Firm Problem. In this appendix, we allow the firm to save in deposits whatever it doesn’t
spend in wages. From firm’s problem, if we substitute the production function into the objective
we obtain:
             h
                                Pt+1 At+1 hαt − 1 + ibt+1 Bt+1
                                                          d
                                                               + 1 + idt+1 Bt+1
                                                                           d            
       Pt+1 rt+1 =     max                                                       − zt ht
                    d ≥0,x
                   Bt+1    t+1 ,ht ≥0


                      d
subject to zt ht ≤ Bt+1 . Observe that

        Pt+1 At+1 hαt − 1 + ibt+1 Bt+1
                                  d
                                       + 1 + idt+1 Bt+1
                                                   d           
                                                        − zt ht
                                          = Pt+1 At+1 hαt − zt ht − ibt+1 − idt+1                   d
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                   Bt+1 + zt ht .



Step 4 - loans demand. Since ibt+1 ≥ idt+1 , then it is without without loss of generality, that
                                                    d
the working capital constraint is binding, zt ht = Bt+1 . Thus, the objective is

                                  Pt+1 At+1 hαt − 1 + ibt+1 zt ht .
                                                           


The first-order condition in ht yields

                                    Pt+1 αAt+1 hαt = 1 + ibt+1 zt ht .
                                                              

Dividing both sides by Pt , we obtain

                                    Pt+1                        zt
                                         αAt+1 hαt = 1 + ibt+1      ht .
                                     Pt                          Pt
Next, we use the labor supply function (C.6), to obtain the labor demand as a function of the
loans rate:
                       Pt+1                                                          αAt+1 hαt
                            αAt+1 hαt =               ibt+1       hν+1       Rtb
                                                              
                                                 1+                t     →         =           .                    (C.7)
                        Pt                                                            hν+1
                                                                                       t




                                                       13
Once we have the wage bill, and the fact that the working capital constraint is biding,
                                                                                              1
                                d                                                    d
                               Bt+1                                                 Bt+1
                                                                                           ν+1
                                         zt ht
                                    = ht       = hν+1
                                                  t   → ht =                                       .           (C.8)
                                Pt        Pt                                         Pt

We combine (C.7) and (C.8) to obtain the demand for loans:
                                                   −1                α
                                             d               d                    d
                                            Bt+1            Bt+1                 Bt+1
                                                                    ν+1
                                                                                                b
                   Rtb   = αAt+1                                            →               b
                                                                                      = Θt Rt+1                (C.9)
                                             Pt              Pt                   Pt

Thus, the coefficients of the loans demand are
                                                                                              
                                                     −b                         ν+1
                               Θbt   = (αAt+1 )            and  =  b
                                                                                                   .
                                                                              α − (ν + 1)

This concludes the elements of the proposition. Next, we present the formulas for hours, output
and the market price of shares.

Step 5 - Equilibrium Output and Hours. We replace the loans demand (C.9) into (C.8),
to obtain the labor market equilibrium:
                                                            1
                                                         α−(ν+1)
                                                  1                      b
                                                                                    1
                                                                                α−(ν+1)
                                     ht =                               Rt+1               .
                                                αAt+1

We replace (C.8) into the production function to obtain:
                                   α
                                α−(ν+1)                                           α
                                                                              α−(ν+1)
                         1                   b
                                                        α
                                                    α−(ν+1)                 1            (ν+1)
                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                          α
                                                                                                      α−(ν+1)
     yt+1 = At+1                            Rt+1                 → yt+1   =              ν+1−α
                                                                                        At+1    Rt+1           ·
                       αAt+1                                                 α

The profit of the firm is given by:
                                          (ν+1)        α           ν+1
                                                                                     α
        h             b           h
                                                  α− α−(ν+1) − α− α−(ν+1) · Rt+1
                                                                             b
                                                                                  α−(ν+1)
       rt+1 = yt+1 − Rt+1 Bt+1 → rt+1    ν+1−α
                                      = At+1                                               .

Step 6 - Market Price. The asset price qt then is determine as:
                                            X       s
                                       qt =      β h rsh .
                                                           s≥1


With this, we conclude that output, hours and the firm price are decreasing in current (and
future) loans rate. Throughout the proof we use the labor market clearing condition, so this
market clears independently of other markets. Thus, once we compute equilibria taking the
schedules as exogenous in the bank’s problem, it is possible to obtain output, hours, and house-
hold consumption from the equilibrium rates. By Walras’s law, if asset markets clear, so does
the goods market.




                                                               14
D     Law of Motion for Aggregate Equity and Transfers
D.1     Disaggregate and Consolidate Government Budget Constraints
We present here the budget constraint of the monetary and fiscal authority separately and show
how the consolidation leads to (10).
   The Fed’s budget constraint during the lending stage of period t is given by:
               
   M̃tF ed − Mth (1 + im      F ed   F ed
                       t ) + Bt+1 + Gt+1 =
                      F ed
                    M̃t+1  + WtF ed (iw    m      F ed
                                      t − it ) + Bt    (1 + ibt ) + GFt ed (1 + igt ) + Pt Tt − IN Tt . (D.1)

The left-hand side are the uses of funds. The Fed used funds to pay for the interest on the
holdings of reserves, which equals the money supply M̃tF ed minus the currency holdings Mth by
                                  F ed
households, to buy new loans Bt+1      , and to buy government bonds GFt+1
                                                                         ed
                                                                            . The Fed obtains funds
by issue reserves M̃t+1 ,through the income flow generated by the discount window, WtF ed (iw
                    F ed                                                                        m
                                                                                            t −it ),
                                                                      F ed        F ed
the value of the current portfolio of loans and government bonds, Bt and Gt , plus taxes on
banks Pt Tt and internal transfers from the Fed to the fiscal authority, IN Tt .
    During the balancing stage of period t, the budget constraint is:


                                        F ed     F ed     F ed
                                       Mt+1  = M̃t+1  + Wt+1   .                                      (D.2)

This budget constraint simply tracks the increase in reserves that results from discount loans.
    We can combining these two constraints, (D.1) and (D.2), and also use t − 1 period version
of (D.2), to obtain the balance sheet of the Fed from one lending stage to the other:


  (1 + im    F ed
                  − Mth + Bt+1
                           F ed
                                + GFt+1
                                      ed     F ed
                       
        t ) Mt                           + Wt+1   =
                      F ed
                     Mt+1  + (1 + iw
                                   t )Wt
                                        F ed
                                             + (1 + ibt )BtF ed + (1 + igt )GFt ed + Pt Tt − IN Tt . (D.3)

The fiscal authority’s budget constraint at t is given by,

                                (1 + igt ) GFt A = GFt+1
                                                       A
                                                         + Pt Tt + IN Tt .                            (D.4)
In this expression, the left-hand side is the value of government bonds inclusive of the interest
rate. For the right hand side, GFt+1
                                   A
                                     are new issuances of government bonds, Tth are transfers to
households, which we derive in Section D.3 of this appendix.
    We can substitute IN Tt from the this budget constraint into (D.3) to obtain a consolidated
version of the budget constraint:


  (1 + im    F ed
                  − Mth + (1 + igt )GGov    F ed     F ed
                       
        t ) Mt                       t   + Bt+1  + Wt+1   =
                              F ed
                                   + GGov         b   F ed
                                                           + (1 + iw    F ed
                                                                             + Pt Tt + Tth . (D.5)
                                                                                          
                             Mt+1     t+1 + (1 + it )Bt            t )Wt

where GGov
       t   ≡ GFt A − GFt ed ,is the issuances of government bonds, net of Fed holdings.


                                                   15
D.2      Law of Motion for Bank Equity
Law of Motion of Real Aggregate Bank Equity. The law of motion of real aggregate bank
equity depends on assumptions made on the amount of transfers to banks. We choose transfers
to keep to isolate the effects.
    On the bank’s side, replace m = m̃ + f + w, on the individual equity (14) to obtain:


                                                                                                  j f
                                                                                                                       !
          m̃jt (1 + im ) + g̃ j
                                (1 + i g
                                         ) + b̃ j
                                                  (1 + i b
                                                           ) − ˜
                                                               d j
                                                                   (1 + i d
                                                                            ) − w j w
                                                                                   (i − i m
                                                                                            ) − f  (i − i m
                                                                                                            ) − P  T
                                                                                                                  t t
                                                                                                                     j
 ejt =               t       t         t        t        t       t        t       t t     t       t t     t
                                                                                                                         .
                                                                    Pt
                                                                                                                      (D.1)

We iterate this law of motion forward one period, and integrate across banks, using the market
clearing conditions to obtain:
                          
                       h                               g
              M̃t+1 − Mt+1   (1 + iior                                     b
                                   t+1 ) + G̃t+1 (1 + it+1 ) + B̃t+1 (1 + it+1 )
 Et+1 =
                                                    Pt+1
                                                                                                                      j
                                                              −D̃t+1 (1 + idt+1 ) − Wt+1 (iw      ior
                                                                                           t+1 − it+1 ) − Pt+1       Tt+1 dj
                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                        Pt+1
Multiplying and dividing by Pt on each term on the right hand side, we obtain:

                                                                                                                     
          m
                
                               h
                                     
                                            g            b            d             w      m     Wt+1                      j
Et+1 =   Rt+1       M̃t+1 −   Mt+1       + Rt+1 G̃t+1 + Rt+1 B̃t+1 − Rt+1 D̃t+1 − (Rt+1 − Rt+1 )                −        Tt+1 dj.
                                                                                                  Pt
Now substitute the definition of portfolio shares from Proposition 3, to obtain

                                                                                                                
                                                                                                     Wt+1
  Et+1 =          b
                (Rt+1 b¯t   +    m
                                Rt+1 m̄t   +    g
                                               Rt+1 g¯t   −    d
                                                             − c¯t ) −
                                                              Rt+1        −
                                                                   d̄t )Et (1         w
                                                                                    (Rt+1      m
                                                                                              Rt+1 )        −          j
                                                                                                                     Tt+1 dj
                                                                                                      Pt
                    b
                        b¯t − Rt+1
                               d                         m              g
                                                                              
          = (āt + Rt+1            d̄t )Et (1 − c¯t ) + Rt+1 − 1 m̄t + Rt+1 − 1 g¯t
                                         
                  w        m   Wt+1            j
            −(Rt+1 − Rt+1 )            − Tt+1      dj.                                                                    (D.2)
                                Pt
Next, we demonstrate how two different tax rates for banks, lead to different laws of motions for
aggregate bank equity.

Tax Protocol. Consider a tax scheme that returns the nominal interest minus and the arbi-
trage income earned on banks, equation (11) shifted one period forward. We have that:




                                                                   16
         
               j
                                      M̃t+1                 G̃t+1
  Tt =       Tt+1 dj = iior
                        t+1 − πt+1           + igt+1 − πt+1         ...
                                       Pt+1                   Pt+1
                                                                                 F ed
                                                                               Bt+1             ior Wt+1
                                                             − ibt+1 − πt+1           − (iw
                                                                                          t+1 − it+1 )      .
                                                                                Pt+1                   Pt+1
Observe the equality,
                                                                       Pt+1
                                                                x
                         ixt+1 − πt+1 = 1 + ixt+1 − 1 − πt+1 = Rt+1 −1       .
                                                                         Pt
The tax is rearranged to the following expression:
  
        j        m
                        Pt+1 M̃t+1    g
                                               Pt+1 G̃t+1
      Tt+1 dj = Rt+1 −1 ·           + Rt+1 −1              ...
                          Pt Pt+1                Pt Pt+1
                                                            F ed
                                                    Pt+1 Bt+1
                                            b                        w      m     Wt+1
                                       − Rt+1   −1               − (Rt+1 − Rt+1 )      . (D.3)
                                                      Pt Pt+1                      Pt

Equilibrium law of motion. Then, substitute the tax (D.3) inside the law of motion (D.2)
to obtain:
                           b
                               b¯t − Rt+1
                                      d                         b
                                                                    − 1 b̄Ft ed Et (1 − c¯t )
                                                                       
      Et+1 = (m̄t + g¯t + Rt+1            d̄t )Et (1 − c¯t ) + Rt+1
                       b
                          − 1 b¯t − Rt+1d                               b
                                                                              − 1 b̄Ft ed Et (1 − c̄t )
                                                                               
           = 1 + Rt+1                         − 1 d̄t Et (1 − c¯t ) + Rt+1
                       b
                          − 1 b̄t + b̄Ft ed − Rt+1   d
                                                             
           = 1 + Rt+1                                    − 1 d̄t Et (1 − c¯t ),                         (D.4)

where in the second line we use b¯t + m̄t = 1 + d¯t . We also use the definition where b̄Ft ed ≡
  F ed
Bt+1   / (Pt (1 − c¯t )Et ) . This is the law of motion for aggregate equity that appears in the body of
the text, equation (19).


D.3      Household Transfers
Next, recall that clearing in the market for money is given by:

                                              M̃tF ed = M̃t + Mth .

and similarly for government bonds:

                                           GFt A = GFt ed + Gt + Ght .

Recall that:             
                                  M̃t       G̃t      B̃ F ed W F ed (iw    m
                                                                      t − it )
                             Ttj dj = im
                                      + igt
                                       t        + ibt t − t                    .
                                  Pt        Pt         Pt            Pt
To derive the law of motion for aggregate equity, we combine the consolidate the Fed’s budget
constraint with the budget constraint of the fiscal authority. Then, we net out the holdings of
household bonds. From the resulting budget, we combine this with the bank’s budget constraint


                                                       17
and use the market clearing conditions. Next, take the budget constraint of the consolidated
government. Similarly, we can add the fiscal authority’s budget constraint into (10) to obtain:

Pt Tth + Tt = M̃tF ed (1+im    Gov
                                   (1+igt )+Bt+1
                                              F ed     F ed
                                                            −GGov    F ed w
                                                                         (it − im     F ed
                                                                                           (1+ibt ),
           
                          t )+Gt                   − M̃t+1    t+1 −Wt           t )−Bt

and using the clearing conditions and expressions for government debt we obtain:

                                Ght (1 + igt ) − Ght+1 + ∆BtF ed − ∆M̃tF ed − ∆G̃t
                        Tth =                                                      .
                                                         P




E       Proof of Proposition 3
E.1      Proof of Item (i)
E.1.1     Steps in the Proof of Item (i) of Proposition 3

The proof of item (i) is carried out in four steps. Along the proof, we prove results in greater
generality, for the case where the supply of government bonds is enough to satisfy all payment
needs by banks, as assumed in the body of the text. We specialize the results to the case
considered in the paper. The sequence of steps are the following:

Step 1. We first show that there exists a function Vt (e) with a single state variable, e, such
that Vt (e) = Vtl (g, b, m, d, f, w) where e is defined in terms of end-of-balancing stage variables:
                                                    g             f
           (1 + im           b          d                                      w
                                         
                 t )m + 1 + it b − 1 + it d + (1 + it ) g − (1 + it )f − (1 + it ) w
        e≡                                                                           (1 − τt ).
                                            Pt
                                                              ˜ ω) = βVt (e0 ) is given by:
Step 2. The second step is to , we show that Vtb (g̃, b̃, m̃, d,
                                                                       !
                             b̃        (m̃ + g̃)            ˜
                                                            d
                e0 = Rt+1b          m
                                + Rt+1                d
                                                 − Rt+1        + Z (s̃) (1 − τt+1 )
                            Pt            Pt               Pt

where
                                           g      m
                                                     0               0
                            Z (s̃) = max
                                      0
                                         Rt+1 − Rt+1 g + χ̄t+1 (s̃ − g )).
                                      g ≥0

In tandem with Step 1, this shows that there’s a recursive representation for the bank’s problem,
with a Bellman equation that depends exclusively on equity Vt (e).

Step 3. The third step is to characterize the equilibrium in the government bonds market during
the balancing stage. Two special cases of that characterization are considered in the paper. If
banks hold government bonds at the lending stage, and there is a surplus of reserves after the
                                                                               g
government bond market opens at the balancing stage, then we can show that Rt+1      m
                                                                                  = Rt+1 + χ̄+
                                                                                             t+1 .
                               g     m
The other case occurs when Rt < Rt + χt , and in that case, we show that banks cannot hold
government bonds during the lending stage—only households hold them.


                                                     18
                                             g
Step 4. Then final step is to show that if Rt+1       m
                                                 ≤ Rt+1   + χ̄+
                                                              t+1 , future equity can be written in
terms of end-of-lending stage variables:
            "                                                                !#
                   b̃
                             
                               m̃    g̃
                                        
                                                 d˜           g̃     m̃  ˜
                                                                         d
       e0 = Rt+1b         m
                      + Rt+1      +          d
                                          − Rt+1    + χ̄t+1      + , ,ω          (1 − τt+1 ).
                   Pt          P t Pt            Pt           Pt Pt Pt

This last step is key to show that banks are indifferent between the composition of their liquid
                                                                                           g
assets. We conclude the proof with a set of sufficient conditions that guarantee that Rt+1      ≤
  m      +
Rt+1 + χ̄t+1 in equilibrium. If the condition is not satisfied, equity can be written recursively,
but the function χ̄t+1 is slightly modified. We proceed with the formal steps of the proof by
establishing the following propositions:

Proposition E.1 For any t, there exists a function Vt (e) that yields the value of the bank’s
problem at the lending stage. In particular, Vt (e) = Vtl (g, b, m, d, f, w) for
                                                       g             f
          (1 + im            b             d                                      w
                                            
                t )m + 1 + i t   b − 1 + i t d + (1 + it ) g − (1 + it )f − (1 + it ) w
       e≡                                                                               (1 − τt ).
                                               Pt

    This proposition shows that we can define the value at the lending stage through a value
function Vt that depends on a notion of bank equity, regardless of the composition of the banks’
balance sheet. Once we obtain this result, we solve the problem at the balancing stage, and
obtain a recursive expression for Vt . We need to define the balance of reserves that each bank
starts with during the balancing stage, considering the value of treasury bills at the lending stage,
prior to the trade of government bonds at the balancing stage.56 This is balance is defined as
                                                      d 
                                  ˜                   Rt+1
                        s̃(g̃, m̃, d, ω) ≡ g̃ + m̃ +   m
                                                           ω d˜ − ρd(1
                                                                   ˜ + ω).
                                                      Rt+1

The following proposition is an intermediate step toward characterizing the value during the
balancing stage, exclusively in terms of variables chosen at the lending stage. The goal is to
find a single Bellman equation for Vt without reference to the transactions that occur during the
balancing stage.
                                                                                       ˜ ω) = βVt (e0 )
Proposition E.2 For any t, the value at the balancing stage satisfies Vtb (g̃, b̃, m̃, d,
where                                                                     !
                     b̃        ( m̃ + g̃)        d˜                    
          e0 = Rt+1
                  b         m
                        + Rt+1               d
                                          − Rt+1    + Z s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω)    (1 − τt+1 )
                     Pt            Pt            Pt
and
                                            g
                                                        0
                         Z (s̃) = maxg0 ≥0 Rt+1    m
                                                − Rt+1  g + χ̄t+1 (s̃ − g 0 )).                           (E.1)

Furthermore, the solution to g 0 in Z (s̃) is the solution to g 0 in Vtb . As a result, we can express
  56
    Notice that this balance is not the balance with which they end the lending stage, nor the balance with with
they end the balancing stage. Rather, its the balance computed as if all banks would sell all their government
bonds. The policy functions during the lending stage are characterized by s̃.




                                                      19
Vt recursively,

                  Vt (e) =            max               u(c) + βE [Vt+1 (e0 )] , subject to        (E.2)
                               {c,ã,b̃,d˜}≥0,d∈[0,κ]
                                              ˜


                         ã   b̃    d˜
                         Pt
                           + −         +c=e
                             Pt P t
                           "                                       #
                                 b̃     m (m̃ + g̃)       d˜
                    e0   =     b
                             Rt+1 + Rt+1               d
                                                    − Rt+1 + Z (s̃) (1 − τt+1 ).                   (E.3)
                                 Pt          Pt           Pt

    Proposition E.2 uses that the value function during
                                                         the balancing
                                                                        stage equals βVt (e0 ) and
                                                               ˜ ω and the value of the auxiliary
shows that e0 can be written in terms of the state g̃, b̃, m̃, d,
problem in Z (s̃). The auxiliary problem is the optimal choice of g 0 in the balancing stage that
maximizes future equity. Since the objective at the balancing stage is to maximize the value at
the lending stage, but we showed that the value at the lending stage can be written only in terms
of equity, the solution to the auxiliary problem is the solution to the problem at the balancing
stage. Next, Proposition E.3 characterizes the solution Z (s̃). The optimal choice of g 0 depends
on the liquidity premium of the government bond:

Proposition E.3 The solution to Z (s̃) in Proposition E.2 is given by:
  Region 1. If Rtg > Rtm + χ̄−
                             t , then

                                                  g 0 = ∞ for any s̃.

   Region 2. If Rtg < Rtm + χ̄+
                              t then,

                                                   g 0 = 0 for any s̃.

   Region 3. If Rtg = Rtm + χ̄−
                              t
                             (                                            (
                                s̃               s̃ ≥ 0                       χ̄−
                                                                                t s̃     s̃ ≥ 0
                       g0 =                              and Z (s̃) =
                                [0, ∞]           s̃ < 0,                      χ̄−
                                                                                t s̃     s̃ < 0.

   Region 4. If Rtg = Rtm + χ̄∗t ∈ Rtm + χ̄+     m     −
                                                         
                                            t , Rt + χ̄t
                                 (                         (
                           0      s̃ s̃ ≥ 0                  χ̄∗t s̃                   s̃ ≥ 0
                          g =                and Z (s̃) =
                                  0 s̃ < 0,                  χ̄−t s̃                   s̃ < 0.

   Region 5. If Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+
                              t
                             (                                           (
                                      [0, s̃]   s̃ ≥ 0                    χ̄+
                                                                            t s̃        s̃ ≥ 0
                              g0 =                      and Z (s̃) =        −
                                      0         s̃ < 0,                   χ̄t s̃        s̃ < 0.

    Proposition E.3 characterizes the solution and value of the individual bank’s problem of choos-
ing g 0 . Next, we use the policy functions obtained in E.3 to find the possible range of equilibrium
government bond rates. It is useful to define the threshold shock that produces a deficit consider-

                                                              20
                                                                    
ing the sales of government bonds, ω ∗ , as ω ∗ = − (m̃ + g̃) /d˜ − ρ / Rt+1
                                                                         d     m
                                                                                      
                                                                             /Rt+1 − ρ . Clearing
in the government bond market during the balancing stage requires the following equation to
hold:
                                  ∞
                                       g 0 (g̃ j , m̃j , d˜j , ω j )dF ω j
                                                                              
               G̃t =                                                                                                               (E.4)
                              −1
                              ∞                                                     ω∗
                                       g (g̃ , m̃ , d˜j , ω j )dF ω j +
                                         0   j     j
                                                                                           g 0 (g̃ j , m̃j , d˜j , ω j )dF (ω) .
                                                                     
                        =                                                                                                          (E.5)
                                  ω∗                                                  −1

We make the following remarks:

Corollary E.1 In any equilibrium, Rtg ≤ Rtm + χ̄−                    g    m     +
                                                t . Furthermore, if Rt < Rt + χ̄t then, g̃ = 0.

    The proof follows directly from Proposition E.3: If Rtg > Rtm + χ̄−     t we are in Region 1 in
Proposition E.3, but since the supply of government bonds is finite, this case cannot occur in
equilibrium and satisfy E.4. If if Rtg < Rtm , we are in Region 2 in Proposition E.3. Thus, it
must be that g̃ = 0 during the lending   stage. We are left with the characterization of the market
equilibrium when Rtg ∈ Rtm + χ̄+  t , Rt
                                        m
                                          + χ̄−
                                              t .
    The next Proposition characterizes the equilibrium nmarket equilibrium
                                                                       o           as function of the
aggregate portfolio holdings during the lending stage G̃, M̃ , D̃ for the cases where Rtg ∈
                     −
 Rt + χ̄+
 m            m
                       
          t , Rt + χ̄t . The prevailing equilibrium return of government bonds depends on whether
there is a large enough surplus of government bonds relative aggregate reserve-balance deficit
in the interbank market. To simplify the calculations in the characterization, without loss of
generality, we use the portfolio of the representative bank. Item (iv) of Proposition 3 indeed
verifies that the model has a representative bank. We summarize this condition excess function
of government bonds is captured by:
                                ∞                                   
    Γ G̃, M̃ , D̃       ≡                        s̃(G̃, M̃ , D̃, ω) − G̃ dF (ω) −     G̃F (max {ω ∗ , −1}) (E.6)
                                  max{ω ∗ ,−1} |             {z         }             |          {z           }
                                                                                  Gov. bonds held by Banks in Deficit
                                                        Surplus of Reserves
                                  ∞
                        =                          s̃(G̃, M̃ , D̃, ω)dF (ω) − G̃.                                                  (E.7)
                                  max{ω ∗ ,−1}

The following Lemma is used to show that the equilibrium prices must be unique given aggregate
portfolio holdings.

Lemma E.1 Γ is decreasing and convex in G̃, and has the following limits: Γ (0) > 0 and
                       ˜
limg̃→∞ Γ (g̃) = m̃ − ρd.

   We obtain the following characterization.

Proposition E.4
               The equilibrium
                                 rates are given by:
  Case 1: If Γ G̃, M̃ , D̃ < 0 then St+ = 0, St− > 0 and,
                                                                                              
               Rtg      =   Rtm   +    χ̄−     +
                                         t , χ̄t   =   (Rtw   −   Rtm )       1−e   −λ̄(1−η)
                                                                                                   , χ̄−     w    m
                                                                                                       t = (Rt − Rt ) .




                                                                      21
                          
   Case 2: If Γ G̃, M̃ , D̃ = 0 then St+ = 0, St− > 0 and,
                                                                           
         Rtg ∈ Rtm + χ̄+     m     −                               −λ̄(1−η)
                                                                              , χ̄−
                                     +          w     m                               w    m
                       t , Rt  + χ̄t  , χ̄ t = (Rt  − Rt  )  1 − e                t = (Rt − Rt ) .


                                  
   Case 3: If 0 < Γ G̃, M̃ , D̃ and ω ∗ > −1, then St+ > 0, St− > 0 and,
                                                                   
               Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+
                             t , χ̄+
                                   t < (R w
                                          t − Rt
                                                m
                                                  )  1 − e −λ̄(1−η)
                                                                      , χ̄−     w    m
                                                                          t < (Rt − Rt ) .


                              
   Case 4: If 0 < Γ G̃, M̃ , D̃ and ω ∗ ≤ −1, then St+ > 0, St− = 0 and

                                Rtg = Rtm , χ̄+        −     w    m
                                              t = 0, χ̄t < (Rt − Rt ) e
                                                                       −λ̄η
                                                                            .



    Proposition E.4 establishes four possible scenarios for the equilibrium spread between bonds
and reserves, depending on the aggregate holdings of bonds, money, and deposits. The first
two scenarios (Cases 1 and 2) are characterized by a large supply of government bonds. In
fact, the holding of government bonds is so that all the trade in the interbank market occurs
in the government bond market, prior to the trade in the interbank market. By contrast, in
cases 3 and 4 the government bond supply is not that large enough to absorb all of the excess
of government bonds. Case 4 corresponds to a regime with reserve satiation, in which no bank
ends in deficits—a case we also study in detail.
    The next proposition establishes two key results in the paper: that banks are indifferent
between their holdings of government bonds and reserves and that the value function has a
single state variable.

Proposition E.5 If Rtg ≤ Rtm + χ̄+
                                 t , the law of motion of bank net worth can be written as:
                 "                                                !#
                        b̃          ã        d˜          ã  d˜
             e0 = Rt+1
                     b         m
                           + Rt+1          d
                                       − Rt+1    + χ̄t+1     , ,ω    (1 − τt+1 ).
                        Pt         Pt         Pt         Pt Pt
where ã ≡ m̃ + g̃. As a result, we can express Vt recursively,

             Vt (e) =              max          u(c) + βE [Vt+1 (e0 )] , subject to                   (E.8)
                         {c,ã,b̃,d˜}≥0,d∈[0,κ]
                                           ˜


                      ã     b̃         d˜
                      Pt
                         + −                +c=e
                           Pt Pt
                         "                                                          !#
                                     b̃          ã         ˜
                                                            d              ã  d˜
                 e0   =   Rt+1b              m
                                          + Rt+1        d
                                                    − Rt+1    + χ̄t+1         , ,ω     (1 − τt+1 ).   (E.9)
                                    Pt           Pt        Pt              P t Pt

Else, if Rtg ∈ (Rtm +    χ̄+     m    −           +
                           t , Rt + χ̄t ), then χ̄t in the definition of the function χ̄t+1 is replaced by
                     −          g            −                           −
some χ̄∗t ∈ χ̄+                      m                +
                       
               t , χ̄t . If Rt = Rt + χ̄t , then χ̄t is replaced by χ̄t .




                                                      22
   The proof to this proposition is immediate after we replace Z̃ (s) in Proposition E.3 into
Proposition E.2, for the case in which Rtg ≤ Rtm + χ̄+             g     m     −
                                                      t . When Rt = Rt + χ̄t , then χ̄t+1 in the
proposition is replaced by a linear function with slope χ̄−
                                                          t .
   Problems 1 and 2 can be combined into a single Bellman equation as presented in (E.4).
This concludes the proof of Item (i) in Proposition 3. As stated in the body of the paper, we
focus on the cases (3 and 4) where there the supply of government bonds is not that large,
andRtg ≤ Rtm + χ̄+t . This concludes the proof of Item (i) in the proposition.
                                                                      n          o
   Naturally, given an aggregate portfolio during the lending stage, G̃, M̃ , D̃ , we must fall in
one of the 4 possible cases. Naturally, if G̃ = 0, we are in case 2. If at limG̃→0+ Γ < 0, then by
Lemma Γ < 0 for any combination of parameters, and thus Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+     t . If at limG̃→0+ Γ ≥ 0,
then, Rt = Rt + χ̄t for any value of G̃ such that Γ > 0, and after that point Rtg falls to Rtm + χ̄+
        g     m    −
                                                                                                   t .
This suggests that as long as the supply of government bonds is not too large, government bonds
will not deplete a surplus of reserves.
    Next, we present two sufficient conditions that guarantee that Rtg ≤ Rtm + χ̄+       t , the case
presented in the paper.
Corollary E.2 If m̃ ≥ ρd, ˜ then the bond premium falls in cases (3) or (4) of Proposition E.4.

   As special case which we consider in the paper is when ρ = 0.
Corollary E.3 Assume that ρ = 0, then Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+
                                                    t without loss of generality.

   Finally, notice that when Rtg ≤ Rtm + χ̄+ t the value function depends on the sign of s̃. Banks
with deficit of s̃ sell all their government bonds. Their reserve deficit after selling government
bonds is given by:                                           ω∗
                                                St−   =−                      ˜ ω)F (ω).
                                                                   s̃(g̃, m̃, d,
                                                             −1

Bank above the threshold ω ∗ end with a surplus of:
                                   ∞                          
                  St+      =                           ˜ ω) − g̃ dF (ω) −
                                            s̃(g̃, m̃, d,                         g̃F (ω ∗ )         .
                                    ∗
                               |ω
                                                                                  | {z }
                                                        {z            } Purchases of governmentbonds
                                            Initial Reserve Surplus


We then have that,
                      ∞                           
        St+   =                           ˜
                               s̃(g̃, m̃, d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω) + g̃ (1 − F (ω ∗ )) − (1 − F (ω ∗ )) − g̃F (ω ∗ )
                       ∗
                  ω∞
              =                       ˜ ω)dF (ω) − g̃F (ω ∗ ).
                           s̃(g̃, m̃, d,
                      ω∗

If we combine these features, we establish the following proposition.
Proposition E.6 Let Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+   t , then market tightness of the interbank market can be
expressed in terms of lending stage variables as follows:
                                                                ω∗
                                            St−                       ˜ ω)F (ω)
                                                           s̃(g̃, m̃, d,
                                        θt ≡ + = −  ∞ −1                          .
                                            St                     ˜ ω)dF (ω) − g̃
                                                       s̃(g̃, m̃, d,
                                                    ω∗




                                                                      23
E.2     Proofs of Lemma E.1 and Propositions E.1-E.5
Proof of Lemma E.1. Observe that
                                        
                          ΓG̃ G̃, M̃ , D̃ = −F (ω ∗ ) ≤ 0

                                                          ˜ ω ∗ ) = 0. This shows that as we increase
where we used Leibniz’s rule and the fact that s̃(g̃, m̃, d,
the number of government bonds, relative to reserves, moves the condition closer to cases 1 and
2. Then,
                                                             ∗
                                                      ∗ ∂ω
                                       
                                 ΓG̃G̃ G̃ = −f (ω )            ≥ 0.
                                                          ∂g̃
Hence, we know that the surplus function is decreasing and convex. Furthermore,
              ∞                                    d
                                                        R
                                                                                
 Γ 0, M̃ , D̃ =               ˜ ω)dF (ω) = m̃ − ρd˜ +
                    s̃(0, m̃, d,                          t+1
                                                              − ρ E [ω|ω > ω ] d˜ F (ω ∗ ) > 0
                                                                            ∗
                                                          m
                 ω∗                                     Rt+1

and                                                   
                                                                ˜
                                       lim Γ 0, M̃ , D̃ = m̃ − ρd.
                                       G̃→∞

This property shows that there will be a surplus in the government bond market if there is a
surplus of reserves, and furthermore, that even if there are infinite government bonds, there will
be banks in deficit if there is an aggregate deficit of reserves. QED.

Proof of Proposition E.1. We have to show that the recursive problem of banks during the
lending stage, Vtl (g, b, m, d, f, w), has a value that can be summarized by Vt (e) where e is a
single state variable. To show this result, we define the after-tax real value of equity at the start
of a lending stage:
                                                                                  
                                                               g                 f                          j
          (1 + ibt )bt + (1 + im
                               t )m t − (1 + i d
                                               t )dt + (1 +  i t ) g t −   1 + i              w
                                                                                 t ft − (1 + it ) wt − Pt Tt
    et ≡                                                                                                      .
                                                          Pt
This term is the right-hand side of equation (12) in Problem 1 over the price level. If we use this
definition, the budget constraint of a given bank satisfies,

                                                 b̃t + m̃t − d˜t
                                          ct +                   = et .                                  (E.1)
                                                       Pt
                n                 o
                                ˜
The choice of g̃t , b̃t , m̃t , dt is constrained by the capital requirement and the budget constraint
is independent of the composition of real equity. Hence, the value Vtl (b, m, d, f, w) must depend
on e, but not its composition. Therefore, we can define Vt (e) ≡ Vtl (b, m, d, f, w). QED.


Proof of Proposition E.2. Define e as in the body of the paper. Consider the value at the
lending stage, V l . The value function is increasing in e, since it increases the budget constraint.
Since U is strictly increasing, the policy functions that solve the problem at the balancing stage,
must also maximize e0 . Thus, the choice at the balancing stage must be given by:


                                                       24
                                                                                                                           
   e   0
           = (1 − τt+1 )       max     b
                                      Rt+1 b̃   +    m
                                                    Rt+1            0
                                                           (m̃ − (g − g̃)) +     g
                                                                                Rt+1 g0   −    d
                                                                                              Rt+1 d˜ +                0
                                                                                                          χ̄t+1 (s̃ − g )
                               g 0 ≥0
                                                                                                                                   
                                b             m                    d
                                                                       d˜ +           g          m         0                    0
                                                                                                     
           = (1 − τt+1 )       Rt+1 b̃   +   Rt+1   (m̃ + g̃) −   Rt+1        max
                                                                               0
                                                                                     Rt+1   −   Rt+1 )    g + χ̄t+1 (s̃ − g ) .
                                                                              g ≥0


The second line factors out predetermined variables from the objective. Therefore, we write:
                                                                    
                    e0 = Rt+1
                            b        m
                               b̃ + Rt+1              d
                                         (m̃ + g̃) − Rt+1 d˜ + Z (s̃) (1 − τt+1 ).

where
                                                  g        m
                                                               ) g 0 + χ̄t+1 (s̃ − g 0 )
                                                                
                               Z (s̃) = maxg0 ≥0 Rt+1 − Rt+1                                                                        (E.2)
                                                           s.t.
                                                         0
                                                        g ≥ 0.                                                                      (E.3)

This concludes the proof of Proposition E.2. QED.


Proof of Proposition E.3. The objective is piece-wise linear and concave. The constraint
set is linear. Standard textbooks in linear programming show that piece wise linear programs
can be written as linear programs. Hence we have the following conditions for the choice of g 0 .
The derivative of the objective function with respect to g 0 is given by:
                                                 g      m                    0
                                                Rt+1 − Rt+1 − χ+
                                                               t+1 if s̃ > g                                                        (E.4)

and
                                                 g
                                                Rt+1    m
                                                     − Rt+1 − χ−            0
                                                               t+1 if s̃ < g .                                                      (E.5)


   By Proposition 2 in Bianchi and Bigio (2017), we have that χ+ < χ− , for any market tightness.
Hence, we obtain

                                 g      m                 g             −
                                Rt+1 − Rt+1 − χ+                 m
                                               t+1 ≤ 0 ⇒ Rt+1 − Rt+1 − χt+1 < 0

and also the converse:
                                g                        g
                               Rt+1    m
                                    − Rt+1 − χ−                 m      −
                                              t+1 ≥ 0 ⇒ Rt+1 − Rt+1 − χt+1 > 0.

Next, we characterize, g 0 (s̃), the optimal policy of an agent with surplus s̃. The solution depends
on the value Rtg as follows:

      Case 1. Assume Rtg > Rtm + χ̄−     t . Then, the objective in Z (s̃) is increasing everywhere in
g 0 . Thus, the maximizer of Z (s̃) is g 0 = ∞ for any s̃.

    Case 2. Assume Rtg < Rtm + χ̄+    t . Then, the objective in Z (s̃) is decreasing everywhere in
g . Thus, the maximizer of Z (s̃) is g 0 = 0 for any s̃. In this case, Z (s̃) = χ̄t (s̃).
 0



                                                                   25
                                                     value

                                                           Z(s̃s )


                                          s̃d
                                                                       g0
                                                     (0, 0) s̃s


                                                 Z(s̃d )




Figure 9: Values of Objective in Z as functions of g 0 (Case 3: Rtg = Rtm + χ̄−
                                                                              t ). Note: The figure
considers two values for the reserve balance −s̃d = s̃s > 0. The red and blue lines correspond to
the objective of banks that starts with s̃d (deficit) and s̃s (surplus), respectively. Dashed lines
represent values outside the constraint set (g 0 < 0). The figure shows how banks must get rid of
their excess reserves. Banks in deficit are indifferent between increasing their deficits or not.

    Case 3. Assume Rtg = Rtm + χ̄−        t . If a bank starts with s̃ > 0, the objective in Z (s̃) is
                                     g
                0
increasing in g ∈ [0, s̃]. Because Rt+1 > Rt+1  m
                                                   + χ+ t+1 , as long as the bank remains in surplus, it
is better of selling government bonds in exchange for reserves. At then point where g 0 ≥ s̃, the
objective is flat, because the bank becomes a deficit bank after that point. Thus, after entering a
deficit, the bank in indifferent between buying government bonds and widening its deficit. Thus,
a bank, banks with an initial surplus, end with g 0 ≥ s̃ ≥ 0. Since one particular solution     is g 0 = s̃,
                                                                                 g      m
                                                                                             s̃ = χ̄−
                                                                                           
the value of the objective for a bank with an initial surplus is Z (s̃) = Rt+1 − Rt+1                t+1 s̃.
    Now consider a bank in deficit. If the bank buys government bonds, it widens the deficit. The
marginal return of a government bond is Rtg and the cost of a unit deficit of reserves is Rm + χ̄−     t+1 ,
hence the bank is indifferent. Thus, for any bank that starts in deficit, s̃ ≤ 0 any choice of g 0 ≥ 0
is a solution—the bank necessarily ends in deficit. One particular feasible solution is g 0 = 0, and
thus the value for banks in deficit is, Z (s̃) = χ̄−t+1 s̃. Combining these observations
                                   (
                                     [s̃, ∞] s̃ ≥ 0
                              g0 =                     and Z (s̃) = χ̄−t+1 s̃.
                                     [0, ∞] s̃ < 0,

Figure 9 presents a graphical representation of the objective function in Z, for two banks, one
that starts in deficit and another with surplus. It shows how a bank in surplus must get rid of
any excess balance whereas a bank in deficit is indifferent.

    Case 4. Consider now the region where Rtg = Rtm + χ̄∗t for some χ̄∗t ∈ χ̄+        −
                                                                                        
                                                                                t , χ̄t . This means
that the objective in Z (s̃) is decreasing in g 0 as long a s bank has a deficit, but increasing as
long as a bank has a surplus. Since a bank with s̃ < 0 cannot cover its deficit, it will set g 0 = 0
in order not to increase its deficit, i.e. g 0 = 0. Conversely, a bank in surplus will sell all of its
surplus g 0 = s̃, but will not purchase government bonds beyond that point. If we replace this

                                                     26
                                                    value

                                                          Z(s̃s )


                                         s̃d
                                                                      g0
                                                    (0, 0) s̃s




                                                Z(s̃s )




Figure 10: Values of Objective in Z as functions of g 0 (Case 4: Rtg ∈ Rtm + χ̄+            m      −
                                                                                                     
                                                                                      t , Rt  + χ̄ t   for
some χ̄∗t ). Values of Objective in Z as functions of g 0 (Case 3: Rtg = Rtm + χ̄−
                                                                                 t ). Note:   The   figure
considers two values for the reserve balance −s̃d = s̃s > 0. The red and blue lines correspond to
the objective of banks that starts with s̃d (deficit) and s̃s (surplus), respectively. Dashed lines
represent values outside the constraint set (g 0 < 0). The figure shows how banks with an initial
surplus get rid of their excess balances. Banks in deficit do not increase their deficits.

conditions into objective in Z (s̃) we obtain:
                                (                         (
                            0      s̃ s̃ ≥ 0                χ̄∗t s̃ s̃ ≥ 0
                           g =               and Z (s̃) =
                                   0 s̃ < 0,                χ̄−
                                                              t s̃ s̃ < 0.


Figure 10 presents a graphical representation of the objective function in Z, for two banks, one
that starts in deficit and another with surplus; in the context of Case 4 now. It shows how a
bank in surplus must get rid of any excess balance, but not end in deficit. A bank in deficit will
not increase its deficit.

    Case 5. Assume Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+                                                                0
                                        t . In this case, the objective in Z is decreasing in g as long
as the bank in is deficit. Consider a bank that starts in deficit. Then, any choice of g 0 > 0
increases its deficit and thus, reduces future equity. Thus, banks that start in deficit always
remain in deficit and must set g 0 = 0. Thus, Z (s̃) = χ̄−  t s̃. By contrasts, the objective is constant
as long as 0 ≤ g 0 ≤ s̃. Hence, banks that begin with a surplus are indifferent between selling any
amount in [0, s̃]. One particular solution is g 0 = 0 which yields a value Z (s̃) = χ̄+    t s̃. Summing
up, we have:                   (                                  (
                           0     [0, s̃] s̃ ≥ 0                     χ̄+
                                                                      t s̃ s̃ ≥ 0
                          g =                     and W (s̃) =
                                 0        s̃ < 0,                   χ̄−
                                                                      t s̃ s̃ < 0.



                                                    27
                                                 value

                                                       Z(s̃s )


                                       s̃d
                                                                  g0
                                                 (0, 0) s̃s




                                             Z(s̃s )




Figure 11: Values of Objective in Z as functions of g 0 (Case 5: Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+
                                                                               t ). Note: The figure
considers two values for the reserve balance −s̃d = s̃s > 0. The red and blue lines correspond
to the objective of banks that starts with s̃d (deficit) and s̃s (surplus), respectively. Dashed
lines represent values outside the constraint set (g 0 < 0). The figure shows how in deficit set
g 0 = 0, implying that they sell all their initial holdings of government bonds. Banks in surplus
are indifferent between reducing their surpluses, as long as they don’t enter into deficit.

Figure 11 presents a graphical representation of the objective function in Z, for two banks, one
that starts in deficit and another with surplus, but now for Case 5. It shows how a bank in
surplus is indifferent between buying any amount of government bonds as long as it doesn’t
become a deficit bank. A bank in deficit sets g 0 = 0, and thus sells all of its initial balance g̃.
This concludes the proof of Proposition E.3. QED.


Proof of Corollary E.2. We now consider the market clearing conditions in the market of
government bonds. The goal is to find conditions on the quantities of reserves and government
bonds determined at the lending stage, such that given the returns on government bonds, reserves
and the interbank market, deliver market clearing conditions in the government bond market.
We break the analysis into the cases studied in Proposition E.3.

   Case 1. Assume that Rtg > Rtm + χ̄−                                            0
                                         t . By Proposition E.3 we have that g = ∞ for all
banks. However, since the stock of government bonds is finite, clearing in the government bond
market, (E.4), cannot hold.

    Case 2. Assume that Rtg < Rtm + χ̄+                                         0
                                           t . By Proposition E.3 we have that g = 0 for all banks.
In this case, this price can only clear the government bond market, (E.4), if g̃ = 0.


                                                 28
   Case 3. Assume that Rtg = Rtm + χ̄−
                                     t . We can rewrite (E.4) as:
                               ∞                                                  ω∗
                       ∗
              g̃F (ω ) =                 g (g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω) +
                                          0
                                                                                           g 0 (g̃, m̃,˜d, ω)dF (ω) .
                               ω∗                                                     −1

By Proposition E.3, we also know that g 0 ≥ s̃ for s̃ ≥ 0 or, equivalently for ω ≥ ω ∗ . Thus, we
can replace the optimal policy into (E.4)
                                   ∞                                               ω∗
                   ∗
             g̃F (ω ) =                                ˜
                                             s̃(g̃, m̃, d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω) +                 g 0 (g̃, m̃,˜d, ω)dF (ω) .
                                   ω∗                                                 −1

Since we know also by Proposition E.3 that g 0 ≥ 0 for ω < ω ∗ ,
                                                       ∞                            
                                   g̃F (ω ) ≥ ∗
                                                                 s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω) ,
                                                       ω∗

or simply Γ (g̃) ≤ 0. Thus, if Rtg = Rtm + χ̄−t then, Γ (g̃) ≥ 0. Furthermore, since we know that
g 0 = s̃ for banks with ω > ω ∗ , but that banks in deficit end in deficit, there is no surplus left in
the interbank market.

   Case 4. Assume that Rtg = Rtm + χ̄∗t for some χ̄∗t ∈ χ̄+              −
                                                                           
                                                                   t , χ̄t . Then, following the same
steps, as in the previous region, but now setting g 0 (g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) = 0 for banks with ω < ω ∗ , we
obtain:                                 ∞                      
                                  ∗
                            g̃F (ω ) =      s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω)
                                                        ω∗

or simply put, Γ (g̃) = 0. Furthermore, since we know that g 0 = s̃ for banks with ω > ω ∗ , then
there is no surplus available in the Fed funds market.

   Case 5. Assume that Rtg = Rtm + χ̄+                            0             ∗
                                            t . We now have that g = 0 for ω < ω . Thus, if we
substitute this result in (E.4), we obtain,
                                                       ∞                              
                                   g̃F (ω ) = ∗
                                                                 g 0 (g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω).
                                                       ω∗

Now, since by Proposition E.3 we have that g 0 ≥ s̃ for banks in surplus, we have that :
                                                        ∞                           
                                    g̃F (ω ) ≤∗
                                                                 s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω),
                                                        ω∗

or namely 0 ≥ Γ (g̃). Furthermore, if the condition holds with equality, it must be that g 0 = s̃ for
banks with ω > ω ∗ , and hence, there is no surplus available in the Fed funds market. However,
if the condition is strict, then, there must be a positive mass of banks with surplus (the supply
of government bonds by deficit banks    g̃F (ω ∗ ) does not exceed the holdings of reserves of banks
             ∞                    
in surplus ω∗ s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ . Consider the special cases where ω ∗ ≤ −1, no bank has an
initial deficit. Thus, all banks must end with a surplus, and this means we are in case 5, since
this is the only case where this is possible. QED.



                                                                    29
E.3     Proof of Corollaries E.2 and E.3
Proof of Corollary E.2. Assume that there is an aggregate deficit of reserves. Then, assume
by contradiction that
                                                                        ∞                            
                                         ∗
                                   g̃F (ω )                      >                s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω)
                                                                          ∗
                                                                     ω ∞ 
                           ω∗                                                                       
         ⇒ g̃F (ω ∗ ) +    −1
                                   s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω) >                 s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) − g̃ dF (ω)
                                                                         −1
                        ω∗
         ⇒                −1
                               s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω)dF (ω)                    ˜
                                                                 > m̃ − ρd.                                      (E.1)

Now observe by definition, s̃(g̃, m̃,˜d, ω) ≤ 0, hence a contradiction. This rules out case 1. Now
assume that the condition holds with equality. The only possibility is that ω ∗ < −1 and m̃ = ρd.˜
This case rules out 2 since F (−1) = 0 and F is not degenerate. Hence, the only two scenarios
are cases (3) or (4). QED.

Proof of Corollary E.3. The result is immediate after we set ρ = 0 in the statement of
Corollary E.2. QED.


E.4     Proof of Items (ii)-(iv)
Auxiliary Lemmas The proofs of items (ii)-(iv) of proposition 3 make use of the following
two lemmas.

Lemma E.2 The function χ̄t is homogeneous of degree 1 in (m, d).


Proof. We need to show χ̄t (km, kd, ω) = k χ̄t (m, d, ω) for any k > 0. By definition:
                                       +
                                         χt s if s ≥ 0
                  χ̄t (km, kd, ω) =                         ,
                                         χ−t s if s < 0
                                                            1 + idt+1
                                   s = km + kωd                       − ρkd (1 + ω) ,            (E.1)
                                                            1 + iior
                                                                 t+1
                                    n                     o
                                            + f
where χ−t and χ +
                t are functions of   Ψ−
                                      t , Ψ t , ı̄ t , θt    and independent of m and d. We can factor
the constant k from the right-hand side of (E.1) and obtain

                                              1 + idt+1
                                                                         
                             s = k m + ωd                     − ρd (1 + ω) .
                                              1 + iior   t+1

Define the position without the scaling factor k as s̃ given by

                                           1 + idt+1
                                                                
                             s̃ = m + ωd             − ρd (1 + ω) .
                                           1 + iior
                                                 t+1




                                                            30
Observe that (s > 0) ←→ (s̃ > 0) , (s < 0) ←→ (s̃ < 0) and (s = 0) ←→ (s̃ = 0) . Thus,
                   +                   +                      +
                     χt s if s ≥ 0        χt ks̃ if s ≥ 0        χt s̃ if s̃ ≥ 0
χ̄t (am, ad, ω) =                    =                     =k                     = k χ̄t (m, d, ω).
                     χ−
                      t s if s < 0        χ−t ks̃ if s < 0       χ−t s̃ if s̃ < 0

The last line verifies that χ is homogeneous of first degree. QED.
The next lemma establishes that an increase in the (gross) nominal policy rates by a constant
scales χt by that constant. We use this lemma in the policy analysis results when we discuss the
neutrality of inflation.
                                                        m w
Lemma
 m w E.3 Let χt be given by two policy       rates, {itm, it }, given θwt . Consider alternative rates
 ia,t , ia,t such that they satisfy 1 + ia,t ≡ k (1 + it ) and 1 + ia,t ≡ k (1 + iw
                                           m
                                                                                         t ) for some  k.
                                 m w
Then, the χ̄a,t associated with ia,t , ia,t for the same θt satisfy χ̄a,t = k χ̄t .


Proof. Observe that χt in Definition 1 (which follows from Proposition 1) is a function scaled
by the width of the corridor system (iw          m
                                           t − it ). Then,
            ia,t − ia,t = (1 + ia,t ) − (1 + ia,t ) = k((1 + iw
             w      ior         w             ior                         m         w    m
                                                              t ) − (1 + it )) = k(it − it ).

Then the result follows immediately from the functional form of χt in Proposition 1. QED.

Proofs of items (ii)-(iv) of Proposition 3 This section presents a proof of items (ii)-(iv)
in Proposition 3. Item (ii) establishes that the single state representation satisfies homogeneity.
We follow the guess-and-verify approach, common to dynamic programming. Our guess is that
                                           1−γ
the value function satisfies Vt (e) = vt e1−γ − 1/((1 − β) (1 − γ)), where vt is a time-varying
scaling factor in the value function, common to all banks. From item (i), the bank’s problem is
summarized by

          Vt (e) = max u(c) + βEt [Vt+1 (e0 )] ,
                  c,ã,b̃,d˜

               subject to
                    b̃ + ã − d˜
               c+                = e,
                        Pt
                                 
               d˜ ≤ κ b̃ + ã − d˜

                                                                                ˜ ω (1 − τt+1 ) .
                                                                                 
               e0 = (1 + ibt+1 )b̃ + (1 + iior )ã − (1 + i d
                                                                )d˜ + χ̄t+1 ã, d,
                                           t+1              t+1
                                                                                       Pt+1

Note that multiplying and dividing by Pt , we have that e0 can also be written as
                                                                         
                  b̃(1 + ibt+1 ) + ã(1 + iior ) − ˜ + id ) + χ̄t+1 ã, d,
                                                   d(1                  ˜ω
                                           t+1          t+1                   (1 − τt+1 )
          e0 =                                                                            ,         (E.2)
                                                  Pt                          (1 + πt+1 )
where (1 + πt+1 ) = Pt+1 /Pt .




                                                    31
     If the conjecture for the value function is correct, then this condition satisfies

                                     c1−γ − 1
                                                                                   
    1−γ           1                                         0 1−γ          1
vt e     −                  = max             + βEt vt+1 (e )     −                   ,
           (1 − β) (1 − γ) c,ã,b̃,d˜ 1 − γ                         (1 − γ) (1 − β)
                               subject to
                                    b̃ + ã − d˜
                               c+                = e,
                                         Pt
                                                   
                               d˜ ≤ κ b̃ + ã − d˜
                                                                                                   
                                                 b              ior     ˜      d                 ˜
                                        b̃(1 + it+1 ) + ã(1 + it+1 ) − d(1 + it+1 ) + χ̄t+1 ã, d, ω (1 − τ )
                                                                                                              t+1
                               e0 =                                                                                 .
                                                                       Pt                               (1 + πt+1 )

Observe that we can factor out constants from the objective:

                         c1−γ − 1
                                                                        
                                                 0 1−γ          1
                                  + βEt vt+1 (e )      −                   ...
                           1−γ                           (1 − γ) (1 − β)
                          c1−γ       h
                                               1−γ
                                                   i          1
                     =         + βEt vt+1 (e0 )      −                 .
                         1−γ                           (1 − β) (1 − γ)

Then, if we substitute the evolution of e0 in (E.2), we obtain

                      c1−γ
vt e1−γ = max              +                                                                                  (E.3)
          c,ã,b̃,d˜ 1 − γ
                                                                                                       1−γ 
                               b̃(1 + ibt+1 ) + ã(1 + iior ) − ˜ + id ) + χ̄t+1 ã, d,
                                                                d(1                  ˜ω
                                                        t+1          t+1                   (1 − τ     t+1 ) 
         βEω vt+1 
                                                                                                                
                                                           Pt                                  (1 + πt+1 )
                                                                                                                 

       subject to
            b̃ + ã − d˜
       e=                +c
                 Pt
                         
       d˜ ≤ κ b̃ + ã − d˜ .

Let us define variables in terms of equity, c̄ = c/e. Also, define b̄ = b̃/ ((1 − c̄ )ePt ) , ā =
ã/ ((1 − c̄ )ePt ) , and d¯ = d/
                                ˜ ((1 − c̄ )ePt ), as in the statement of Proposition 3. By Lemma E.2,
we can factor constants (1 − c̄ )ePt from χ̄t and express it as
                                                                  !
                                         ã            d˜                                ¯ω .
                                                                                            
                 (1 − c̄ )ePt χ̄t               ,              , ω = Pt (1 − c̄)eχ̄t ā, d,
                                   Pt (1 − c̄ )e Pt (1 − c̄ )e




                                                         32
Using this observation, we can replace c̄ in the value function to obtain

                           c̄1−γ
  vt e1−γ = max e1−γ             + βvt+1 ((1 − c̄) e)1−γ Eω ...                                  (E.4)
            c,ã,b̃,d˜   (1 − γ)
           "                                                                      #            !1−γ
               b̃(1 + ibt+1 )/Pt ã(1 + iior        ˜ + id )/Pt
                                         t+1 )/Pt   d(1                           (1 − τt+1 )
                                +                 −        t+1                ¯ω
                                                                  + χ̄t+1 ā, d,
                  (1 − c̄) e         (1 − c̄) e        (1 − c̄) e                   (1 + πt )
        subject to:
         b̃ + ã − d˜
                      =1
         (1 − c̄) ePt
                                                          !
           ˜ t
           d/P             b̃/Pt      ã/Pt      ˜ t
                                                 d/P
                    ≤κ             +          −
         (1 − c̄) e      (1 − c̄) e (1 − c̄) e (1 − c̄) e

From this expression, we can cancel out e1−γ from both sides of (E.4), which verifies that the
objective is scaled by e1−γ . Thus, we verify the guess that Vt (e) = vt e1−γ − ((1 − β) (1 − γ))−1 .
   Next, we derive the policies that attain Vt (e) and the value of vt . If the conjecture is correct,
                                    ¯ we obtain
using the definition of b̄, ā, and d,

                                  c̄1−γ
          vt =      max                 + βvt+1 (1 − c̄)1−γ ...                                  (E.5)
                {c̄,b̄,ā,d¯}≥0 (1 − γ)
                                                                             (1 − τt+1 ) 1−γ
                                                                                          
            Eω (1 + it+1 )b̄ + (1 + it+1 )ā − (1 + it+1 )d¯ + χ̄t+1 ā, d,
                              b            ior             d             ¯ω
                   
                                                                               (1 + πt+1 )
            subject to
            b̄ + ā − d¯ = 1
            d¯ ≤ κ

Thus, any solution to Vt (e) must be consistent with the solution of vt if the conjecture is correct.
Define real return on equity as follows:
                E            ¯ ω) ≡ Rb b̄ + Rm ā − Rd d¯ + χt+1   ¯ ā, ω) (1 − τt+1 ).
                                                                           
               Rt+1 (b̄, ā, d,      t+1     t+1     t+1     ¯   (d,

Then, the value function can be written as

                                        c̄1−γ                                      ¯ ω) 1−γ .
                                              + βvt+1 (1 − c̄)1−γ Eω Rt+1
                                                                     E                   
                    vt = max                                              (b̄, ā, d,
                        {c̃,b̄,ā,d¯} (1 − γ)
We now use the principle of optimality. Let Ωt be the certainty equivalent of the bank’s optimal
portfolio problem, that is,
                                                                       1
                                                              ¯ ω) 1−γ 1−γ
                                                 E              
                                Ωt ≡ max Eω Rt+1     (b̄, ā, d,
                                    {b̄,ā,d¯}
                   ¯             ¯ κ. Assume c̄ is optimal. If γ < 1, the solution that attains vt must
               Ed = 1 and d ≤
subject to b̄+ā−
                               ¯
maximize Eω  Rt+1 (b̄, ā, d, ω)1−γ if vt+1 is positive. If γ > 1, the solution that attains vt must
                                     

minimize Eω Rt+1 E            ¯ ω)1−γ if vt+1 is negative. We guess and verify that when γ < 1, the
                     (b̄, ā, d,


                                                       33
term vt+1 is positive and vt+1 is negative when γ > 1. Under this assumption, if γ < 1, we have
that vt+1 > 0, so 1−γ > 0. Thus, by maximizing Ωt , we are effectively maximizing the right-hand
side of vt . Instead, when γ > 1, we have that vt+1 < 0, so 1 − γ < 0. Thus, by maximizing Ωt , we
are minimizing Ω1−γ t  , which multiplied by a negative number—vt+1 —maximizes the right-hand
side of vt .
    Hence, the Bellman equation becomes

                                                          c̄1−γ
                                    vt = max                    + βvt+1 (1 − c̄)1−γ Ω1−γ
                                                                                     t   .
                                        {c̄,b̄,ā,d¯}≥0 (1 − γ)

This yields the statements in items (i) and (ii), provided that vt inherits the sign of (1 − γ).
    To prove item (iii), we take the first-order conditions with respect to c̄, and raising both sides
to the − γ1 power, we obtain

                                                               −(1−γ)/γ                                1
                                       c̄ = (βvt+1 )−1/γ Ωt                 (1 − c̄) (1 − γ)− γ .

We can rearrange terms to obtain
                                                                  1
                                              c̄ =                          1/γ .
                                                      1 + βvt+1 (1 − γ)Ω1−γ
                                                         
                                                                        t


Define ξt = (1 − γ)βvt+1 Ω1−γ
                           t  . Under the conjectured sign of vt , the term ξt is always positive.
Substituting this expression for dividends, we obtain a functional equation for the value function
                     −(1−γ)                                                                     −(1−γ)
                1/γ                                                #(1−γ)                    1/γ                                 #(1−γ)
           1 + ξt                                                                   1 + ξt
                                                  "                                                                   "
                                                           1/γ                                                            1/γ
                                                          ξt                                                      ξt     ξt
vt =                            + βvt+1 Ω1−γ
                                         t                   1/γ
                                                                            =                                +
              (1 − γ)                                 1   + ξt                          (1 − γ)                (1 − γ) 1 + ξt1/γ

and finally,                                                                       "                #(1−γ) 
                                                                                             1/γ
                                       1       
                                               1 + ξt1/γ
                                                          −(1−γ)                           ξt
                                =                                 + ξt                         1/γ
                                                                                                             .
                                    (1 − γ)                                             1   + ξt

   Thus, we obtain

                                                                                                            
                                                                                              1/γ
                                          1                    1                             ξt
                                vt =                                 (1−γ) + 
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                    (1−γ) 
                                       (1 − γ)
                                               
                                                               1/γ                            1/γ
                                                          1 + ξt                     1 + ξt
                                                               1/γ
                                         1        1 + ξt             1    
                                                                                 1/γ
                                                                                     γ
                                    =                    (1−γ) =           1 + ξt      .
                                      (1 − γ)                     (1 − γ)
                                              
                                                     1/γ
                                                1 + ξt

This verifies that vt inherits the sign of (1 − γ). Thus, we can use Ω∗ directly in the value




                                                                     34
function. Furthermore, vt satisfies the following difference equation:
                                    1 h                   1−γ
                                                                 γ1 iγ
                            vt =          1 + β(1 − γ)Ωt vt+1           .                    (E.6)
                                  1−γ
We can treat the right-hand side of this functional equation, solved independently of consumption.
If we solve for this equation independently of the banker’s consumption, we can obtain a solution
to the banker’s consumption policy via

                                                     1
                                  c̄ =                         1/γ .
                                         1 + βvt+1 (1 − γ)Ω1−γ
                                            
                                                           t

This concludes the proof of items (i)-(iv), for all cases except γ → 1. We work out that case
next.

Log-Case. Observe that as γ → 1, then vt in (E.6) explodes. However, we can guess and verify
that

                                                             1
                                         lim vt (1 − γ) =       .
                                         γ→1                1−β
This assumption can be verified in equation (E.6). In this case,
                             h                      γ1 iγ
         lim (1 − γ) vt = lim 1 + β(1 − γ)Ω∗1−γ
                                           t    vt         = 1 + β/ (1 − β) = 1/ (1 − β) .
         γ→1              γ→1

Thus, as γ → 1 , we have that c = (1 − β). Thus,
                                                           ¯ ω)
                          Ωt ≡ max exp Eω log RtE (b̄, ā, d,
                                                              
                                                                   .
                                {b̄,ā,d¯}

This final step completes the proof of aggregation. QED.




                                                   35
F      Derivation of Liquidity Premia (Proof of Proposition
       4)
In this section, we suppress time subscripts and study the liquidity premia that emerge from
portfolio problem (17). The calculations here proof Proposition 4. We derive the premia in the
case where government bonds are not large enough to eliminate the surplus of reserves, as in
the paper. A more general statement follows simply by substituting {χ̄− , χ̄+ } for the coefficients
given in Proposition E.5. Everything else remains the same. The starting point is to replace the
                                ¯ into the objective in (17), we obtain:
budget constraint b̄ + ā = 1 + d,
                                              n                                       o 1
                                                                                   ¯ ω 1−γ 1−γ .
                                               Eω Rm − Rb ā − Rb − Rd d¯ + χ̄ ā, d,
                                                                     
       Ωt ≡ (1 − τ )               max
                            {b̄,ā}≥0,d∈[0,κ]
                                      ¯


Let ω ∗ be the threshold shock that makes s̃ < 0. Partition the expectation inside the objective
into two terms:
                     ¯ )
              ω ∗ (ā,d,ω
                                                                    ¯ ω) 1−γ f (ω) dω +
                             R + Rm − Rb ā + Rb − Rd d¯ + χ̄− (ā, d,
                             b                                       
            −1
                   ∞
                                                                             ¯ ω) 1−γ f (ω) dω.
                                     Rb + Rm − Rb ā + Rb − Rd d¯ + χ̄+ (ā, d,
                                                                              
                           ¯ )
                   ω ∗ (ā,d,ω



Derivatives of the Liquidity Cost Function. For the rest of the proof we use the following
calculations:                                    d    
                                                 R
                              s = ā − ρd¯ + d¯     − ρ ω.
                                                 Rm
Hence, we have that
                                                   ¯ω
                                                              (
                                          ∂ χ̄ ā, d,       1    χ+                 if ω > ω ∗
                                                        =
                                               ∂ā        1 + π χ−                  if ω < ω ∗
and                                                    d      
                                                          R
                                 ¯                 +
                                                  χ −ρ + Rm − ρ ω   if ω > ω ∗
                                      
                        ∂ χ̄ ā, d, ω       1   
                                        =                                      .
                             ∂ d¯
                                                               
                                          1 + π χ− −ρ + Rmd − ρ ω  if ω < ω ∗
                                                          R


Derivation of the Loan Liquidity Premium. Assuming the solution is interior in m̄, we
can take the derivative with respect to m̄ to obtain:
                                             ω∗                                           ∞
                                                                   − ∂s̃              ∂s̃
    Eω (Rωe )−γ Rm − Rb +                          (Rωe )−γ                                     (Rωe )−γ χ̄+
                     
                                                              χ̄           f (ω) dω +      f (ω) dω+ . . .
                                  −1                  ∂ā               ω∗            ∂ā
                                                 ∂ω ∗                                                ∂ω ∗
        + (Rωe )−γ χ̄− s̃f (ω) ω=ω∗ (ḡ,m̄,d¯) ·      − (Rωe )−γ χ̄+ s̃f (ω) f (ω) ω=ω∗ (ḡ,m̄,d¯) ·      = 0
                                                 ∂ m̄                                                ∂ m̄
             ¯ ω ∗ = 0, the second line in the expression vanishes. Importantly, the expectation
                  
Since s̃ ā, d,
                   e −γ 
operator in Eω (Rω )         excludes the point ω = ω ∗ —since this is a zero probability event, we
simply exclude the point where the derivative is not included in the notation. We rearrange


                                                                           36
terms to express the condition as::
                         e −γ                                     e −γ
                                   ω > ω∗                                  ω < ω∗
                                                                                 
                    + Eω (Rω )                       ∗        − Eω (Rω )
        b    m
      R − R = χ̄             
                                e   −γ     (1 − F (ω )) + χ̄        
                                                                         e −γ      F (ω ∗ ) .
                         Eω (Rω )                                  Eω (Rω )

This expression uses the definition of conditional expectation. Furthermore, we use the decom-
position of an unconditional into two conditional expectations to obtain:

        Eω (Rωe )−γ ω > ω ∗ (1 − F (ω ∗ )) = Eω (Rωe )−γ − Eω (Rωe )−γ ω < ω ∗ F (ω ∗ ) .
                                                                         


We thus express the loans premium as:

                                          Eω (Rωe )−γ ω < ω ∗
                                                              
                                         −
                      b     m     +
                    R − R = χ̄ + χ̄ − χ̄       +
                                                 
                                                      e −γ      F (ω ∗ ) .
                                               Eω (Rω )
Clearly, since χ̄− > χ̄+ > 0 and marginal utility is positive,
                                                            the loan premium            Finally,
                                                                              is positive.
since we know that (Rωe )−γ > 0, we have that 0 < Eω (Rωe )−γ ω < ω ∗ F (ω ∗ ) < Eω (Rωe )−γ .
                                                                                               

This condition implies that Rw ≥ Rb ≥ Rm .

Derivation of the Bond Liquidity Premium. Earlier, in the proof of of Proposition 3,
item (i), where Proposition E.4 shows in the cases where S + >0, we have that Rg ≤ Rm +
χ+ . If the equality  is strict, we also showed  that g̃ = 0. Observe again that since 0 <
        e −γ        ∗        ∗           e −γ
Eω (Rω ) ω < ω F (ω ) < Eω (Rω ) , we have that Rw > Rb ≥ Rg ≥ Rm . The inequalities
                                              

are strict if and only if, the Fed eliminates the spread in its corridor rates, Rw = Rm , or if banks
are satiated with reserves F (ω ∗ ) = 0.

Derivation of the External Financing Premium and the Deposit Liquidity Premium.
The derivation of the external financing premium follows the same steps as the loans premium.
However, the presence of the capital requirement constraint implies that
                                                              ¯
                                            h                     i
                                         Eω (Rωe )−γ ∂ χ̄(ā,d,ω)
                                                          ∂ d¯
                             Rb − Rd =                −γ          + µ,                 (F.1)
                                             Eω (Rωe )

where µ is a Kuhn-Tucker multiplier associated with the capital requirement condition. We can
subtract the loans liquidity premium to obtain:
                                                       ¯              ¯
                                       h        h                          ii
                                          e −γ ∂ χ̄(ā,d,ω)   ∂ χ̄(ā,d,ω)
                                    Eω (Rω )        ∂ā
                                                            − ∂ d¯
                      Rm − Rd = −                                             + µ.
                                              Eω (Rωe )−γ
                                                           

Thus, the liquidity premium on deposits is the difference between the marginal benefit of addi-
tional reserves minus the benefit
    The expression inside the the right-hand side is given by:
                                                  
                                              #  +          d
                                                                R
                                                                      
                       ¯                 ¯                               if ω > ω ∗
            "
                                                    χ̄ 1 + ρ − Rm − ρ ω
                            
              ∂ χ̄ ā, d, ω     ∂ χ̄ ā, d, ω
                              −                 =                                   .
                                     ∂ d¯
                                                                    
                   ∂ā                            χ̄− 1 + ρ − Rd − ρ ω  if ω < ω ∗
                                                               Rm



                                                   37
Then, it is convenient to partition the expectation:
                       ¯               ¯
  h          h                              ii           h                     d                i
Eω (Rωe )−γ ∂ χ̄(∂m̄,m̄d,ω) − ∂ χ̄(m̄,
                                   ∂ d¯
                                       d,ω)
                                                      Eω   (R e −γ
                                                              ω )    (1 + ρ) −   R
                                                                                Rm
                                                                                    − ρ  ω  ω > ω ∗

                          −γ                   = χ̄ +
                                                                                                      (1 − F (ω ∗ ))
                                                                         Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                                 
            Eω (Re )
                                                         h                     d                i
                                                      Eω (Rωe )−γ (1 + ρ) − RRm − ρ ω ω < ω ∗
                                               + χ̄−                                                  F (ω ∗ ) .
                                                                         Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                                   

Thus, liquidity premium of deposits as:
                       ¯               ¯
  h         h                               ii
Eω (Rωe )−γ ∂ χ̄(∂m̄,m̄d,ω) − ∂ χ̄(m̄, d,ω)             "                         e −γ                            #
                                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                                         
                                   ∂ d¯                                      E ω  (R  ω )     ω  <  ω
                                               = (1 + ρ) χ̄+ + χ̄− − χ̄+                                   F (ω ∗ ) ...
                                                                           
           Eω (Re )−γ                                                             Eω (Rωe )−γ
                                                                                              
                                                                    e −γ
                                                                              ω ω > ω∗
                                                  d                                        
                                                              + Eω (Rω )
                                                          
                                                   R
                                               −     m
                                                       − ρ χ̄                   −γ          (1 − F (ω ∗ )) ....
                                                   R                 Eω (R )  e
                                                  d                e −γ                 ∗
                                                                                            
                                                                    (R   )    ω  ω  <   ω
                                                          
                                                   R            Eω     ω
                                               −       − ρ χ̄−                                F (ω ∗ )
                                                   Rm                Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                                   

Using the the same decomposition, we have:
                       ¯               ¯
   h       h                                ii
Eω (Rωe )−γ ∂ χ̄(∂m̄,m̄d,ω) − ∂ χ̄(m̄, d,ω)             "                       e −γ                        #
                                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                                   
                                   ∂d¯                                     E ω   (R ω )    ω < ω
                                               = (1 + ρ) χ̄+ + χ̄− − χ̄+                             F (ω ∗ ) ...
                                                                         
           Eω (Re )−γ                                                            Eω (Rωe )−γ
                                                                                          
                                                  d      "                         e −γ               ∗
                                                                                                                    #
                                                   R                             Eω    (Rω )  ω  ω   < ω
                                                       − ρ χ̄+ + χ̄− − χ̄+                                   F (ω ∗ ) .
                                                                               
                                               −
                                                   Rm                                   Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                                                   


We combine these expressions to obtain:

                                                                              Rd
                                                                                
                         m       d                      b    m
                                                                     
                       R − R = − (1 + ρ) R − R                           + ρ − m DRP + µ,
                                                                              R

where DRPt stands for a deposit risk premium:
                         "                      e −γ                      #
                                                               ∗
                                                                 
                                            Eω  (Rω ) ω  ω < ω
                DRP ≡ χ̄+ + χ̄− − χ̄+                              F (ω ∗ ) .
                                          
                                                    
                                                      e −γ 
                                                 Eω (R )

We re-arrange the expression, to obtain:

                                                                             Rd
                                                                                  
                           d      m                 b        m
                                                                 
                         R − R = (1 + ρ) R − R                       +          − ρ DRP − µ.
                                                                             Rm

Next, we show that the deposit risk premium, the second term, is also positive.
   Next, we demonstrate the sign of DRP. Since, Eω [ω] = 0 marginal utility is decreasing, the




                                                            38
risk-weighted expectations operator carries a premium over a fair bet:
                                                    "              #
                       Eω (Rωe )−γ ω ω < ω ∗            (Rωe )−γ
                                            
                                               ≤ Eω              ω ≤ 0.
                            Eω (Re )−γ                Eω (Re )−γ
                                                       


Therefore:
                    e −γ           ∗
                                                                e −γ             ∗
                                                                                     
                Eω  (Rω ) ω  ω  > ω                          Eω  (R ω )   ω  ω < ω
    DRPt = χ̄+                          (1 − F (ω ∗ )) + χ̄−                           F (ω ∗ )
                     Eω (Re )−γ                                   Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                            
                    e −γ                                        e −γ
                          ω ω > ω∗                                        ω ω < ω∗
                                                                                    
              + Eω (Rω )                          ∗        + Eω (Rω )
         ≤ χ̄           
                          e  −γ        (1 − F (ω )) + χ̄             
                                                                          e −γ        F (ω ∗ )
                     Eω (R )                                      Eω (R )
                                                                             e −γ 
                                                                       + Eω (Rω )    ω
                                                                  = χ̄           −γ   ≤ 0.
                                                                          Eω (Re )
                                                                                       d
A necessary condition for the deposit liquidity premium to be negative, ρ > RRm . However, if
the premium is negative, Rd > Rm , but since ρ <1, the necessary condition is violated. Thus,
the DRP is negative. This concludes the proof of Proposition 4 and the claims about their sign.
QED.




                                                  39
G        Proofs of Policy Analysis (Section 3)
To present formal proofs, we define two important concepts: reserve satiation and neutrality.
Definition 4 (Satiation). Banks are satiated with reserves at period t if the liquidity premium
is zero, that is, if Rtb = Rtm .

    The following Lemma states that banks are satiated with reserves under two conditions.
Lemma G.1 Banks are satiated with reserves if and only if either (case 1) iw    m
                                                                           t = it or (case
2) a bank is in surplus for ω = ωmin .

   To discuss policy effects, we compare an original policy sequence—with sub-index o—with
an alternative (shocked) policy—sub-index s in all of the exercises. We mean that a policy is
neutral relative to the other in the following sense.
Definition 5 (Neutrality). Consider original and alternative policy sequences:
                            F ed
                                 , GFo,ted , GFo,tA , Mo,t , Wo,t , To,t , κo,t , iior    w
                  
                    ρo,t , Bo,t                                                    o,t , io,t and
                                            F ed
                                                 , GFs,ted , GFs,tA , Ms,t , Ws,t , Ts,t , κs,t , iior    w
                                
                                    ρs,t , Bs,t                                                    s,t , is,t .

Policy s is neutral—relative to o—if the induced equilibria satisfies

               Eo,t , co,t , b̄o,t , d¯o,t , m̄o,t , ḡo,t = Es,t , cs,t , b̄s,t , d¯s,t , m̄s,t , ḡs,t for all t ≥ 0.
                                                           


    When the condition holds, real aggregate loans and deposits are also determined, and identical
to those of the original allocation—and also for currency and holdings of government bonds and
currency. The rest of this appendix shows the proofs for the classic exercises in monetary policy
analysis that we studied in the main text. We begin by establishing to classic results:
                                                                                        F ed
Proposition G.1 Consider an equilibrium sequence induced policy {Mt+1 , Wt+1 , Bt+1          , GFt+1
                                                                                                   ed
                                                                                                      ,}
                                                                  w m
that grows at rate kt and a sequence of nominal policy rates {it , it }. Then,
    i) Consider a policy sequence that induces a stationary equilibrium and another policy sequence
where Fed balance sheet is scaled by a constant K > 0. Then, the alternative policy induces
another stationary equilibrium where the price level is scaled by K, but all real variables are the
same as in the original stationary equilibrium.
    ii) Consider an increase the balance sheet of the Fed by kt for some t, has no real effects if
and only if the
              n demand     for
                            o currency is inelastic (or zero) and the Fed alters its nominal policy
                1+im  1+i w
rates to keep 1+ktt , 1+ktt constant.

    Part i) establishes long-run money neutrality. This result applies only to the stationary
equilibrium because assets are nominal. Thus, changes at any point in time, by changing the
price level have redistributive consequences. Even if the policy is anticipated, if policy rates
are not adjusted, the policy change induces a different equilibrium. In the long run, however, a
change in the scale of the Fed’s balance sheet leads to a scaled stationary equilibrium. Part ii) is
a condition for super-neutrality; the condition that changes in the inflation rate of the economy
is neutral. The result says that if the Fed increases the growth rate of its nominal balance sheet,
by a scalar, and adjusts its nominal policy rates to keep real rates constant, variations in the

                                                                      40
growth rate of its nominal balance sheet only translates into changes in the unit of account,
and inflation generates no changes. It is important to note that a qualification for this result
is that the demand for real balances of currency are inelastic. Otherwise, changes in inflation
produce a change in the money demand by households, and inflation adjusts differently in that
context. Part ii) can be also interpreted as an approximation, for mild inflation rates, as long as
the currency demand is close to inelastic, changes in inflation will be neutral.


G.1      Proof of Lemma G.1 (Conditions for Satiation)
By definition of satiation, the right-hand side of (Loan LP-Deposit LP) must equal zero under
satiation, and thus:

                                                      Eω (Re )−γ ω < ω ∗
                                                                        
                              +     −    +         ∗
                                           
                        0 = χ̄ + χ̄ − χ̄ · F (ω ) ·                        ,
                                                          Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                    

and
                                                         0 = χ̄+ .
    This expression equals zero in two cases:

                                                                        −
   Case 1. If iw        m                                                   +
                   t = it , then the condition holds immediately since χ = χ = 0. This case is
condition (i) in the proposition.

                                          −
    Case 2. If iw        m
                  t > it , then since χ     > χ+ for any θ,we must have that: F (ω ∗ ) = 0 and
χ̄+ = 0. This occurs only if ω ∗ ≤ ωmin .
    Under condition (ii) of the proposition, no bank is in deficit even for the worst shock. QED.


G.2      Proof of Proposition G.1 Item (i)
Consider a policy sequence {o} and an alternative policy {s} such that

  1. Xs,t = kXo,t for some k > 0 for the balance sheet variables X ∈ B F ed , GF ed , GF A , M, W ,
                                                                              

  2. policies are identical for non-balance-sheet variables ρo,t , κo,t , im      w                    m w
                                                                                      
                                                                           o,t , io,t = ρs,t , κs,t , is,t , is,t .

The proposition states that the stationary equilibrium induced by either policy features identical
real asset positions and price levels that satisfy Ps,t = kPo,t .
    The proof is by construction and requires us to verify that the equilibrium conditions that
determine {b̄ss , āss , d¯ss , c̄ss , Ess } in Section B.2 are satisfied by any pair of policy sequences
                                              F ed F ed F A
                                              Bo,t , Go,t , Go,t , Mo,t , Wo,t t≥0

and
                                           F ed
                                                , GFs,ted , GFs,tA , Ms,t , Ws,t
                                      
                                          Bs,t                                     t≥0

that satisfies the relationship above. We proceed to check that b̄ss , āss , d¯ss , c̄ss , Ess solves the
                                                               

set of equilibrium equations in Section B.2 in both cases.

                                                             41
   Consider the original and alternative policies. We are considering stationary equilibria, so by
hypothesis these satisfy

     Xa,t = Xa,t−1 (1 + πss ), for some πss and a ∈ {o, s} and B F ed , GF ed , GF A , M, W .
                                                                


By hypothesis also, inflation and nominal rates are equal under both policies. Thus, the real
interest rate on reserves is equal under both policies. We check the equilibrium conditions in the
order in which they appear in Section B.
    First, we guess and verify that the real returns on loans and deposits are also equal under
both policies. If both policies yield the same real rates, the solution for bank portfolios (the
solution for Ωt ) must also be equal in both equilibria:

                            b̄o,ss , āo,ss , d¯o,ss , c̄o,ss = b̄s,ss , ās,ss , d¯s,ss , c̄s,ss .
                                                              


   Consider now the aggregate supply of loans and reserves under either policy:
                                                   b 
                          (1 − css )b̄ss Ess = Θb Rss      F ed
                                                      
                                                        − Bt+1  /Pt .
                                                                      F ed                  F ed
That equation can be satisfied under both policies because Bo,t+1          /Po,t = (1 + g)Bo,t+1 /(1 +
          F ed
g)Po,t =Bs,t+1 /Ps,t . This verifies that the real rate on loans is equal under both policies.
                                      d
    The same steps verify that Rss      is the same under both policies. Similarly, the demand for
reserves and currency can be satisfied in both equations because

                            (1 − css )m̄ss Ess = Mo,t /Po,t = Ma,t /Pa,t .
A similar argument holds for the holdings of government bonds. This verifies market clearing
for reserves.
    Now, the ratio of surpluses to deficits is also equal under both policies:

                                          −     +
                                   θss ≡ Sa,t /Sa,t for a ∈ {o, s}.
Because θ and policy rates are equal, the liquidity cost function χ is also equal under both
policies. Observe that χ is a function of θ only. With equal inflation under both policies, the
liquidity return Rχ must also be equal. This verifies that all the real rates in both equilibria
are the same under both policies. Since rates are the same, both policies satisfy the same law
of motion for equity (19). It is immediate to verify that the consolidated government budget
constraint is satisfied under both policies, once all portfolios from the private sector are identical
in real terms. QED.


G.3     Proof of Proposition G.1 Item (ii)
This statement of the proposition regards superneutrality and non-superneutrality. The proof
closely follows the proof of Proposition G.1, item (i). The main difference is that we prove
neutrality along an equilibrium sequence, not only in stationary equilibrium. The proof is again
by construction and only requires that we verify that the equilibrium conditions that determine




                                                 42
{b̄t , āt , d¯t , c̄t , Et } in Section B lead to the same values under both policies. Let
                                                                          F ed
                                               Mo,t , GFa,ted , GFa,tA , Bo,t
                                             
                                                                               , Wo,t t≥0

and
                                          Ma,t , GFa,ted , GFa,tA , Ba,t
                                                                     F ed
                                      
                                                                          , Wa,t   t≥0

be two policy sequences. Again, to ease notation, we follow the order of the equations in Section
B.
   Consider the original and alternative policies. By the hypothesis of stationary equilibrium,
both equilibria satisfy
        F ed            F ed
                             = for some ka and for a ∈ {o, s} and X ∈ M, GF ed , GF A , B F ed , W .
                                                                       
Xa,t = Xa,t−1 (1+ka ), Ba,t

Also, let the initial conditions be the same, Xs,0 = Xo,0 .
   Then, the condition for the consolidated government implies that

                                 Xs,t+1 = (1 + ks )t Xs,0 = (1 + ks )t Xo,0 ,
                                 Xo,t+1 = (1 + ko )t Xo,0 ,

for X ∈ M, GF ed , GF A , B F ed , W . Thus, we can relate both government policy paths via:
       

                                                              t
                                                      ks − ko
                                                  
                                       Xs,t+1    = 1+            Xo,t+1 .
                                                      1 + ko

Through the proof, we guess and verify the following:
                           g      χ̄                          g      χ̄
      b     d      m
                                        b      d      m
 A.1 Ro,t , Ro,t , Ro,t , Ro,t , Ro,t = Rs,t , Rs,t , Rs,t , Ro,t , Rs,t .

 A.2 Po,0 = Ps,0 = P0 .
                                                
                                        ks −ko
 A.3 (1 + πs,t ) = (1 + πo,t ) 1 +      1+ko
                                                     .

First, we verify (A.1). Under the conjecture that real returns are the same along a sequence, we
have that
                              b̄o,t , āo,t , d¯o,t , c̄o,t = b̄s,t , ās,t , d¯s,t , c̄s,t ,
                                                            

so the optimality conditions are satisfied in both cases.
    Next, consider the aggregate supply of loans and reserve demand. Equilibrium in the loans
market requires                                          F ed
                               (1 − ct )b̄t Et = Θb Rtb − Bt+1  /Pt .
                                                                            F ed          F ed
If the equation is satisfied under both policies, then we must verify that Bo,t+1 /Po,t =Bs,t+1 /Ps,t .
To see that this condition holds, recall that
                                                                          t
                                                                ks − ko
                                                         
                                         F ed                                   F ed
                                        Bs,t+1       =       1+                Bs,0  .
                                                                1 + ko
Now, if πs,t − πo,t = (ks − ko ) / (1 + ko ), by (A.2) we have that


                                                                43
                                               t
                                               Y
                                      Pa,t =          (1 + πa,τ ) P0 for a ∈ {o, s} .
                                               τ =1

Combined with the guess (A.3) above, we obtain
                               t                                                                    t
                                                   ks − ko                                ks − ko
                               Y                                                 
                     Ps,t   =      (1 + πo,t ) 1 +                     P0 = Po,t       1+                .
                              τ =1
                                                   1 + ko                                 1 + ko
Therefore,
                                                        t
                                                ks − ko
                                            
                             F ed                           F ed          F ed
                            Bs,t+1 /Ps,t   = 1+            Bs,0  /Ps,t = B0,t+1 /Po,t ,
                                                1 + ko
which shows that the real holdings of loans under both policies are equal. The arguments are
identical for the equilibrium in the deposit and government bond market are identical, but the
market for Fed assets works differently.
   We needed to verify that under our guess, Rtb , Rtg , Rtd is the same under both policies. Note
                                                

that Rtm is the same under both policies:

                                                                 ks − ko
                                                                        
              m          ior                         ior
                                                         
            Ro,t = 1 + io,t+1 / (1 + πo,t+1 ) = 1 + is,t+1 1 +             / (1 + πo,t+1 ) ,
                                                                 1 + go
and by assumption (A.3), the condition is also equal:
                                                 (1 + πo,t+1 )
                                   1 + iior
                                        s,t+1
                                                                                   m
                                                                / (1 + πo,t+1 ) = Rs,t .
                                                  (1 + πs,t+1 )

Next, consider the condition for an equilibrium for Fed liabilities:

                                                     h                         h
                     (1 − ct )m̄t Et = Mo,t /Po,t − Mo,t /Po,t = Ms,t /Ps,t − Ms,t /Ps,t .
It is important that the demand for real balances of currency is inelastic—possibly zero. Oth-
erwise, since currency earns no interest rate, its rate of return does change with the rate of
inflation. Consider it is, then bank reserve demand must be the same: the condition is used to
verify our guess (A.3). The condition above requires
                                                          t                     t
                                                   ks − ko Mo,t+1        ks − ko
                                                                    
                     Ps,t+1   Ms,t+1
                            =        =          1+                  = 1+            .
                     Po,t+1   Mo,t+1               1 + ko    Mo,t+1      1 + ko
Then, since by Assumption (A.2), initial prices are the same, we have that

               t
               Q
                     (1 + πs,t ) P0                t     t                  t
                                           ks − ko
                                                                                                   
     Ps,t+1                                                                                   1 + ks
            = τ =1
                                                        Y                  Y
                t
                                      = 1+            ⇒      (1 + πs,t ) =      (1 + πo,t )            .
     Po,t+1    Q                           1 + ko                                             1 + ko
                     (1 + πo,t ) P0                     τ =1               τ =1
              τ =1

Since the condition holds for all t, then A.3 is deduced from the quantity equation of reserves.


                                                              44
    The next step is to verify that Rtχ̄ is constant under both policies. For that, observe that the
interbank market tightness is the same under both economies. To see that, simply note that the
ratio of reserves to deposits is the same under both policies, and that this is enough to guarantee
that θt is equal under both policies.     By Lemma E.3 and the condition for policy rates in the
                     x
                                 x
                                      1+ks 
proposition— 1 + io,t = 1 + is,t 1+ko for x ∈ {w, m}—in states away from satiation,
                                                                              
                                                                      1 + ks
                                         .; iw      ior
                                                                                   χ .; iw      ior
                                                                                                   
                                   χ         s,t , is,t       =                          o,t , io,t .
                                                                      1 + ko

Therefore, we have that
                                                                 
                                                          1+ks
                                                                 χ .; iw      ior
                                                                                  
                             .; iw                                     o,t , io,t
                                        ior
                                                                                      χ .; iw      ior
                                                                                                      
                 χ       χ       o,t , io,t               1+ko                              s,t , is,t      χ
                Ro,t =                            =                               =                    = Rs,t .
                             1 + πo,t                       1+ks
                                                                   (1 + πo,t )         (1 +   π  s,t )
                                                            1+ko
                           χ̄    χ̄
This step verifies that Ro,t  = Rs,t . So far,
                                             we have checked the consistency of assumptions (A.1)
and (A.3), and that the policy rules for b̄t , āt , d¯t , c̄t and the real rates are the same under both
equilibria. We still need to show that the sequences for Et are the same under both policies, that
the initial price level is the same, and that the Fed’s budget constraint is satisfied under both
policies. This follows immediately from the law of motion of bank equity:
                                         b                     d
                                                                 − 1)d¯t (1 − c̄t ) Et ,
                                                                       
                        Et+1 = 1 + Rt+1      − 1 b̄t − (Rt+1
                                                                             F ed             F ed
which as noted, must be the same. We have already verified that Bs,t+1            /Ps,t = Bs,0     /Po,t .
Following the same steps, we can show that real reserves Mt /Pt , government bonds GFt ed /Pt
                                                                F ed

and GFt A /Pt and discount loans WtF ed /Pt are identical under both policies. Away
                                                                                   wfrom
                                                                                         satiation,
  χ       χ                                                                WtF ed  1+it
Ro,t = Rs,t , so that means that real income from the discount window, Pt          1+πt
                                                                                         , is constant
under both policies—τt is identical under both policies. Consider now (B0 , D0 , M0 , G0 , W0 ) , the
initial condition under both policies. If P0 is same initial price under both policies, Eo,0 = Es,0 .
This is precisely the initial conditions that we need to confirm our guess Eo,0 = Es,0 and Po,0 =
Ps,0 . QED.


G.4     Proof of Proposition 5
Consider two policies, o and s, and let the alternative policy feature a mix of conventional and
unconventional open-market operations performed at t = 0 and reverted at t = 1 in the sense
that
       F ed    F ed
   1. Bs,1  = Bo,1  + ∆B F ed , GFs,1ed = GFo,0ed + ∆GF ed , and Ms,1
                                                                  F ed    F ed
                                                                       = Mo,1  + ∆M F ed , such that,
      ∆M F ed = ∆GF ed + ∆B F ed and ∆M F ed , ∆GF ed , ∆B F ed ≥ 0.

   2. For all t ≥ 0, we have

                                        im      w      FA
                                                                  m w            FA
                                         o,t , io,t , Go,t , Wo,t = is,t , is,t , Gs,t , Ws,t .




                                                                       45
  3. For all t 6= 1, we have
          m w             F ed
                                , GFo,ted , GFo,tA , Bo,t
                                                      F ed
                                                           , Wo,t = im      w      F ed   F ed   FA     F ed
                                                                   
            io,t , io,t , Mo,t                                       s,t , is,t , Ms,t , Gs,t , Gs,t , Bs,t , Ws,t .


The statement of the proposition is that for λ > 0, the operation is neutral if and only if banks
are satiated with reserves at time zero under both policies. If λ → 0 and the economy is away
from satiation, then a conventional policy, i.e. ∆B = 0, is neutral but an unconventional policy
∆B > 0 is not. We refer to neutrality as a situation where, as we compare across both policy
sequences, the total outstanding amount of loans, deposits, and bonds remains unchanged in real
terms.
    The proof requires an intermediate step: First, we show that if two policies induce identical
real aggregate loans deposits and bond holdings, the equilibrium prices Po,0 = Ps,0 must be equal.
Then, we show for positive λ that if the price is constant, the open-market operation must have
real effects away from satiation. Then, we show that if banks are satiated, the policy has no
effects. Finally, we show that if λ = 0, the stated results holds.

Auxiliary Lemma. First, we prove the following auxiliary lemma corresponding to the first
step of the proof.

Lemma G.2 Consider two arbitrary policy sequences o and s, as described above. If total real
loans, deposits, dividends, reserves, government bonds, and bank equity are equal across equilibria
for all t ≥ 0, then Po,0 = Ps,0 .


Proof. Without loss of generality, normalize the price in the original equilibrium to Po,0 = 1,
but not the price of the alternative sequence—we can always re-scale the original sequence to
obtain a price of one. The idea of the proof is to start from the quantity equation in one equilib-
rium, and use real market clearing conditions to express obtain a relationship using quantities of
the second equilibrium. Using the quantity equation of the second equilibrium, the result must
follow.
    Consider now a given bank. By hypothesis, real equity is equal in both equilibria, Es,0 = Eo,0
and c̄o,0 = c̄s,0 . Also, recall that
                                     F ed
                                      Bo,1 , Bo,1 , GFo,1ed , Go,1 , Mo,1
                                                                      F ed
                                                                           , Mo,1

and                                   F ed
                                      Bs,1 , Bs,1 , GFs,1ed , Gs,1 , Ms,1
                                                                      F ed
                                                                           , Ms,1
are the nominal loans, government bonds, and reserves of the Fed and the representative bank,
respectively—under the original and alternative policies.
   We use the following relationships: Since equity, dividends, and real deposits are constant,
from the bank’s budget constraints, we obtain

                                       Bo,1 − Bs,1 /Ps,1 = As /Ps,1 − Ao .                                         (G.1)

   Also, we know that since market clearing must hold in the loans market under both equilib-



                                                          46
rium sequences,
                                               b
                                       b
                                   Θb Ro,1              F ed
                                                     ≡ Bo,1  + Bo,1                                            (G.2)
                                                             F ed
                                                                          
                                                     =      Bs,1  + Bs,1 /Ps,1 ,

—recall that Po,0 = 1.
  We now exploit the quantity equations of both equilibria, through the following relationship:
        F ed
       Mo,t  + GFo,tA − GFo,ted − Gho,t + ∆M − ∆G =                   F ed
                                                                    M1,t     + GF1,tA − GF1,ted − Gh1,t
                                                  =                 Ps,0 ās,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0
                                                                                                 
                                                  =                 Ps,0 b̄o,0 + āo,0 − b̄s,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0
                                                                                        
                                                  =                 Ps,0 b̄o,0 + āo,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 . . .
                                                                                   b            
                                                                    − Θb Ro,1    b
                                                                                        − Bs,1F ed
                                                                                                     .           (G.3)

The first equality just uses the relationship between both policies, the second equality follows
from the quantity equation (23) which holds under the alternative equilibrium, the third equality
uses (G.1) expressed in terms of the banks portfolio, and fourth follows from (G.2). Substituting
      F ed
out Bs,1   from the last term into (G.3), we obtain

   F ed
  Mo,t  + GFo,tA − GFo,ted − Gho,t + ∆M − ∆G = . . .
                                                                                  b             
                                    Ps,0 b̄o,0 + āo,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 − Θb Ro,1
                                                                               b          F ed
                                                      
                                                                                       − Bo,1  + ∆B .

Then, using that ∆M = ∆B + ∆G, the equation simplifies to

   F ed
                                                                                   b         
        + GFo,tA − GFo,ted − Gho,t = Ps,0 b̄o,0 + āo,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 − Θb Ro,1
                                                                                b          F ed
                                                       
  Mo,t                                                                                  − Bo,1    .

                                                     b
                                       b
Using the loans clearing condition Θb Ro,1                    F ed
                                                           − Bo,1  =b̄o,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 , we obtain:
        F ed
             + GFo,tA − GFo,ted − Gho,t = Ps,0 b̄o,0 + āo,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 − b̄o,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0
                                                            
       Mo,t
                                        = (Ps,0 − 1) b̄o,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 + Ps,0 āo,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0
                                                                             F ed
Finally, using the quantity equation (23) applied to the first equilibrium, Mo,t  + GFo,tA − GFo,ted −
Gho,t = āo,0 (1 − c̄s,0 ) Es,0 we obtain:

                    0 = (Ps,0 − 1) b̄o,0 (1 − c̄o,0 ) Eo,0 + (Po,0 − 1) āo,0 (1 − c̄o,0 ) Eo,0 .

Since this equation is independent of ∆M, and b̄o,0 , c̄o,0 , Eo,0 , āo,0 are all positive numbers, and
any price is positive, it must be that Po = Ps = 1. QED.
   Next, we establish the main results.

Item 1: Non-neutrality away from satiation and λ > 0. First, we argue that if the policy
change is neutral away from satiation, we reach a contradiction. Assume that the policy is indeed
neutral. If policy s is neutral with respect to policy o, real assets, real asset returns, dividends,


                                                            47
and bank equity must be equal across both equilibria. Consider Loan LP. Since real loans are
the same, Rb must be the same in both equilibria. Also Rm must be the same. This is the case
because by t = 1, the policy is reverses and thus the equilibrium and the price must be the same.
Since by assumption, the policy is neutral, also, the t = 0 price must be equal, as shown in
Lemma G.2. Hence, since im is constant across both policies, then, Rm must the same. However,
since under one equilibrium liquid assets are lower, but deposits are the by assumption same,
the liquidity premium cannot be the same. A contradiction.

Item 2: Neutrality under satiation. Next, we verify that under satiation, the policy change
has no effects. The key to verify the result is to show that if the economy is under satiation
under both policies, if the bank’s portfolio changes exactly in the opposite direction as the Fed’s
portfolio, the policy is neutral—that is, we guess that there is no crowding in or crowding out
effects. Thus, we guess that:

                       Bo,1 − ∆B = Bs,1 , Go,1 − ∆G = Gs,1 , and Mo,1 + ∆M = Ms,1 .

If the allocation is the same in real terms, then by Lemma G.2, t = 0 and t = 1 prices are the
same, and Po,1 = Ps,1 . Under satiation, we also know that Rb = Rm = Rg . Hence, the aggregate
quantity of loans and bonds be equal under both policies. Hence, clearing in the loans market
implies:
                                                  F ed                 F ed
      b    b
               b      b    m 
                                 b      Bo,1 + Bo,1     Bo,1 − ∆B + Bo,1   + ∆B
  Θ       Ro,1       =Θ     Ro,1       =               =                         ...
                                             Po,1                 Po,1
                                                                                        F ed
                                                                               Bs,1 + Bs,1              b
                                                                             =               = Θb Rs,1
                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                            .
                                                                                   Ps,1

and in the bond market,


      g
               g               g       GF1 A − Go,1 + GFo,1ed   GF1 A − Go,1 − ∆G + GFo,1ed + ∆G
  Θg Ro,1            = Θg Ro,1
                           m
                                       =                          =                                    ...
                                                   Po,1                            Po,1
                                                                            GF1 A − Gs,1 + GFs,1ed         g
                                                                                                             g
                                                                          =                        = Θg Rs,1     .
                                                                                    Ps,1

and in the deposit market,

  Do,1   Bo,1 + Go,1 + Mo,1          Bo,1 + Go,1 + Mo,1 − ∆B − ∆G + ∆M
       =                    + Eo,1 =                                       + Eo,1 . . .
  Po,1          Po,1                                  Po,1
                                                           Bs,1 + Gs,1 + Ms,1           Ds,1
                                                         =                    + Es,1 =       .
                                                                  Po,1                  Ps,1

Thus, all market clearing conditions are satisfied. Since, if banks start under satiation, and the
increase in total liquid assets is positive, then banks are satiated under both policies. Thus,
under both policies, banks are indifferent between loan, bond, and reserve holdings, the guess is
consistent with bank equilibrium choices. Since the law of motion of equity is unchanged across
both equilibria, the path of dividends is also the same, which verifies the guess that the price

                                                             48
level is the same in both cases.

Item 3: Limit case as λ → 0. Finally, we verify that if λ → 0, conventional policies are
neutral, but unconventional policies are not. Recall, a conventional policy is one where ∆B =
0, ∆G > 0 and an   unconventional is one where ∆B > 0. Also, recall that if λ → 0, then χ̄+
                                                                                          o,1 = 0
       −      +       w
                 
and χ̄o,1 − χ̄o,1 = Ro,1 , for any interbank market tightness. Thus, we have that the Loan LP
becomes:                                                    e −γ          ∗
                                                                             
                                                        Eω  (R )  |ω <   ω
                          Rb − Rm = Ro,1w
                                           · F (ω ∗ ) ·                        ,
                                                            Eω (Re )−γ
                                                                      

where ω ∗ ≡ − ā/d¯ − ρ / Rt+1 d    m
                                           
                                 /Rt+1  − ρ . In turn, the bond return satisfies:

                                              Rg = Rm .

First, we verify that the conventional policy is neutral: Suppose it is. By Lemma G.2, t = 0 and
                                                     m        m
t = 1 prices are the same, Po,1 = Ps,1 . Thus, Ro,1      = Rs,1 . Since the price level is the same, and
the policy is exclusively a conventional policy, ∆M = ∆G. Under this guess, if the policy does
not crowd out household bonds, Go,1 + Mo,1 = Go,1 + Mo,1 + ∆M − ∆G = Gs,1 + Ms,1 . This in
                                              ∗      ∗
turn, implies that āo,0 = ās,0 , and thus, ωo,0 = ωs,0 . Since the threshold remains unchanged, and
tightness does not affect the loans nor the bond premium. The guess is therefore verified.
    To close the proposition, we verify that the unconventional policy has an effect. Suppose not.
Then, prices do not change, again by Lemma G.2. We know that:

               Go,1 + Mo,1 = Go,1 + Mo,1 + ∆M − ∆G − ∆B = Gs,1 + Ms,1 − ∆B.

Thus, since ∆B 6= 0, the real value of liquid assets under the original and alternative policies
differ. Hence, we have a contradiction: either the threshold ω ∗ differs across both policies or the
deposits adjust, or both. In either case, the liquidity premium must be different across both
policies. The result follows. QED.


G.5     Proof of Proposition 6 and Corollary 1
We first demonstrate Proposition 6 and then proof the bound in Corollary 1. For the rest of this
proof, we avoid time subscripts under the understanding that the condition applies to stationary
equilibria. A stationary equilibrium satisfies four equilibrium conditions under any Friedman
rule. We have that:

   1. A stationarity condition:

                                    1/β = ā + Rb 1 + d¯ − ā − Rd d¯ .
                                                                    
                                                                                                  (G.1)

   2. Two stationary clearing conditions:
                                                b                    d
                                    B = Θb R̄         and D = Θd R̄          .

   3. An aggregate budget balance:
                                            B = D + (1 − ā) Ẽ.                                  (G.2)

                                                  49
Here Ẽ is the steady-state equity after dividends. These conditions hold regardless of the sta-
tionary dividend.

Proof of Proposition 6 There are four possible outcomes: either capital requirements bind
or not and either ā > 0 or a = 0. We develop observations for each case. We first observe that
under the Friedman rule, Rb ≥ Rm , with equality if a > 0. We first investigate the cases where
a = 0.

    Case I: ā = 0 and capital requirements do not bind. If the capital requirement does
not bind and ā = 0, then we know that Rb ≥ Rm and Rb = Rd . Because the Friedman rule
eliminates the liquidity premium, the stationary condition (G.1) requires:
                             1
                               = ā + Rb 1 − ā + d¯ − Rd d¯ = Rb ,
                                                           
                             β

where the first equality is the definition of equity returns and the second equality uses Rb = Rd
and a = 0. Thus, we have that Rb = Rd = 1/β and Rm ≤ 1/β.
   In this case, the stationary equilibrium loans and deposits are given by
                                               b                     d
                               B = Θb (1/β) and D =Θd (1/β) .

Thus, (G.2), becomes
                                                   b             d
                                  Ẽ = Θb (1/β) − Θd (1/β) .                              (G.3)
If capital requirements are indeed satisfied, it must be that:
                                               1 d       d
                                        Ẽ ≥     Θ (1/β) .                                 (G.4)
                                               κ
Combining, (G.3-G.4) yields:
                                           b       κ+1 d      d
                                  Θb (1/β) ≥         Θ (1/β) .                            (G.5)
                                                    κ
If the condition is not satisfied, then, it is not possible to have a stationary equilibrium under
the Friedman rule with a = 0 and where capital requirements do not bind. We summarize this
case with the following observation:
Remark 1. If ā = 0 and capital requirements do not bind, then Rb = Rd = 1/β and Rm ≤ 1/β
and condition (25) must hold.

    Case II: capital requirements binds and ā = 0. If the capital requirement binds and
ā = 0, we know that Rb > Rd and Rb > Rm . Since capital requirements bind, after dividend
                                d
equity must equal, Ẽ = κ1 Θd Rd . Again, because the Friedman rule eliminates the liquidity
premium, the stationary condition (G.1) to bank equity is 1/β:

                                    1/β = Rb + Rb − Rd κ.
                                                      

Rewriting this expression yields a relationship between Rd and Rb ,

                                                   50
                                                      1
                                                b     β
                                                          + κRd
                                               R =                   .                                              (G.6)
                                                       (1 + κ)
We have the following observation, which we proof consequently:
Remark 2. If the capital requirement binds and ā = 0, we have that Rd < 1/β.
   Suppose the contrary, then
                                           1                  1
                                           β
                                               + κRd          β
                                                                  + κ β1         1
                                   Rb =                   >                  =     .
                                           (1 + κ)            (1 + κ)            β

But if then, Rb > 1/β, and Rb > Rd , implies that the return on equity is above 1/β. Clearly a
contradiction. Hence, Remark 2 must hold.
   Substituting the equilibrium conditions into the aggregate budget constraint yields:
                                                                         
                   b
                        b
                       b       d
                                     d 1 d d  d
                                   d                     d
                                                                d κ+1
                                                               d 
                  Θ R       =Θ R        + Θ R         =Θ R                  .
                                          κ                           κ
Substituting (G.6) and re-arranging produces:
                                                    1/b
                                        Θd 1 + κ
                                    
                                                                   d /b       1
                          (1 + κ)                             Rd             =     + κRd .                          (G.7)
                                        Θb κ                                     β

This is the same expression for R̄d in Proposition 6. We have the following property:
Remark 3. Equation (G.7) has a unique solution.
   To see this, note that the left-hand side is decreasing in Rd and the right increasing in Rd .
For Rd = 0, the left hand side is above 1/β, so the solution must be unique. With this, and
using (G.6) we obtain R̄b as in the Proposition.
   Next, we must verify that indeed the unique solution holds for Rd < 1/β, as needed—see
Remark 2. Since the right hand side of (G.7) is increasing and the left decreasing, R̄d < 1/β if
and only if:
                                  d       1/b
                                   Θ 1+κ               d b    1
                         (1 + κ)    b
                                                 (1/β) / < + κ1/β.
                                   Θ κ                        β
Rearranging the terms, leads to:
                                                b     κ+1 d      d
                                   Θb (1/β) <           Θ (1/β) .
                                                       κ
This is enough to conclude that:
Remark 4. If ā = 0 and capital requirements bind, then Rm ≤ R̄b ≤ 1/β and condition (25)
must be violated.
   We can combine this result and remark 1, to obtain the following:
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                       m                    +κR̄d
Remark 5. Whether condition (25) holds or not, if ā = 0, then R                             ≤ min 1/β,   β
                                                                                                          (1+κ)
                                                                                                                        for
        d    1/b     d /b
        Θ 1+κ
(1 + κ) Θb κ        R̄d         = β1 + κR̄d .

                                                       51
     Next, we move to the cases where ā > 0.

  Case III: capital requirements do not bind and ā > 0. In this case, we know that
R = Rm = Rd . The (G.1) becomes:
 b


                1/β = ā + Rm 1 + d¯ − ā − Rm d¯ = (Rm − ā (Rm − 1)) .
                                                


Hence, we have that:
                                          Rm − 1/β
                                            ā =     .
                                           Rm − 1
This implies that that Rm > 1/β. We have the following remark:
Remark 6. If capital requirements do no bind and ā > 0, then Rm >1/β.

    Case IV: capital requirements bind and ā > 0. So far we have shown conditions
for stationary equilibria in which a = 0,which specify hold only if Rm ≤ 1/β—with an exact
threshold given in Remark 5. Remark 6 shows that if capital requirements do not bind and
if Rm > 1/β, then ā > 0. To complete the statement of the proposition, we need to show if
                                                       R̄d
condition (25) is not satisfied and Rm ≤ R̄b = β1 1+κβ
                                                    1+κ
                                                           where R̄d solves:
                                                     1/b
                                      Θd
                                  
                                              −1
                                                                    d /b       1
                                                              R̄d                   + κR̄d ,
                                                 
                        (1 + κ)          1 + κ                                =
                                      Θb                                          β

then ā = 0 and the capital requirement binds. Hence, any Rm > R̄b must feature ā > 0
establishing that Rb = Rm .
    To prove this, we assume by contradiction that ā > 0. By assumption,

                                                             1 1 + κβ R̄d
                                      Rb = Rm ≤ R̄b =                     .
                                                             β 1+κ

and a > 0. Under the stated assumptions, (G.1) becomes:

                           1/β = Rm − (Rm − 1) ā + Rm − Rd κ .
                                                            
                                                                                               (G.8)

However, we also know that:
                                       1/β = R̄b + R̄b − R̄d κ .
                                                             
                                                                                               (G.9)
Hence, we have the following condition:
Remark 7. If condition (25) is not satisfied, capital requirements bind, ā > 0, and Rm ≤ R̄b ,
then it would be the case that Rd < R̄d .
  The remark can be shown to hold simply by noticing that Rm < R̄b and ā > 0, in then it
must be that Rd < R̄d , by comparing (G.8) and (G.9).
  Next, solving for ā from (G.8) yields:

                                     Rm − 1/β + Rm − Rd κ
                                                       
                                ā =                      .
                                             Rm − 1


                                                     52
Observe that by monotonicity:
                                                                     b                b
                                                   Θb (Rm ) > Θb R̄b
and also
                       d                             d                           d
            Θd Rd            1 + κ−1 (1 − ā) < Θd R̄d     1 + κ−1 (1 − ā) < Θd R̄d .
                                                                          


Then, if we substitute real rates into (G.2), we obtain:

                                                  1 − ā                                                      κ + (1 − ā)
                                                                                                                            
                 b   m b         d
                                           d
                                          d 
                                                                d      d
            Θ (R ) = Θ                R         +        · Θd Rd = Θd Rd                                                         .
                                                    κ                                                              κ

Substituting the inequalities above:

                                                                          κ + (1 − ā)
                                                                                                                            
             b
                      b
                     b       b       m b             d
                                                                d
                                                               d                                     d
                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                               d        κ+1
           Θ R̄            < Θ (R ) = Θ                    R                                    <Θ        R̄                         .
                                                                               κ                                          κ

However, this contradicts the definition of R̄b , R̄d . Hence, we conclude that:
                                           

Remark 8. If condition (25) is not satisfied and Rm ≤ R̄b , then we have that ā = 0 and capital
requirements binds.

  Collecting the results. Consider the cases where condition (25) holds. Combining re-
marks (1) and (6) we have that:
Remark 9. If (25) holds, then the loans rate associated with the Friedman rule is:
                                         (
                                           1/β if Rm < 1/β,
                                Rb,F R =                                                                                                 (G.10)
                                           Rm if Rm ≥ 1/β.

Moreover, ā = 0 and the capital requirement does not bind if and only if Rm ≤ 1/β. If Rm ≤ 1/β,
the stationary deposit rate is also 1/β .
   Now consider the cases where condition (25) does not hold. Combining remarks (5) and (8)
we have that:
Remark 10. If (25) does not hold
                                                                (
                                               b,F R                R̄b       if Rm < R̄b ,
                                           R               =                                                                             (G.11)
                                                                    Rm         if Rm ≥ R̄b ,

where
                                                               1 1 + κβ R̄d  1
                                                  R̄b =                     ≤ ,
                                                               β 1+κ         β
where R̄d the stationary deposit rate which is the unique solution to
                                                                     1/b
                                              Θd
                                          
                                                      −1
                                                                                     d /b       1
                                                                               R̄d                   + κR̄d .
                                                         
                             (1 + κ)             1 + κ                                         =
                                              Θb                                                   β

Moreover, ā = 0 if and only if Rm ≤ R̄b . In this case, the capital requirement binds.

                                                                         53
   Combining remarks (9) and (10) we obtain the statement of Proposition 6. QED.

Proof of Corollary 1 The proof is immediate. First, observe that if (25) holds, then we had
showed that the R̄d that solves
                                             b
                                            1/
                                d
                                Θ       −1
                                                     d b
                                                    d  /   1
                       (1 + κ)     1 + κ         R̄        =   + κR̄d ,
                                Θb                           β

is above β1 . Thus, R̄b > 1/β. Otherwise, if (25) does not hold, the solution is less than 1/β and
R̄b < 1/β. This implies that a compact way to write Rb,F R is:
                                  (
                                   min R̄b , 1/β        m
                                                           < min R̄b , 1/β ,
                                                               
                          b,F R                    if Rss
                        R       =
                                   Rm                    m
                                                           ≥ min R̄b , 1/β
                                                                 
                                                    if Rss

Then, since by assumption of the corollary Rm ≥ min R̄b , 1/β = Rb,F R and Rb ≥ Rm in any
                                                   

equilibrium, the bound follows. QED.




                                               54
H        Efficient Allocations and Proof of Proposition 7
In this Appendix, we derive the efficient allocations under the assumption that β h = β. We also
show that a version of the Friedman rule, with the appropriate choice of Rm , can implement the
first-best allocation, provided that capital requirements are sufficiently ample. We let a planner
maximize a weighted average of households and bankers’ utility subject to the resource constraint
for goods and labor. The planner’s problem is:
Problem 4 (Planner’s Problem). The unconstrained planner’s problem is given by:
                                                                                                   
                                                                                      1+ν
                                   X                       X                         h
                 max                      β t (1 − $)            U x (cxt ) + cht − t  + $ · u(ct )
       {ct ,cdt ,cgt ,cm
                              ∞                                                      1+ν
                       t ,ht }t=0 t=0,1..                x∈{d,g,m}


subject to the resource constraint:
                                            X
                                                      cxt + cht + ct = yt ,                               (H.1)
                                          x∈{d,g,m}


and the technological constraint:
                                                 yt = At hαt−1 .                                          (H.2)
The initial labor input h−1 is given.
   Here, we use $ for the Pareto weight on the banker’s consumption. The next Proposition
characterizes an optimal allocation.
Proposition H.1 The optimality conditions of the unconstrained planner problem are:
                                                 $
                            Ucxx X̄ = 1 =             φu0 (ct ) for x ∈ {d, g, m}
                                   
                                                                                                          (H.3)
                                              (1 − $)

and
                                              βαAt+1 hα−1
                                                      t   = hνt .                                         (H.4)
    The proposition states that in the first best allocation, the planner equalizes the labor wedge
to zero and equalizes all the marginal utility across goods to one. The latter is optimal because
the marginal rate of transformation is one across all goods. Notice also that the planner’s
solution is characterized by a sequence of static problems, so there are no dynamic trade-offs
in the allocation. We say an allocation is efficient if it coincides with the planner’s solution for
some $.
    Next, we state a detailed version of Proposition 7.
Proposition H.2 Consider a competitive equilibrium and a version of the Friedman rule where
the Fed sets Rtm = Rtw = 1/β, (and πt = β − 1) and adjusts MtF ed , and GFt ed such that Rg = 1/β.
A necessary condition for this Friedman rule to induce an efficient allocation in its stationary
equilibrium is that:                             
                                      b     1+κ                d
                                b
                              Θ (1/β) ≥             Θd (1/β)1/ .
                                               κ
If the condition is violated, the first-best is not attainable.
    We proceed with a proof.

                                                         55
H.1      Decentralization and the Friedman Rule (Proof of Propositions
         H.1 and H.2)
We begin with the proof of Proposition H.1.

Proof. Substituting out ch from the resource constraint into the objective, replacing yt from
the technological constraint yields a modified objective function:
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                     1+ν
                         X                       X                                 X                h
        max                     β t (1 − $)            U x (cxt ) + At hαt−1 −           cx + ct − t  + $ · u(ct ) .
{ct ,cdt ,cgt ,cm                                                                                   1+ν
                t ,ht } t=0,1..                x∈{d,g,m}                         x∈{d,g,m}


                                                                                                   ct , cdt , cgt , cm
                                                                                               
The conditions are verified by taking first-order conditions with respect to                                         t , ht .
QED.
  We now move to proof Proposition H.2.

                                                                                       1
Proof. Note that a necessary condition for efficiency is that Rd = Rg = 1/β and 1+π       = 1/β.
This follows directly from the household’s optimality condition in (C.4)—for the case where
each asset-in-advance constraint is slack. In that case, the household’s allocation across goods
coincides with the planner problem’s unconstrained condition, (H.3). Similarly, for the firm’s
problem, the optimality condition (C.7) coincides (H.4) for Rb = 1/β. Also, notice that it is only
possible to Rb = Rd = Rg = Rm = 1/β if there is no liquidity premium.
    Assume that the efficiency condition holds at every period. Then loans and deposits are given
by:
                                           b                      d
                             Bt = Θb (1/β) and Dt = Θd (1/β)1/ .
From the bank’s budget constraint, and portfolio constraints, using these quantities, we have
that:                                    b               d
                           At + Θb (1/β) = Θd (1/β)1/ + Et                            (H.1)
                                                     1 d         d
                                              Et ≥     Θ (1/β)1/                                                   (H.2)
                                                     κ
                                                     At ≥ 0.                                                        (H.3)
A condition for stationarity is:
                                                 b
                                                    1 + d¯ − ā − Rss
                                                                   d ¯
                                                                      
                                   1/β = āss + Rss                   d ,                                           (H.4)

and replacing the efficiency condition, Rb = Rd = 1/β, yields:

                                         1/β = (1/β − 1/β (1 − ā)) .

This condition implies that At ≥ 0.
   Combining (H.1) and (H.3) we obtain:
                                                         b                 d
                                      Ess = Θb (1/β) − Θd (1/β)1/ .




                                                        56
Substituting this result into the capital requirement condition yields:
                                                   
                                        b     1+κ               d
                                 b
                               Θ (1/β) ≥              Θd (1/β)1/ .
                                                 κ

Hence, the necessary conditions for efficiency in Proposition 7. QED.




                                                57
I     Proof of Proposition 8
Here we present the proof of Proposition 8 in Section 5.2 regarding the pass-through of monetary
policy. In this appendix we present a more general version of the Proposition in the text. In
particular, we derive the comparative statics with respect to changes in the the interest on
reserves under two scenarios: (i) keeping the discount window rate constant, and (ii) keeping
the spread in both policy rates constant. For ease of exposition we restrict to the cases where,
b̄f ed = 0, but the result can be extended along that dimension without difficulty. Let LP xy denote
the derivative of the liquidity premium of asset x with respect to portfolio holdings of asset y.
The general version of of Proposition 8 is as follows.

Proposition I.1 Consider stationary equilibria. Consider an increase from a stationary level of
rm that leaves the stationary level of rw constant or leaves the corridor spread, ∆ = rw − rm ,
constant. If capital requirements are binding, then the increase in rm unambiguously increases
rb . Then, if capital requirements bind, in the region where capital requirements bind:

                                     (b̄+b̄F ed ) rb
    drb                     1 + d ·
                                                                                                    
                                          κ       Rd                          Eω [χ (θ)]        w
        =                                                                 1−            · I [dr = 0] ∈ [0, 1] ,
    drm           (b̄+b̄ ) rb
                        F ed
                                         b (b̄+b̄
                                                  F ed
                                                       ) d                        ∆
                                                        
               d                                                b̄     b
            1+ ·      κ      Rd
                                 − LP a Rb                 ·   κ
                                                                     −

     drb
and dr m = 1, when banks are satiated with reserves. If capital requirements do not bind and the

deposit supply is perfectly elastic at rd , the pass-through is ambiguous and given by:

                          LP bd + LP dd rb + LP bb + LP db rd
                                                        
 drb
                                                                                                     
                                                                               Eω [χ (θ)]        w
     =                                                                      1−            · I [dr = 0] .
drm     LP bb rd + LP dd rb + LP bb LP db + LP dd − LP db LP bb + LP bd b̄
                                                                      
                                                                                   ∆


Proof. We first prove the result for the case with a perfectly elastic deposit supply schedule
and binding capital requirements. We then relax one assumption at a time for the general result.
First, recall that the the slopes of the liquidity yield function are given by
                         η  η 1−η                                η  η 1−η
                                        −θ                                          −1
                                                                                      
         +      w    m   θ̄     θ θ̄                 −     w    m    θ̄     θ θ̄
       χ = (i − i )                            and χ = (i − i )                          . (I.1)
                         θ         θ̄ − 1                            θ         θ̄ − 1

Thus, we can write them as be written as:

                                       χ+ = ∆q + (θ) and χ− = ∆q − (θ) .

Clearly, {q + , q − } ∈ [0, 1]2 . We proof the results for the case where drw > 0, but the steps are the
same to obtain the general result above. QED.

    Case #1: Infinitely Elastic Deposit Supply and Binding Capital Requirements.
The gist of the proof is to perform a comparative statics analysis with respect to rm on the
following sub-system of equilibrium equations:

                                 1 = β 1 + rb b̄ + b̄F ed − rd d¯ ,
                                                                
                                                                                        (I.2)



                                                            58
and
                                                       rb = rm + Eω [χ̄] ,                                  (I.3)
where                                              ω∗                        ∞
                                                            −
                               Eω [χ̄] =                  χ̄ f (ω) dω +            χ̄+ f (ω) dω.
                                                  −1                          ω∗

This subsystem is the loans premium and the stationarity condition for equity.
   Then, taking total differentials with respect to rm on (I.2) and (I.3) we respectively obtain:

                                                          F ed
                                                                  drb       db̄
                                                b̄ + b̄               m
                                                                        + rb m = 0.                         (I.4)
                                                                   dr       dr
and
                                                    drb      d [E [χ̄]]
                                                       m
                                                         =1+            .                                   (I.5)
                                                    dr         drm
   Then, we have that
                                            d [E [χ̄]]                     db̄
                                                       = −E ω [q (θ)] + ∆                                   (I.6)
                                              drm                         drm
where
                                               ∗
                                                                     dθ∗
                                                                       
                               −         ∗ dω
                 LP bb              +
                                      
                         ≡ E χ̄ − χ̄ f (ω )      + Eω [χ̄θ f (ω) dω]        > 0.
                                            db̄                      db̄
We employed Leibnitz’s rule. Thus, substituting the expressions we obtain:

                                    drb          db̄
                                       m
                                         − LP bb m = 1 − Eω [q (θ)] > 0.
                                    dr          dr
The system (I.4) and (I.5) in matrix form is represented as:
                                             drb  h
                         b̄ + b̄F ed  rb                      0
                                                                       i
                                             ·  drm  =   1 − Eω [q (θ)] .                                   (I.7)
                             1       −LP bb      db̄
                                                dr m



Inverting the matrix in the left yields the solution to the local comparative statics of (I.2) and
(I.3):
                            drb
                                                                       −1 h
                                                b̄ + b̄F ed  rb                          0
                                                                                                    i
                             drm        =                                                               .
                              db̄                   1       −LP bb                 1 − Eω [q (θ)]
                             drm
To compute the solution, we need only the upper right element of the inverse matrix. That term
is by construction:
                        drb              rb
                            =                         (1 − Eω [q (θ)]) > 0.
                        drm    LP bb b̄ + b̄F ed + rb
                                                

Similarly, we can also sign the portfolio share:

                                       b̄ + b̄F ed
                                                   
                         db̄
                             =−                         ((1 − Eω [q (θ)])) < 0.
                        drm      LP bb b̄ + b̄F ed + rb
                                                   




                                                                    59
    Observation 1. Notice that under satiation q (θ) = LP bb = 0. Thus, the passthrough is one
for one. Away from satiation the pass-through is less than one because LP bb b̄ > 0.
    Observation 2. Notice that for fixed ∆, the result goes through since (1 − Eω [q (θ)]) is replaced
by 1.

   Case #2: Finetely Elastic Deposit Supply and Binding Capital Requirements.
We now move to a more general result, with an elastic deposit supply schedule. Equilibrium in
the loan supply and deposit

                                                                  −1     b
                              b̄ + b̄f ed · β · Ess =       Θb   · rb + 1 ,
                                         
                                                                         d
                                                            Θd −1 rd + 1
                                                              
                                       κ · β · Ess =

Combining both conditions yields a single equilibruum condition that we append to the equilib-
rium system (I.2) and (I.3).
                                                           b
                                 b̄ + b̄f ed    Θd rb + 1
                                             
                                               = b·            .                         (I.8)
                                     κ          Θ (rd + 1)d
We write (I.8) in differential form:

                                     b
                                           b −1                   b
                                                                          b
                               b                     b        d
                  1 db̄    b Θ     r   + 1        dr      d Θ     r   + 1     drd
                        −       ·                     +       ·                 = 0.
                  κ drm      Θd (rd + 1)d drm              Θd (rd + 1)d +1 drm

Substituting I.8, this expression is written as:
                                         f ed
                                                            b̄ + b̄f ed 1 drd
                                                                      
                     1 db̄     b b̄ + b̄        1 drb    d
                           −                          + ·                     = 0.
                     κ drm           κ          Rb drm          κ        Rd drm
   In addition the differential form of (I.2) is now

                                                drb     b db̄     drd
                                 b̄ + b̄F ed         + r       − κ     = 0,                       (I.9)
                                                 drm      drm      drm
which replaces (I.4).
   Hence, in matrix form, the local comparative statics is given by:
          drb                                                       −1
                                     F ed        b
                                          
                           b̄ +  b̄            r          −κ               "
                                                                                   0
                                                                                             #
            drm                                    b
          db̄m  =            1            −LP b         0          
                                                                             (1 − Eω [q (θ)]) .
            dr                                                         
                          b(             ) 1          d ( b̄       ) 1             0
               d              b̄+ b̄f ed                 b̄+  f ed
            dr                                  1
            drm         −        κ        Rb  κ
                                                      ·     κ      Rd

We can use standard linear algebra tools to obtain the solution to the pass-through to the credit




                                                       60
rate. In this case:
                                  "                                       #
                                      rb              −κ
                                      1             (b̄+b̄F ed )    1
   drb                                κ
                                             d ·        κ         Rd
       = −                                                           (1 − Eω [q (θ)])                                           (I.10)
   drm                            F ed
                                            rb
                                       
                          b̄ + b̄                      −κ
           
                              1           −LP bb        0           
                                                                     
                         b (b̄+b̄      ) 1         d (b̄+b̄      ) 1
                                  f ed                      f ed
                                            1
                       −       κ       Rb  κ
                                                   ·     κ       Rd
                                                           (b̄+b̄f ed )
                                                                    rb
                                                    d ·        κ   Rd
                                                                         +1
          =    −                                                   ¯f ed
                                                                                                               (1 −    Eω [q (θ)]) (I.11)
                        b d (b̄+b̄         ) b̄           (              )                   (  b̄+b̄f ed ) rb
                                      f ed                   b̄+b̄         1        b
                 −LP b  ·           κ      Rd
                                                − 1 + b κ Rb κLP b − d ·                          κ       Rd
                                                         ( b̄+  b̄F ed
                                                                        ) 1 b
                                                1 + d ·         κ         Rd
                                                                              r
          =                                                                                                       (1   − Eω [q (θ)])
                                                                                                                                  (I.12)
                                                                                                                                     .
                         (b̄+b̄f ed ) rb          b d (b̄+b̄
                                                               f ed
                                                                     ) (b̄+b̄F ed )    b(
                                                                                          b̄+b̄f ed ) 1         b
               1 + d ·      κ        Rd
                                           +   LP b  ·       κ              Rd
                                                                                    −       κ        Rb
                                                                                                           κLP  b


and since all terms are positive, the solution holds (b < 0), this step proves the first statement
of the Proposition. Note simply that LP ba = −LP bb .

      Observation 3. Notice that under satiation q (θ) = ϑ = LP bb . Thus, the pass-through is
                                                                                      (b̄+b̄F ed ) (b̄+b̄F ed )
one for one. Away from satiation, the pass-through is less than one because LP bb d · κ               Rd
                                                                                                                −
  ( b̄+ b̄F ed
               )
b κ             1
                 Rb
                    κLP bb > 0.

   Case #3: Infinitely Elastic Deposit Supply and Non-Binding Capital Require-
ments. In this case, the equilibrium system is given by (I.2) and (I.3), but now we also include
the deposit liquidity premium. In this case:

                                               rd = rm + Eω [χ̄] − Eω [χ̄ · ω] .                                                  (I.13)

Once the deposit share is free to move, the differential form of (I.2) is

                                                          drb                  ¯
                                                                   b db̄     d dd
                                           b̄ + b̄F ed         + r       − r      = 0,                                            (I.14)
                                                           drm      drm       drm
which replaces (I.4).
   From the loan LP
                                                         drb      d [E [χ̄]]
                                                            m
                                                              =1+            ,
                                                         dr         drm
where
                                d [E [χ̄]]                        ¯
                                                b db̄         b dd
                                           = LP b     + LP    d     .
                                  drm             drm           drm
   Following the same notation as before:
                                                   ∗
                                                                        dθ∗
                                                                          
                     b        −      +       ∗ dω
                                       
                  LP b ≡    χ̄ − χ̄ f (ω )           + E [χ̄θ f (ω) dω]        >0
                                                db̄                     db̄



                                                                          61
and
                                                         dω ∗                 dθ∗
                                                                                   
                                      −                     ∗
                    LP bd                  +
                                               
                            ≡        χ̄ − χ̄       f (ω ) ¯ + E [χ̄θ f (ω) dω] ¯          <0
                                                          dd                  dd
   The differential form of (I.13):

                                                       d [Eω [χ̄]] d [Eω [χ̄ · ω]]
                                       0=1+                       +
                                                          drm          drm
where
                                d [Eω [χ̄ · ω]]                     ¯
                                                   d db̄       d dd
                                                = ∆b       + ∆ d       .
                                    drm              drm         drm
                                                         ∗
                                                                                dθ∗
                                                                                  
                                 −                ∗ dω
                      d                 +
                                           ∗
                   LP b ≡ −    χ̄ − χ̄ ω f (ω )            + E [ω χ̄θ f (ω) dω]
                                                      db̄                       db̄
and
                                                               dω ∗                   dθ∗
                                                                                          
                                       −                ∗       ∗
                   LP dd                       +
                                                   
                           ≡−        χ̄ − χ̄           ω f (ω ) ¯ + E [ω χ̄θ f (ω) dω] ¯         .
                                                                dd                    dd
Where we also have that LP db > 0, LP dd > 0.
    As in the previous two examples, we construct the matrix representation of the comparative
statics.
       drb                                                      −1 "
                     b̄ + b̄F ed        rb             −rd
                                 
                                                                               0
                                                                                         #
         drm
       db̄m  = 
         dr
                         1            −LP bb          −LP db            (1 − Eω [q (θ)]) .
            ¯                           b      d        b      d               0
                                                                
          dd
            m
                         1         − LP b + LP b   − LP d + LP d
        dr

To obtain the solution to the pass-through, we do the same calculation as in the earlier step.


                                      rb                  −rd
                                                                    
                               − LP bb + LP db − LP bd + LP dd
                                                                 
             drb
                   = −                                                                               (I.15)
             drm        b̄ + b̄F ed            rb               −rd
                                    
                                                  b
                              1              −LP b            −LP db
                                       − LP bb + LP bd − LP db + LP dd
                                                                        
                              1
                                         LP bd + LP dd rb + LP bb + LP db rd
                                                                       
                     =                                                                 .           (I.16)
                       LP bb rd + LP dd rb + LP bb LP db + LP dd − LP db LP bb + LP bd b̄
                                                                


Using that LP bb = −LP ba , LP db = −LP da we obtain:

                                  LP bd + LP dd rb − LP ba + LP da rd
                                                                
                                                                                 .
                −LP ba rd + LP dd rb − LP ba LP db + LP dd + LP da LP bd − LP ba b̄
                                                          


   Observation 4. In this case, the sign is ambiguous and depends on the sign of:

              LP bb rd + LP dd rb + LP bb LP db + LP dd b̄ ≥ LP db LP bb + LP bd b̄.
                                                                               


   This concludes the proof of Proposition 8 . QED.


                                                                62
J     Existence, Uniqueness, and Convergence under Fried-
      man Rule
This Appendix characterizes the existence and uniqueness of a stationary equilibria when the
bank has log preferences (γ = 1), the Fed eliminates all distortions Rm = Rw and sets Rm low
enough so that banks do not hold liquid assets. We can treat these results as holding for an
approximation where bank dividends are close to constant and interbank market distortions are
not too large.


J.1     Dynamical Properties
In this section, we study the dynamical properties of the model. We fully characterize these
dynamics when banks have log utility and the Fed carries out a policy of no distortions in the
interbank market. Both assumptions simplify the analysis. Although the results are not general,
for small deviations around that policy, the dynamic properties should be similar.

Stationary Equilibrium and Policy Effects with Satiation. We begin describing the
transitional dynamics of the model when the Fed carries out a policy that satiates the market
with reserves via iw     m                                          m
                   t = it by setting a sufficiently low value for it . For simplicity, we set the
supply of government bonds to zero and assume the Fed does not purchase loans. . By inducing
satiation, and maintaining an equal amount of reserves as Fed loans, the Fed eliminates the
liquidity premium of loans. Thus, a spread between loans and deposits only results from capital
requirements. This characterization is useful because it describes the dynamics of the model in
absence of any distortions.

For this section, it is useful to define the inverse demand elasticity of loans and supply elasticity
of deposits, ¯x ≡ (x )−1 for x ∈ {d, b}, respectively. Also, intercept of the inverse demand
                                                        x
for loans and supply of deposits are Θ̄x ≡ (Θx )−1/ for x ∈ {d, b}. We obtain the following
characterization:

Proposition J.1 [Transitions under Friedman Rule] Consider a policy sequence such that iw
                                                                                        t =
 m    F ed    F ed
it , Bt = Gt = 0, and Mt = Gt = 0. Then:
    a) Real aggregate bank equity follows:

                   Et+1 = Rtb + κ min Rtb − Rtd , 0 βEt , with E0 > 0 given.
                                                 


    The dynamics are given by a critical threshold
                                               "                     #      1
                                                                         ¯d −¯b
                                          1           Θ̄b /Θ̄d           

                                     Eκ ≡                       b                  ,
                                          β        (1 + κ)−¯ κ¯d

    If Et > Eκ , then Rtb , Rtd , d¯t solve:
                     

                                                      ¯b                        ¯d
                           Rtb = Θ̄b βEt 1 + d¯t              = Θ̄d βEt d¯t               = Rtd .


                                                       63
   Otherwise, d¯t = κ and
                                                              b                  d
                                Rtb = Θ̄b (βEt (1 + κ))¯ , Θ̄d (βEt κ)¯ = Rtd

    b) There ∃! steady state level of Ess > 0. The steady state features binding capital requirements
if and only if
                                           b            d
                                 Θb (1/β) < Θd (1/β) 1 + κ−1 .
                                                                   
                                                                                                 (J.1)
   If capital requirements do not-bind at steady state, then Ess solves:
                                                          b                  d
                                            Θb (1/β) − Θd (1/β)
                                      Ess =                       .
                                                      β

   Otherwise, Ess solves:
                                                      b                              d
                         1/β = Θ̄b (βEss (1 + κ))¯ (κ + 1) − κΘ̄d (βEss κ)¯ .

       (1−1/b )       κ
   c) If         ≥         ,   and capital requirements bind at steady state, then Et converges to Ess
       (1+1/d )     (1+κ)
monotonically.


In the paper, the calibration satisfies these parameter restrictions.


J.2    Proof of Proposition J.1
The proof of the proposition is presented in three steps. First, we derive a threshold equity
level where capital requirements are binding. Second, we prove that there can be at most one
steady state. Third, we provide conditions such that the equilibrium features binding reserve
requirements. Finally, we derive the sufficient condition for monotone convergence. We then
establish the result for the rate of inflation and the determination of the price level.

Part 1 - Law of Motion of Bank Equity. As shown in the Proof of Proposition 3, under log
utility c̄t = (1 − β). Then, the law of motion in (19) becomes

                             Et+1 = Rtb + κ min Rtb − Rtd , 0 βEt .
                                                             
                                                                                   (J.1)

This follow                                     ¯
   b     d
            directly by substituting b̄ = 1 + d and noticing that the equity constraint binds if
 Rt − Rt and if not, deposits don’t affect equity. This is enough to show that the law of motion
of bank equity satisfies the difference equation in the proposition. Thus, we have obtained a law
of motion for bank equity in real terms. We use this to establish convergence. Consider now
the condition such that capital requirements are binding for a given Et = E. For that we need
that Rtb > Rtd . Using the inverse of the loan demand function, Rtb can be written in terms of the
supply of loans using the market clearing condition:
                                                                  ¯b
                                             Rtb = Θ̄b b̄βEt             .



                                                      64
If the capital requirement constraint binds,
                                                                          b
                                        Rtb = Θ̄b (βEt (1 + κ))¯ .

Using the result that capital requirements are binding when Rtb > Rtd , we obtain
                                                          b                         d
                                  Θ̄b (βEt (1 + κ))¯ ≥ Θ̄d (βEt κ)¯ .

Clearing E at equality delivers a threshold,
                                             "                        #      1
                                                                          ¯d −¯b
                                         1              Θ̄b /Θ̄d          

                                    Eκ ≡                          b                 ,
                                         β       (1 + κ)−¯ κ¯d

such that for any E < Eκ , capital requirements are binding in a transition. Thus, the law
of motion of capital is broken into a law of motion for the binding and non-binding capital
requirements regions.

We obtain                                           b                               d
                      Et+1 = Θ̄b (βEt (1 + κ))1+¯ − Θ̄d (βEt κ)1+¯ for Et ≤ Eκ
and                                                               b
                             Et+1 = Θ̄b ((1 + dt )βEt )¯ βEt for Et > Eκ .
Here, we substituted d¯ = κ in (J.1) for the law of motion in the constrained region and
¯    b   d
           
dt Rt − Rt = 0 in the second region.

Part 2 - Uniqueness of Steady State. Here we show that there cannot be more than one
steady state level of real bank equity. We prove this in a couple of steps. First, we ask whether
there can be more than one steady state in each region—in the binding and non-binding regions.
We show that there can be only one steady state in each region. Then, we ask if two steady
states can co-exists, given that they must lie in separate regions. The answer is no.

To see this, define
                                                    b         b                         d   d
                      Γ (E) ≡ Θ̄b (β (1 + κ))1+¯ E ¯ − Θ̄d (β (1 + κ))1+¯ E ¯ .

If a steady state exists in the binding region, it must satisfy the following condition:


                                       1 = Γ (Ess ) and Ess ≤ Eκ .
It is straightforward to verify that


                       Γ0 (E) < 0, lim Γ (E) → ∞, and lim Γ (E) → −∞.
                                   E→0                                E→∞




                                                        65
Since the function is decreasing and starts at infinity, and the function ends at minus infinity,
there can be at most one steady state—with positive E—in the constrained region, Ess < Eκ .

In the unconstrained region, Ess ≥ Eκ a steady state is occurs only when

                                                 1 = Rtb β.

We need to find the level of equity that satisfies that condition. Also, we know that Rd = Rb in
the unconstrained region. Thus, the supply of loans in the unconstrained region is given by
                                                              ¯d
                                          βEt + Θ̄d Rb               ,

the sum of real bank equity plus real deposits. Thus, we can define the equilibrium rate on loans
through the implicit map, R̃b (E) , that solves


                                                                   ¯d ¯b
                                      (                                        )
                          R̃b (E) ≡   R̃|R̃ = Θ̄b               d
                                                        βEt + Θ̄ R̃                 .

If we can show that R̃b (E) is a function and R̃b (E) = β −1 for only one E, then we know that
there can be at most one steady state in the unconstrained region. To show that R̃b (E) is a
function, we must show that there is a unique value of R̃b for any E. Note that R̃b (E) = R̃ for
R̃ that solves                        b         d
                                            ¯                 ¯
                                   Θ̄b R̃        − Θ̄d R̃            = βE.
Since the first term on the left is decreasing and the second increasing, this function is monotone,
and thus, its inverse is a function, i.e., R̃b (E) is a function. Observe that
                    ¯b     ¯d                   ¯b    ¯d
                   b       d                       b        d
             lim Θ̄ R̃ − Θ̄ R̃      = ∞, and lim Θ̄ R̃ − Θ̄ R̃       = −∞,
            R̃→0                                         R̃→∞


so R̃b (E) exists for any positive E. Since R̃b is decreasing in E and defined everywhere, there
exists at most one value for E such that R̃b (E) = (β)−1 . This shows that there exists at most
one steady state in the unconstrained region.

Next, we need to show that if there exists a steady state where Ess ≤ Eκ , there cannot exist
another steady state where Ess ≥ Eκ . To see this, suppose that there ∃ a steady state in the
unconstrained region. Thus, there exists some value Eu > Eκ such that

                                            R̃b (Eu ) = 1/β.

Since R̃b is decreasing and Eu > Eκ , by assumption we obtain that

                               1/β < R̃b (Eκ ) = Rb (βEκ (1 + κ)) ,                            (J.2)

where the equality follows from the definition of Eκ .



                                                    66
As a false hypothesis, suppose that there is another steady state where Ec < Eκ . Then, using
the law of motion for equity in the constrained region,

                Rb (βEc (1 + κ)) = 1/β − κ Rb (βEc (1 + κ)) − Rd (βEc κ)
                                                                           

                 Rb (βEc (1 + κ)) < 1/β,                                                     (J.3)

where the second line follows from Rb > Rd for any Ec < Eκ . Thus,

                           Rb (βEκ (1 + κ)) < Rb (βEc (1 + κ)) < β −1

because Rb is decreasing. However, (J.3) and (J.2) cannot hold at the same time. Thus, there
∃! steady state with positive real equity.

Part 3 - Conditions for Capital Requirements Binding at steady state. We have shown
in Appendix G.5 that a condition for a steady state with slack capital requirements is:
                                         b                 d
                                Θb (1/β) ≥ Θd (1/β)            1 + κ−1 .
                                                                        


Then, the steady state level of equity is:
                                                  b                     d
                                       Θb (1/β) − Θd (1/β)
                                 Ess =                       .
                                                 β
If the condition is violated, we use the stationarity condtion:

                    1/β = Rb (βE (1 + κ)) + Rb (βE (1 + κ)) − Rd (βEκ) κ.
                                                                      


This allows equity to grow at the point where the constraint begins to bind.

Part 4 - Conditions for monotone convergence. Assume that parameters satisfy the
conditions for a steady state with binding capital requirements. Observe that if Et > Eκ , then
Et+1 < Et since Rtb < (β)−1 for all E > Eκ . Thus, any sequence that starts from E0 > Eκ
eventually abandons the region. Thus, without loss of generality, we only need to establish
monotone convergence within the E < Eκ region.

Now consider Et < Ess . We must show that Et+1 also satisfies Et+1 < Ess if that is the case.
Employing the law of motion of equity in the constrained region, notice that
                                                      b                        d
                   Et+1 − Ess = Θ̄b (βEt (1 + κ))1+¯ − Θ̄d (βEt κ)1+¯            − Ess .

Define g (E) ≡ Γ (E) E. Thus,

                                 Et+1 − Ess = Γ (Et ) Et − Ess
                                                          Ess
                                             = −                 g 0 (e) de.
                                                          Et




                                                67
It is enough to show that g 0 (e) > 0 for any e. We verify that under the parameter assumptions,
this is indeed the case. Note that
                                                    b   b                      d   d
               g 0 (e) = 1 + ¯b Θ̄b (β (1 + κ))1+¯ e¯ − 1 + ¯d Θ̄d (βκ)1+¯ e¯
                                                                 

                       = 1 + ¯b Rb (β (1 + κ) e) β (1 + κ) − 1 + ¯d Rd (βκe) βκ,
                                                                     


where the second line follows from the definition of Rb and Rd and the result that capital
requirements are binding in E < Ess . Furthermore, since in this region, Rb > Rd for all E < Eκ ,
then a sufficient condition for g 0 (E) > 0 is to have:

                                     1 + ¯b β (1 + κ) ≥ 1 + ¯d βκ.
                                                               


Thus, a sufficient condition for monotone convergence is

                                       1 + 1/b    κ
                                              d
                                                ≥     .
                                       1 + 1/    1+κ




                                               68
K      Calibration
K.1     Data Sources
Most data series are obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Research
Database (FRED©) and are available at the FRED©website. The original data sources for
each series are collected by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). We use
the following series corresponding to:
   Aggregate Variables. For aggregate variables we use the following:

     total reserves

         – Total Reserves of Depository Institutions, Billions of Dollars, Monthly, Not Seasonally
           Adjusted

                            https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TOTRESNS

     bank equity

         – Total Equity Capital for Commercial Banks in United States, Thousands of Dollars,
           Not Seasonally Adjusted (USTEQC)

                              https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/USTEQC

         – This data is available only at a quarterly frequency. We interpolate the series linearly
           from quarter to quarter to obtain the monthly series

     the volume of interbank market loans:

         – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Interbank Loans, All Com-
           mercial Banks [IBLACBW027NBOG], H.8 Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks
           in the United States,

                        https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/IBLACBW027NBOG

     the volume of discount window loans:

         – Discount Window Borrowings of Depository Institutions from the Federal Reserve
           [DISCBORR], H.3 Aggregate Reserves of Depository Institutions and the Monetary
           Base,

                             https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DISCBORR

     bank deposits:

         – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Deposits, All Commercial
           Banks [DPSACBM027NBOG],

                                                69
                         https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DPSACBM027NBOG

    bank credit:

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Commercial and Industrial
          Loans, All Commercial Banks [BUSLOANS],

                             https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/BUSLOANS

Series for interest rates. For series on interest rates we use the following:

    the interest on discount window loans:

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Primary Credit Rate [DP-
          CREDIT],

                             https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DPCREDIT

    the interest on reserves:

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Interest Rate on Excess
          Reserves [IOER],

                                  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/IOER

    Interest rate on deposits:

        – We use the series used in Drechsler et al. (2017),

                    academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/132/4/1819/3857743.

    the government bond rate is:

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), 3-Month Treasury bill: Sec-
          ondary Market Rate [TB3MS],

                                 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TB3MS

Open Market Operations. The series that corresponds to open-market operations is the ratio
of a measure of the Fed’s assets, normalized by total bank credit. During the crisis, the Fed’s
balance sheet grows for multiple factors: some of these factors include Swaps to foreign govern-
ments and direct loans to institutions such as American International Group (AIG). We consider
the purchase of government bonds as the equivalent of conventional OMO. For unconventional
OMO we consider the sum of mortgage-backed securities and Federal agency securities. These
series are weekly and aggregated to the monthly level. The references for these series are:

    total bank credit

                                                 70
        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Bank Credit of All Commer-
          cial Banks [TOTBKCR],

                                https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TOTBKCR

    Treasury bills

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Assets: Securities Held
          Outright: U.S. Treasury Securities [WSHOTS],

                               https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/WSHOTS

    Federal agency paper

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Assets: Securities Held
          Outright: Federal Agency Debt Securities [WSHOFDSL]

                                https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/WSHOFDSL

    Mortgage-Backed Securities

        – Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), Assets: Securities Held
          Outright: Mortgage-Backed Securities: Wednesday Level [WSHOMCB]

                                https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/WSHOMCB

Ratio Series. The series for ratios are derived as follows.

    Portfolio shares ḡ, d¯

        – The series for the data analogues of ḡ, d¯ are constructed using the micro data from
                                               

          commercial banks from Phillip Schnabl. We take the series for Treasury securities that
          mature in less than three months, and between three months and one year—typically
          government bonds are thought of as Treasury securities with maturity below a year.
          The series for the data analogue of d¯ is obtained as the sum of total liablities and
          divide by equity. Then we aggregate across banks and divide by the equity series.
          The raw data is available in Philip Schnabl’s website:

                         http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/∼pschnabl/data.html

    Portfolio shares m̄:

        – We take the series for cash assets for all commercial banks. The series includes vault
          cash and reserves held by banks. The series is available at the Board of Governors of
          the Federal Reserve System (US), (Cash Assets, All Commercial Banks/Total Assets,
          All Commercial Banks)*100,


                                                  71
                              https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=IW4

        – We divide the series by difference between all commercial bank assets minus liabilities.

    Liquidity Premium

        – The liquidity premium that is used to construct the return on loans is obtained from
          Del Negro et al. (2017),

                     https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20121660

Federal Funds Interest Rate Distribution.

    The series for the dispersion in the Fed funds rates are obtained from the New York
     Federal Reserve Bank. The NY Fed provides two data sets, one for the daily min and
     max and another where it includes quantiles. We use both data sets. In section 4 we use
     the max-min spread because the length of the data is longer.

        – To construct the series FF Range, we construct the monthly average of the daily
          distance between the max and the min of the Fed funds distribution, and average
          over the month. The original series are found
          here:https://apps.newyorkfed.org/markets/autorates/fed-funds-search-page

    When we perform the financial crisis counterfactuals in Section 5.3, we reconstruct the
     Fed funds rate among banks. We also use that data in the robustness checks to section 4
     in Appendix L, w. For that, we use the quantiles of the Fed Funds.

        – The data available from the NY Fed also includes the max and min, 99, 75, 50, 25
          and 1st quantiles, and the standard deviation of daily Fed funds rate. The data is
          available here:

  https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/ff-volumes-oct2006-feb2016.xlsx


K.2     Construction of Bank and Non-bank Fed Funds
Mapping the model to the data after October 2008 requires to account for two additional features:
First, in this period, the average Fed Funds rate fell below the the interest on reserves, the
analogue of Rm in the model. Second, the 1-month T-Bill rate, the analogue of Rg in the model,
also traded below the interest on reserves. One important consideration in accounting for both
features in the model is that many in trades in the Fed funds market are transactions between
banks, which were eligible to receive interest on reserves and other institutions that were not
eligible. Thus, after 2008, the average Fed funds rate reflects in part transactions that occur due
to that regulatory arbitrage, with an interest rate below the rate on reserves. We argue that
to execute the with non-banks, banks need to use government bonds as collateral. Thus, these
trades generate an additional value of holding government bonds. Next, we explain we describe
how we add these features into the model, to address these issues and reconstruct series of Fed
Funds rate corresponding to trades only among banks.

                                                72
Non-Bank Fed Funds Participants. We introduce a set of non-banks (nb) that hold of re-
serves, participate in the Fed funds market, but do not receive interest on reserves. In particular,
we assume that by the end of the balancing stage, banks with a surplus of government bonds
will match (in one round) with non-banks—banks in deficit, by that stage, have already sold
all of their government bonds. We assume that all banks are matched, with a non-bank, on a
per-bond basis. Once a match occurs, banks and non-banks trade 1 unit of government bonds
for one unit of reserves—the position is reversed by the end of the period, but the interest is
paid to the agent that holds the asset overnight. We call this transaction a Repo.

When a bank meets a non-bank, they solve the following Nash bargaining problem:


                                                                 b            b
                         Rf,nb = arg max (R − 1/ (1 + π))1−η (Rm − R)η .
                                        R

The first term in parenthesis is the surplus minus the outside option for the non-bank: the non-
bank earns R instead of storing the reserve at no interest. The second parenthesis, is the surplus
for the bank: the bank earns Rm , but pays R. The bank’s bargaining power is η b . Solution to
the rate in a Repo transaction is:

                                  Rf,nb = 1 + 1 − η b (Rm − 1) .
                                                     
                                                                                             (K.1)

Now, a bank that ends in surplus, not only earns Rm , but also the gains from the regulatory
arbitrage, Rm − Rf,nb . Therefore, (Gov. Bond LP) is now modified to obtain:

                                Rg + Rm − Rf,nb = Rm + χ+ .
                                                
                                                                                       (K.2)

Equations (K.1) and (K.2) account for government bond and Fed funds rates that trade below
Rm .

Construction of Fed Funds analogue. Next, we explain how we approximate R̂f,nb and,
R̂f,ib , the average Fed funds rate among bank trades using data on the distribution of Fed funds
rates. Conceptually, the average Fed funds rate is the average Fed funds rates between interbank
and non-interbank transactions:

                                 Rf = 1 − ν nb · Rf,ib + ν nb · Rf,nb ,
                                              
                                                                                            (K.3)

where ν nb is the fraction of Fed fund trades that occur among banks and non-banks. From the
data, we observe Rf at a given point in time. Thus with a data counterpart for ν̂ nb and R̂f,nb we
could reconstruct R̂f,ib . We observen data on 1-st, 25-th, o75-th and 99-th percentiles of the Federal
                                         f    f     f     f
Funds distribution, respectively Rt,1 , Rt,25 , Rt,75 , Rt,99 , at a given date t. To reconstruct the
                                                                              n            o
                                                                                  f    f
data analogue ν̂tnb , for each t, we find the pair of contiguous percentiles Rt,x   , Rt,y   such that the
                                                                  h           i
                                                                     f    f
interest rate on reserves fell within that interval, i.e., Rtm ∈ Rt,x  , Rt,y  . Naturally, we attribute
all trades executed below R̂tm totrades
                                       among bank and non banks. Thus, the massh of tradesi
                                    f                                               f
with non-bank trades will be F Rt,x plus a fraction of trades that fell within the Rt,x , Rm
interval. We approximate the date using assuming a uniform distribution among the trades

                                                   73
within that interval. Hence, the data analogue of ν nb is:
                                                             f
                                     
                                          f
                                                    Rm − Rt,x    h 
                                                                      f
                                                                            
                                                                               f
                                                                                  i
                        ν̂tnb   =F       Rt,x       + f      f
                                                                 · F Rt,y − F Rt,x .                       (K.4)
                                                     Rt,y − Rt,x

For the analogue of R̂f,nb , we reconstruct it using the same approximation to the distribution of
rates, that is:
                                                                                     
                            1      X         
                                                 f       f
                                                                h  
                                                                      f
                                                                            
                                                                                f
                                                                                   i
                R̂f,nb =                        Rt,y − Rt,x    · F Rt,y   − F Rt,x    
                            2
                                {x, y} ∈[...]
                                                                                        !
                            1  m                 Rm − Rf h                      i
                                              f              t,x        f          f
                       +         R − Rt,x            f       f
                                                                  · F Rt,y − F Rt,x       .
                            2                       Rt,y − Rt,x

We use this construction to backout R̂f,ib and R̂g using (K.3) and (K.2) respectively. We use the
month moving average series for R̂f,ib and R̂g in the procedure that follows.


K.3      Calibration Procedure
In the procedure, we infer steady state parameters using dataanalogues to for the volume of
                                                                               d    m     f     m     w
interbank loans, discount window loans, {W, F }, interest rates Rss              , Rss , Rss , Rss , Rss , an ana-
logue for the loan liquidity premium {LPss } and bank portfolio shares on reserve and government
bond holdings, am well as the capital requirement, {m̄ss , ḡss , κ}.
                                     n                                     o
                                                         δ
    Here we explain how we deduce σ̂ss , λ̂ss , η̂ss , σ̂ss , Θ̂bss , Θ̂dss in section 5.1:

   1. Obtain Ψ̂−
               ss from
                                                             Ψ̂−   −
                                                               ss Sss     Fss
                                                    Ψ̂−
                                                      ss =       −
                                                                      =           .
                                                               Sss      Wss + Fss
   2. Obtai                                                                     !
                                                                        1
                                                      λ̂ss = log                    ,
                                                                     1 − Ψ̂−
                                                                           ss

      by inverting (A.1) under the assumption that θss < 1.
               ∗
                  from the definition (B.2.13) substituting ρ = 0 and ā, d¯ = {m̄ss , ḡss } and
                                                                     
   3. Deduce ω̂ss
      obtain:
                                                            d
                                         ∗     m̄ss + ḡss Rss
                                       ω̂ss =−            / m.
                                                    κ      Rss
   4. Deduce σ̂ss as the solution σ̂ that solves:
                                                             d
                                                                                      
                 W     
                               −
                                 
                                       ∗        m̄ss + ḡss Rss           ∗         κ
                     = 1 − Ψ̂ss Φ (ω̂ss ; σ̂)              + m E [ω|ω < ω̂ss ; σ̂]       .                 (K.1)
                 A                                κ+1       Rss                    κ+1
                                      −                                                      ∗
      This step uses (B.2.14), where Sss is obtained by integrating (B.2.11) among all ω < ω̂ss ,
      dividing by all assets

                                                                74
 5. We deduce a value for θ̂ss from:
                                                           d
                                                                                   
                                    ∗                     Rss            ∗
                              Φ (ω̂ss ; σ̂) m̄ss + ḡss + R m E [ω|ω < ω̂ss ; σ̂] κ
                                                            ss
                  θ̂ss =                                   d
                                                                                        .                        (K.2)
                                   ∗ ; σ̂)) m̄ + ḡ + Rss E [ω|ω > ω̂ ∗ ; σ̂] κ − ḡ
                         (1 − Φ (ω̂ss         ss     ss   Rm             ss           ss
                                                                         ss


                    −                                                     ∗         +
    This step uses Sss obtained by integrating (B.2.11) among all {ω < ω̂ss }, and Sss obtained
                                             ∗
    by integrating (B.2.11) among all ω > ω̂ss , and applying the formula (B.2.12).
                                                                                −
 6. We deduce Ψ̂+                                                        +
                ss from the clearing condition in the Fed funds market Ψ̂ss = Ψ̂ss · θ̂ss

 7. We deduce χ̄ˆ+                           ˆ+       +      f   m
                 ss using (B.2.15) and thus, χ̄ss = Ψ̂ss · (R − R ).

 8. We deduce η̂ss that solves:
                                                                !η̂ss
                                                        θ̄ˆss                   η ˆ1−η̂ss
                                                                                                        !
                                                                              θ̂ss θ̄ss   − θ̂ss
                            χ̄ˆ+      w   m
                               ss = (R − R )                                                                      (K.3)
                                                        θ̂ss                         θ̄ˆ − 1
                                                                                      ss

    where                           
                                    1 + (θ̂ss − 1) exp(λ̂ss )
                                                                                               if θ̂ss ≤ 1
                          θ̄ˆss =
                                        1 + ((θ̂ss )−1 − 1) exp(λ̂ss ))−1
                                    
                                                                                                ifθ̂ss > 1.
                                    

    which direct from (A.2).

 9. We also deduce χ̄ˆ−
                      ss using
                                                                                          1−η̂ss           
                                                                                    θ̄ˆss
                                                             !η̂ss       η̂ss
                                                     θ̄ˆss            θ̂ss                           − 1
                         χ̄ˆ−      w     m
                            ss = (Rss − Rss )
                                                                                    θ̄ˆss − 1
                                                                                                        
                                                     θ̂ss

    which is also obtained from (A.2).
                                          δ
10. We deduce a volatility of defaults, σ̂ss , and κ from the solution to
                                              n                                                  o 1
    ¯ , 1 + κ − (b¯ss , κ) ≡ argmax
    (b                                                    b
                                               E (1 − δ) Rss       m
                                                             b̄ + Rss       d ¯
                                                                      ā − Rss               ¯ ω) 1−γ 1−γ
                                                                               d + χ̄ss (ā, d,
      ss
                             b̄≤κ,ā+b̄−κ=1


    where the expectation E is over δ and ω.

11. We obtain Θ̂bss by inverting (??)
                                                                                 b
                                    Θ̂bss = b̄ss + b̄Fssed · β̂ss · Ess · (Rss ) .
                                                          


12. We obtain Θ̂dss by inverting (??)
                                                                                  d
                                          Θ̂dss = d¯ · β̂ss · Ess · Rss
                                                                     d
                                                                                            .


                                                      75
L     Appendix to Section 4: Robustness Analysis
The next sections present additional corroborating evidence as the one presented in Section 4.

Estimates with other Liquidity Measures. A first robustness check runs the same regres-
sions as in Table 1, but where using two other measures of liquidity premia. The first measure is
a classic measure advocated by Stock and Watson (1989) and Friedman and Kuttner (1993), the
three month spread between the AAA commercial paper and the 3 month T-Bill. The second
measure is the TED spread, the difference between the three-month Treasury bill and the three-
month US dollar LIBOR. In this case, the data availability is longer, from July 2000 to February
2016, when the NY Fed stops reporting the daily max and min values of the Fed Funds market.
Table 5 reports the results. The pattern is consistent with the earlier estimation in Table 1, in
significance in magnitude.
    The next robustness check compares the results with two popular measures introduced by
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012), the GZ Spread and the GZ excess-bond premium (EBP). The
authors construct these measures by taking individual fixed-income securities and discount their
promised cash-flows according to zero-coupon US Treasury yields. This delivers a spread for each
security. The “GZ excess bond premium” of each security is constructed as the portion of the
overall credit spread that cannot be accounted for by individual predictors of default, nor bond-
specific characteristics. Specifically, the authors regress their credits spreads on a firm-specific
measure of expected default and a vector of bond-specific characteristics; the residual of this
regression is the GZ excess bond premium.
    Table 1 reports the results. The pattern is resembles the earlier estimation in Table 1, but
the regressions lose power once we control for the VIX, a measure of dispersion, that remains
significant. This feature indicated that bonds can have premia liqudity premia that correlate
with the cycle, but are independent of the liquidity premia among near-money assets.

Other Spreads and Placebos. Table 7 reports two addition sets of robustness checks. Re-
gressions (1-3) in Table 7 are the same regressions as regression (3) in Table 1, except that the
measure FF Range is replaced by three alternative measures of interbank market dispersion. The
first two measures are FF 99-1 which corresponds to the monthly average of the daily spread be-
tween the 99th and 1st quantiles of the Fed Funds distribution and FF 75-25 which corresponds
to the 75th and 25th quantiles. Finally, FF std is the monthly average daily standard deviation
of the Fed funds rates. The time series for quantiles are shorter than FF range, ranging only
from January 2006 through December 2018. The overall fit is similar, and in particular, the
magnitude of the coefficient of FF 99-1 series is very similar to FF Range, not surprisingly. The
coefficient for the FF 75-25 series is larger, which is unsurprising since the standard deviation of
this series is larger. The FF std series, is also significantly correlated, and the coefficient is even
larger.
    Regressions (4-6) in Table 7 employ other measures of liquidity premia in Nagel (2016), which
are interpreted as placebo tests. These are the series for the 10y AAA to T-Bill corporate bond
spread, the Note T-Bill spread and the spread between on the run and off the run bonds. In
neither case, is the FF Range variable significant.




                                                  76
Subsamples. As final robustness check, we re-run the regressions in Table 8, but this time,
we limit the sample to the pre-crisis period, from July 2000 through December 2007. Again,
the pattern is the same. The FF Range variable remains a significantly correlated variable with
other measures of spreads. By contrast, the VIX index is no longer significantly correlated with
measures of spreads.

           Table 5: Liquidity Premia and Interbank Spreads - Robustness Checks
                   (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
              CP Spread CP Spread CP Spread TD Spread TD Spread TD Spread
 FF Range       0.352∗∗∗      0.320∗∗∗    0.293∗∗∗    0.587∗∗∗    0.609∗∗∗     0.534∗∗∗
                 (17.72)      (14.71)     (13.05)     (16.86)      (15.63)      (13.92)
 FFR                         0.0206∗∗    0.0267∗∗∗                 -0.0137      0.00430
                               (3.26)      (4.20)                  (-1.23)       (0.40)
                                                ∗∗∗
 VIX                                      0.115                                0.315∗∗∗
                                           (3.53)                                (5.70)
                                                 ∗∗∗         ∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Constant       0.00714      -0.00882    -0.345       0.0893      0.101        -0.816∗∗∗
                  (0.44)       (-0.53)     (-3.57)     (3.13)       (3.36)      (-5.00)
 Observations      184           184         184        188          188          188
 Adjusted R2      0.631         0.649       0.670      0.602        0.603        0.661
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001



           Table 6: Liquidity Premia and Interbank Spreads - Robustness Checks
                   (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)
              GZ Spread GZ Spread GZ Spread GZ ebp GZ ebp GZ ebp
 FF Range       0.536∗∗∗      0.769∗∗∗     0.150     0.463∗∗∗ 0.526∗∗∗   0.112
                  (4.01)       (5.29)      (1.87)     (4.91)   (4.98)    (1.62)
 FFR                         -0.147∗∗∗    0.00114             -0.0395 0.0598∗∗
                               (-3.55)     (0.05)              (-1.31)   (3.07)
                                                ∗∗∗
 VIX                                      2.598                         1.738∗∗∗
                                          (22.50)                       (17.39)
                      ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
 Constant       2.302         2.422      -5.139       -0.127  -0.0947 -5.152∗∗∗
                 (21.00)      (21.70)     (-15.07)    (-1.64)  (-1.17) (-17.46)
 Observations      188           188        188         188      188      188
 Adjusted R2      0.075         0.129      0.767       0.110    0.113    0.663
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                              77
          Table 7: Liquidity Premia and Interbank Spreads - Robustness Checks
                   (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
             GC Spread GC Spread GC Spread 10y AAA Spr Note Spr                OF Spr
FF 99-1        0.207∗∗∗
                 (7.26)
FFR            0.0555∗∗∗    0.0774∗∗∗    0.0429∗∗∗    -0.0912∗∗∗   -0.00383 0.00384∗∗∗
                 (6.14)        (9.66)      (8.36)       (-8.33)     (-1.84)     (4.28)
                       ∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
VIX              0.138       0.200        0.0584       0.851       0.0943      0.00462
                 (3.05)        (4.57)      (2.07)       (15.12)      (8.95)     (1.01)
                                    ∗∗∗
FF 75-25                     0.658
                               (6.48)
FF std                                   1.051∗∗∗
                                          (10.08)
FF Range                                                -0.0383     0.00375   -0.00146
                                                        (-0.98)      (0.60)    (-0.54)
                       ∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Constant        -0.411       -0.585       -0.184       -0.696      -0.239      -0.0165
                 (-2.84)      (-4.11)     (-2.08)       (-4.19)     (-7.17)    (-1.14)
Observations       63            63         138           188         138        138
Adjusted R2       0.791        0.768       0.660         0.685       0.486      0.121
t statistics in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




          Table 8: Liquidity Premia and Interbank Spreads - Robustness Checks
                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
             GC Spread GC Spread GC Spread CD Spread CD Spread CD Spread
FF Range       0.238∗∗∗      0.162∗∗∗    0.157∗∗∗     0.581∗∗∗    0.529∗∗∗    0.513∗∗∗
                (8.92)        (6.60)       (6.19)     (13.09)     (10.83)     (10.23)
FFR                         0.0465∗∗∗    0.0482∗∗∗                0.0322∗     0.0377∗
                              (6.72)       (6.63)                  (2.34)      (2.62)
VIX                                       0.0281                               0.0886
                                           (0.80)                              (1.28)
                                     ∗∗
Constant        0.0308      -0.0691        -0.153     -0.0110     -0.0802      -0.345
                (1.35)        (-2.90)     (-1.42)      (-0.29)     (-1.70)     (-1.62)
Observations      90             90          90           90         90           90
Adjusted R2      0.469         0.646        0.645       0.657       0.674       0.676
t statistics in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                          78
M      Algorithms
This appendix presents the numerical algorithms that we use to solve the model. We first present
the algorithm to solve the stationary equilibrium. We then present the algorithm to solve for
transitional dynamics.


M.1     Stationary Equilibrium
The stationary equilibrium of the model can be conveniently reduced to solving a system of
                                                 b
two-non linear equations in two unknowns (Rss      , θss ). In a stationary equilibrium, all nominal
variables grow at a constant rate (in this case, zero) and real variables are constant. To simplify
the presentation, we assume that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution equals one, which
gives rise to a constant dividend-to-equity ratio, a zero nominal growth of the nominal balance
sheet of the monetary authority, and B F ed = 0. We also set a value for Rss         d
                                                                                       based on the
                                                   d
calibration target and infer the intercept term Θ that is consistent with that value.
                                    b
  1. Guess a stationary value for (Rss , θss ), the real return on loans and market tightness.
                                                                                      d
  2. Given market tightness, nominal policy rates, the given long-run inflation, and Rss , compute
     the liquidity yield function χ̄ using (9).
                                                                      ¯ ā}:
  3. Solve banks’ optimization problem for the portfolio weights {b̄, d,
                                      n                                     o 1
                            max                                         ¯ ω) 1−γ 1−γ ,
                                       E Rb b̄ + Rm ā − Rd d¯ + χ̄(ā, d,                     (M.1)
                         {b̄,ā,d¯}≥0
                        b̄ + ā − d¯ = 1, and d¯ ≤ κ.

  4. Check whether banks’ policies are consistent with steady state:

  5. Compute aggregate gross equity growth as

                             E 0 /E = 1 + Rb − 1 b̄ − Rd − 1 d¯ (1 − c̄),
                                                            


  6. Compute implied market tightness:
                                             ¯
                                           ā/d−ρ                           ∞
                                            (1−ρ)
                              −                                    +
                            S =                     s(ω)dΦ and S =             ¯
                                                                                     s(ω)dΦ.
                                                                            ā/d−ρ
                                       1                                     (1−ρ)


      where we used that market tightness is defined as

                                                      θ̃ = S − /S + .

  7. If E 0 /E = 1 and θ̃ = θss , move to step 7. Otherwise, adjust the guess for Rss
                                                                                   b
                                                                                      and θss and
     go to step 3.




                                                        79
  8. Compute household demand for government bonds, using Rg = Rm + χ+

                                             Gh            g
                                                = Θg (Rg )
                                             P

  9. and banks portfolio weights on government bonds by using market clearing condition

                                           G Gh            ¯
                                             −   = Eḡ(1 − c)
                                           P   P

 10. Compute the nominal amount of reserves and the intercepts of the loan demand and deposit
     supply functions using that real equity and the initial price level are normalized to one
     (i.e., P = 1, E = 1) and

                                         M̃ F ed = (1 − c̄)(ā − ḡ)EP,
                                           
                                      b   1
                                   Θ             = E b̄(1 − c̄),
                                         Rb
                                       −ς
                                    d   1             ¯ − c̄).
                                  Θ              = E d(1
                                        Rd

 11. Compute nominal returns using definitions of real returns and transfers T F ed from the Fed
     budget constraint:

                          τ = (1 − c̄) [(im − π) m̄ + (ig − π) ḡ − (iw − im )w̄] .

      where
                                           w̄ = (1 − Ψ− (θ))S − .
                                                                                        b
Let us comment on some details from the computations. To solve for the pair (Rss          , θss ), we
use the fsolve command in Matlab. To solve for the portfolio problem, we use the first-order
conditions, which we solve, again using fsolve. Notice that if the capital requirement binds, there
is only one portfolio variable to solve for.
    To compute expectations, we use a Newton-Cotes quadrature method. Specifically, we apply
the trapezoid rule with a grid of 2,000 equidistant points. To specify the lower and upper
boundaries of the grid, we take the shock values that guarantee 10−5 mass in the tails of the
distribution.


M.2      Transitional Dynamics
The basic procedure to solve for transitional dynamics is to start by conjecturing an initial price
level P0 , solve for all sequences of prices and quantities using market clearing conditions and bank
problems, and finally that the price converges to the path of the price level in the stationary
equilibrium. Essentially, the solution can be reduced to one-equation and one-unknown.
    To simplify the presentation, we assume that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
equals one, which gives rise to a constant dividend-to-equity ratio, a zero nominal growth of
the nominal balance sheet of the monetary authority, BtF ed = 0, and an inelastic demand for
government bonds by households.

                                                 80
 1. Establish a finite period T ∈ N for convergence to steady state, a convergence criterion ε,
    and an initial value for aggregate real equity E0

 2. Guess an initial price level P0 .

 3. Set t = 0.

 4. Given E0 , P0 , and level of nominal reserves set by the monetary authority M̃ F ed , we can
    obtain an implied level of real reserve holdings:

                                                       M̃ F ed
                                                 m̃0 ≡         .
                                                       βP0 E0

 5. Compute
                                                         G     h
                                                         P
                                                           − GP
                                                 g̃0 =
                                                       E0 (1 − c̄)
 6. Denote a˜0 = m̃ + g̃

 7. Find (R1m ,R1b ) that solves

                                                  ā0 − a˜0 = 0
                                                                                       
                                                                                1
                                βE0 (1 + d¯0 − (m̃0 + g˜0 )) =     Θb0            b
                                                                                             ,
                                                                             1 + rt+1

    where ā0 , d¯0 , satisfy
                                 n                                                    o 1
                                                                                  ¯ ω) 1−γ 1−γ
              ā0 , d¯0 = arg max E R1b (1 + d¯0 − ā) + R1m ā − R1d d¯ + χ̄(ā, d,
                       
                                      ¯
                                b̄,ā,d≤κ


    and χ̄ follows (9).
    Given im and R1m , compute inflation between period 0 and 1 as

                                              1 + im
                                                    
                                       π1 =            − 1.
                                                R1m

 8. Given π1 and P0. , compute next-period price P1 = (1 + π1 ) P0 .

 9. Compute next-period equity using the law of motion

                        E1 = 1 + Rb − 1 b̄ − Rd − 1 d¯ (1 − c̄)E0 ,
                                                       


10. Repeat steps 4-9 for t = 1......T

11. Compute criteria for convergence of z = PT +1 − P0 . Notice that if there is steady state
    inflation, this condition for convergence is replaced by z = PT +1 − P0 (1 + πss )T .

12. If |z| < ε, exit algorithm. Otherwise, adjust P0 and go to step 4.


                                                    81
