                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DEMOGRAPHICS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                          James Liang
                                           Hui Wang
                                        Edward P. Lazear

                                       Working Paper 20506
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20506


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




Lazear gratefully acknowledges support of the Coulter Faculty Fellowship. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by James Liang, Hui Wang, and Edward P. Lazear. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographics and Entrepreneurship
James Liang, Hui Wang, and Edward P. Lazear
NBER Working Paper No. 20506
September 2014, Revised November 2016
JEL No. J11,L26,M51

                                             ABSTRACT

Entrepreneurship requires energy and creativity as well as business acumen. Some factors that contribute
to entrepreneurship may decline with age, but business skills increase with experience in high level
positions. Having too many older workers in society slows entrepreneurship. Older workers do not
possess the advantages of youth, but more significant is that when older workers occupy key positions
they may block younger workers from acquiring business skills. A formal theoretical structure is presented
and tested using the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor data. The results imply that a one-standard deviation
decrease in the median age of a country increases the rate of new business formation by 2.5 percentage
points, which is about forty percent of the mean rate. Furthermore, older societies have lower rates
of entrepreneurship at every age.


James Liang                                         Edward P. Lazear
Peking University                                   Graduate School of Business
Guanghua School of Management                       Stanford University
No. 5 Yiheyuan Road, Haidain District               Stanford, CA 94305
Beijing 100871, P.R. China                          and Hoover Institution
jzliang@gsm.pku.edu.cn                              and also NBER
                                                    lazear@stanford.edu
Hui Wang
Peking University
Guanghua School of Management
No. 5 Yiheyuan Road, Haidain District
Beijing 100871, P.R. China
jackie.wang@gsm.pku.edu.cn
1. Introduction

       Few doubt the role of entrepreneurship in fostering economic growth. Without new

business creation, it is difficult to imagine that game-changing technologies can make their

way into the economic environment. Existing companies can modernize and update their

products and techniques of production, but the major innovations tend to be associated with

entrepreneurship and with the formation of new companies.

       Many significant inventions of the last 150 years illustrate the point. Thomas Edison

invented the light bulb and founded General Electric. The inventor of the automobile was

Karl Friedrich Benz, followed closely by Gottlieb Wilhelm Daimler. Daimler-Benz is the

product of their inventions. Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone and founded

AT&T. Guglielmo Marconi, the inventor of radio, was a founder of Wireless Telegraph &

Signal in Britain. The Wright Brothers founded The Wright Company, which later became

Curtiss-Wright. Steven Wosniak, who invented the personal computer, teamed up with Steve

Jobs to form Apple. The list goes on.

       In the last 50 years, most of the developed world has experienced a dramatic

demographic shift. Japan is a case in point. Almost immediately after World War II, Japan’s

fertility rate fell rapidly and dropped below the replacement level in the 1960s. Since 2000s,

Japan’s fertility rate remained one of the lowest in the world at about 1.3,1 which means that

each generation will be 35% smaller than its parent’s generation. Similarly, the fertility rates

of the European countries also fell in the 50-60s and currently are at around 1.6 on average,

which means each generation will be 20% smaller than its parents’ generation. In fact, the

U.S. is the only major developed country with replacement level fertility and some major

developing countries, like China, also have below replacement fertility rates. In the near

future, an aging and shrinking workforce likely will be the norm for most of the world.

       The trend towards an aging and shrinking workforce is widespread. Its impact on future

economic development can be profound. Standard economic theory views the effect of aging

on the economy primarily through its effect on reducing the size of the labor force, and


1   World Bank database, available at: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN
                                                               3
through the fiscal drain associated with government support of a larger fraction of the

population. This effect can be offset at least partially by extending the retirement age, as

many countries have already done.2,3

     The focus here is on another mechanism by which not only the supply of the workforce,

but also the age structure of the workforce, can have a significant impact on economic

performance through the channel of entrepreneurship. Some studies already attribute Japan’s

lost decades to its entrepreneurship vacuum since the 1990s. But what causes this vacuum?

Age structure is the answer emphasized here. A worker in a country with a younger

workforce, like the United States, will be more entrepreneurial than a worker in a country

with an older workforce, like Japan.

     The argument is that entrepreneurial capability depends on two types of abilities: one that

grows with age and one that declines with it. The first factor is called “advantages of youth.”

It may reflect those aspects of creativity that decline with age. The young may generate more

ideas as a result of higher levels of social interaction when young. They may be more able to

think in novel ways and thereby break away from products and production methods of the

past. Alternatively, the young may be more willing to take risk, perhaps because they are less

constrained by family expenses. The specific mechanism is not central to the analysis here.

All that is required is that this factor has a positive effect on entrepreneurship and declines

with age.

     Secondly, another factor that has a positive effect on the ability to start a successful

business is called “business acumen,” which increases with job experience. Additionally,

the experience that provides the relevant business skill is specific to the jobs to which

individuals are assigned. Workers who do low-level, menial tasks are unlikely to acquire the
2
  Schwarz and Demirgue-Kunt (1999) document 17 countries around the world that extended their mandatory
retirement age during 1992 to 1998. Many of these are OECD countries, e.g., Czech Republic (change from 60
to 62), Ireland (65 to 66), Italy (60 to 62), and New Zealand (60 to 65). Examples occurring after 1998 include
France, changing from 60 to 62 in 2010, and Germany, changing from 65 to 67 in 2012.
3
  In fact, many scholars hold the view that the threat of aging has been overstated. Proposed solutions to deal
with the labor shortage problem include: extension of retirement age (Herrmann, 2012), attracting international
migration from labor-surplus countries (Bloom, Canning, and Fink, 2010, Herrmann, 2012), accumulation of
human capital and increases in labor productivity (Prettner, 2013), etc. A recent paper by Vogel, Ludwig, and
Borsch-Supan (2013) evaluates these alternative methods and finds that policies promoting human capital
formation in combination with an increase in the retirement age are effective in reducing welfare loss due to
demographic transitions.
                                                      4
kind of business skill that will make them successful entrepreneurs.           Workers who are

placed in roles that give them decision making authority and the experience of different

management situations acquire more business skills that translate into operating a successful

firm.

    Although the results offer no direct test of either of the effect of youth or business

acumen on entrepreneurship, the findings are in complete alignment with the predictions of

the theory based on these two factors, one of which declines and the other of which increases

with age.   Furthermore, some of the borne-out predictions are subtle and are not produced in

a coherent fashion by other hypotheses.

    The skill acquisition factor, which derives from Becker’s seminal work on human capital

(e.g., Becker, 1962, 1975), accounts for the bulk of the findings. Becker postulated that

workers would acquire human capital through on-the-job training and that the augmentation

of their stock of human capital would affect their productivity and earning capacity. That

same view is adopted here. Workers may begin with raw talent and inherent creativity, but

the acquisition of skills at work is essential to their founding a business.   It is for that reason

that the young are not the ones most likely to start businesses, despite possessing the

advantages of youth. They must have time to obtain the skills on the job that will allow

business that they found to succeed.

    Becker (1960) emphasized the ability of economics to explain fertility and demographic

structure. Becker showed how prices, the most important of which was the implicit price of

time as captured by the wage rate of the mother, affected desired fertility. This analysis

takes the demographic structure as given, but allows demographics to affect the rate of skill

acquisition. It is this interaction between demographics and skill acquisition that allows the

economic framework below, which is in the spirit of Becker, to explain how entrepreneurship

rates vary across countries, by age, and over time.

    As an extension of the Becker notion of human capital accumulation on the job, it is

hypothesized that rank in the firm affects an individual’s exposure to experiences that

produce the human capital necessary to start a business. Rank proxies the opportunity to

                                                5
encounter the relevant experiences. Workers in higher positions shoulder more responsibility,

have more interaction with other decision makers and are in positions to see the larger picture.

The higher one is in an organization, the more opportunity to gain experience that will be

useful in starting an enterprise.

     Consequently, the demographic structure of a country affects human capital formation.

The probability of being in top positions depends on the age structure of the workforce. If a

firm has an old workforce, it is less likely that the younger workers will be given much

management opportunity because the slots are already occupied by the more senior workers.

In young firms, even top positions are held by relatively young people. It is for that reason

that the age structure of a country is potentially an important determinant of entrepreneurship.

A young society provides more opportunity for the young to acquire the skills necessary for

entrepreneurship. The combination of the youth factor with the Becker idea that skills are

acquired on the job, and only when the environment for learning is right, generates two

important predictions.

     First, the relation of entrepreneurship to age is inverted u-shaped. The very young do not

have the requisite human capital and the very old have lost the advantages of youth.4 The

second prediction links demographics directly to entrepreneurship. Workers are less likely to

become entrepreneurs in a country where the cohort size is shrinking over time. In an aging

country, there is a higher proportion of senior workers, which slows down promotion of

junior workers. As a consequence, human capital accumulates more slowly for the younger

workers because they must wait longer to be in those positions that are most conducive to

entrepreneurial skill production. As a result, in steady-state, workers at every age have less of

the human capital required to start businesses and entrepreneurship is suppressed. This

mechanism is labeled the "rank effect," and is new to the literature.


4 See Galenson (2001). Acemoglu, Akcigit and Celik (2014) find that innovation is related to a society’s
openness to disruptive ideas. They find that manager and inventor age are negatively related to the
innovativeness of an invention. The general willingness to accept disruption may also be inversely related to
the age of a society. The specific implications that are derived by our theory are not part of their argument.
For example, the inverted u-shape relation of entrepreneurship with age and the fact that younger countries have
a less pronounced u-shape pattern, derived below, come directly from the theory in this paper, but not from
other theories absent additional modifications.

                                                       6
       The model is tested using a detailed dataset on cross-country entrepreneurship called the

Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (Global Entrepreneurship Research Association, GERA,

2010). The cross-country regressions support the theory laid out below and the effects of

demographics are large. The estimates imply that a median age that is one standard deviation

lower is associated with a 2.5 percentage point higher country rate of entrepreneurship, which

is about 40% of the mean rate. This effect is significant both statistically and economically,

and is robust across different specifications, alternative measures of entrepreneurship, and

among OECD and non-OECD countries.

       To better understand this point estimate, it is important to distinguish the "rank" from the

simple advantages-of-youth explanation that young people are more entrepreneurial for any

of the reasons mentioned earlier. Most directly, without the rank effect or some other

considerations 5 , entrepreneurship would fall monotonically with age. The youngest

individuals in the labor force would be the ones starting businesses. In fact, that is not the

case. Although there is variation across countries, Figure 1 (discussed in more detail below)

makes clear that the likelihood of starting a business rises at least until the 30s and in some

countries, later in life. To explain this, it is necessary that other attributes necessary for

business creation rise with age.

       An alternative would be to simply assume that the relation of some factor to age is

inverted-u-shaped. However, the second piece of evidence provides strong support for the

rank effect. Within every age group, the entrepreneurship rate is lower in countries that are

older. This can have nothing to do with entrepreneurship rates that vary between ages, but

must instead be explained by something that relates entrepreneurship at a given age to the

demographic structure of the country. Although there may be other factors that are captured

by a country’s demographic structure that could affect entrepreneurship, it will be shown that

the specific predictions of the theory that links human capital acquisition to the age

distribution is completely consistent with the findings in ways that other views are not.




5
    For example, the ability to obtain physical capital for investment might be age related.
                                                          7
Furthermore, at the empirical level, inclusion of the most obvious variables that might be

correlated with a country’s demographics do not alter the findings qualitatively.

    As an empirical matter, the cross-country rate differences are not driven much by the fact

that younger countries have a higher proportion of younger workers, which one can think of

as a composition effect. Instead, younger countries have higher entrepreneurship rates

primarily because at any given age, countries with young populations have more

entrepreneurship than countries with old populations. This is the rank effect. It is within-age

group differences across countries, rather than differences in age-group proportions that

account for most of the entrepreneurship variation.

    Of course, there may be alternative mechanisms that could yield similar implications. An

attempt is made to address some alternative theories. Those alternative theories find no

consistent support in the results.



2. The Effect of Age on Entrepreneurship

2.1 A Motivating Anecdote: Japan’s Entrepreneur Vacuum and the Lost Decades

    The Japanese economy grew rapidly in the 1970 and 1980s, and many economists

predicted that it would soon over-take the U.S. in terms of GDP per capita. However, after

the bust of real estate bubble in 1991, the Japanese economy stagnated during the following

20 years, while the U.S. economy pulled ahead again, benefiting from a vigorous high-tech

industry. Hot debates about the cause of Japan’s lost decades are still going on, but one

possible explanation of slow growth is the lack of entrepreneurship and the failure to develop

a dynamic IT industry as the U.S. did during the last 30 years. Five of the top 10 high tech

companies in the U.S. were founded after 1985, and their founders were also very young

when they established these companies, with an average age of only 28. By contrast, in Japan,

none of the top 10 high-tech companies were founded in the last 40 years. The firm entry rate

dropped from the 6 to 7% range in the 1960s and 1970s to 3% in the 1990s (Acht, Thunik,

and Verheut, 2004). This rate is less than 1/3 of that in the U.S. and trails all the other OECD

countries (Karlin, 2013). According to the entrepreneurship survey used in this paper,

                                               8
entrepreneurial propensity in Japan is the lowest among all the developed countries. In the

US, 4.9% adults between the ages of 18 and 64 are working actively to establish new

businesses, as compared to only 1.9% in Japan.

     The theory exposited in this paper can be used to explain at least in part Japan’s “lost

decades” in the 1990s and 2000s.                  It echoes some existing studies that identify the “sheer

pressure of entrepreneurship” as the main driving force of post-war rebirth of Japan’s

economy (e.g., Stone, 1969). Watanabe (2010) documents some interesting features of

Japan’s entrepreneurship in the 1960s when the GDP growth rate in Japan averaged around

10% per year. In 1962, nearly 16% of Japan’s manufacturing firms were identified as “new

enterprises”.6 Self-employed entrepreneurs accounted for nearly 10% of the labor force

throughout 1960s.7 More than 60% of the founders established their firms when they were in

their 20s or 30s, with the highest concentration between 25 and 35 years of age. This pattern

looks similar to that of the U.S. today. In present-day Japan, entrepreneurship is postponed to

later ages and is reduced significantly from the levels reported by Watanabe.8

     Dore (1996) finds that managers have gotten older over time in Japan at the same time

that entrepreneurship has slowed.9 As Japan has aged, the table reveals for example that in

1976, 32% of the sub-section chief level workers were younger than 35; in 1994 the ratio

dropped to only 16%. That pattern of changes over time is found throughout the managerial

workforce. This fact, coupled with the decline in Japanese entrepreneurship, is time series

evidence that motivates and is consistent with the theory proposed.

     Interestingly, it should be noted that Japan’s entrepreneur vacuum is not due to the lack

of technological investment. The country’s R&D spending accounts for about 3% of its GDP,

ahead of all the other OECD countries.10 Japan still enjoys considerable patent advantages in


6 Based on the Second Survey of Medium and Small-scale Enterprises conducted by the Median and Small-scale Enterprise
Agency, Ministry of International Trade and Industry, 1962. “New enterprises” are defined as firms established on or after 1
January 1958 and were still in business on 31 December 1962.
7 See Table I on page 534 of Watanabe (1970).
8 Both of these facts, that the US today looks like Japan in earlier years, and that Japan entrepreneurship occurs later today

than it did a few decades ago, are found in the GEM.
9 Refer to Table 1 of Dore (1996), which is copied in Appendix Table D1.
10 This also tends to undermine the argument that it is physical capital accumulation that drives results. Additionally, and

most important, there is no reason why physical capital at any given age should be directly related to the age structure of the
country. The inverted u-shape pattern that results from this model and the within-age variation across countries by
                                                                9
Asia (Karlin, 2013). However, many of these patents are significantly underutilized. Perhaps

the cause of Japan’s lagging in entrepreneurship is not the dearth of ideas or opportunities,

but the dearth of necessary capabilities to recognize and exploit these opportunities and to

convert the innovative ideas into the creation of new firms.



2.2 Determinants of Entrepreneurship over Lifetime

     Among all the determinants of the decision to engage in entrepreneurship, age is the most

obvious factor to consider.11 Data from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, Figure 1,

which divides countries into young, middle, and old, show the changes in entrepreneurial

propensities at different ages. One noticeable stylized fact is that all three curves are inverted

U-shaped, with the likelihood of becoming entrepreneur peaking in young-middle-age. This

observation is consistent with many existing studies (e.g., Evans and Leighton, 1989;12

Blanchflower and Meyer, 1994; Blanchflower and Oswald, 2009; Modragon-Velez, 2009).

                                                      [Figure 1 is here]

     There is much research, primarily outside economics, on age-productivity patterns. Some

attributes necessary for successful entrepreneurship clearly decrease over the life cycle. For

example, Ruth and Birren (1985) discuss the decline in the ability to conduct logical thinking

and reasoning as an individual ages. Florida (2002) argues that creativity can wane with

aging. The young have advantages in the ability to store and process information, solve

problems, deal with complexity, and adjust to new situations (Kaufman and Horn, 1996;

Ryan, Sattler, and Lopez, 2000). A recent paper by Acemoglu et al. (2014) studies the

relationship between creativity and age of the inventor and the manager, and finds that

inventor and manager age are both negatively correlated with the degree of the invention’s

creativity.




demographic structure does not seem to follow directly from the physical capital accumulation mechanism. There is no
doubt that this is a factor, but not the one that drives the main results contained below.
11 Parker, 2004, p106, reports the results of a meta-study, which identifies age as the most important factor in determining

entrepreneurship.
12 See their table 2, which suggests that self-employment increases then decreases with age.    Of course, unincorporated
self-employment includes many individual service workers who are not entrepreneurs so the results are not comparable.
                                                                 10
    Still, successful entrepreneurship must require more than youth or the entrepreneurship

rate would be highest among fresh graduates. Lazear (2004a) found that entrepreneurship

requires a diverse set of skills rather than specialized knowledge. Many of these skills need to

be accumulated through work, social interactions, and learning-by-doing. For example, “tacit

knowledge” accumulated over a lifetime peaks when a person is in his or her 50s (Wang and

Kaufman 1993; Kaufman and Horn 1996; Ryan, Sattler, and Lopez, 2000). Moreover, it is

helpful for aspiring entrepreneurs to develop a strong social network, which assists their

ability to access resources in different phase of the establishment process (Granovetter, 1985).

The importance of networks in launching a business has been well documented by empirical

studies in different cultural settings (e.g, Greve and Salaff, 2003; Wellman, 1999).

    As a logical matter, the productivity-age pattern for virtually all work activities must be

an inverted-u. Young children have neither the skills, strength nor wisdom to be very

productive. The very old possess neither the energy, stamina, nor mental acuity to carry out

complex assignments. The issue is determining the peak of the U and how the shape of the

productivity-age relationship varies with the activity in question.



2.3 Demographic Structure and Entrepreneurship

    Another pattern apparent in Figure 1 is that entrepreneurship in countries with a younger

workforce dominates those in countries with an older workforce. At every age, the

entrepreneurship rate of the older countries is lower than that of middle and younger

countries. This implies that the propensity to become an entrepreneur at any given age is

lower when the country has a higher median age. Furthermore, the effect is especially

pronounced for middle-aged individuals between 30 and 40 years of age. Both empirical

findings, that older countries have lower entrepreneurship at every age and that the

differences are greatest for middle age workers, are direct implications of the model below

and do not follow easily from alternative explanations.




                                               11
3. Model

3.1 Age structure of the Workforce

     Suppose a country’s cohort structure is given by
                 r
 f (a, r )          e ra                                                                                  (1)
               er 1
where a is age, and r is the shrinkage parameter that relates the size of one cohort to

another.13 Normalize age a such that a=0 is age 20, which conceptually serves as a typical

work starting age, and a=1 is age 65, which serves as a typical retirement age. Then the

fraction of workforce under age a, or the age distribution c.d.f., is given by the following

expression:

               e ra  1
F ( a, r )                                                                                                  (2)
               er  1

     Figure 2 compares the age distribution of a balanced workforce (r=0) to the age

distributions of a shrinking (r=0.22) and a growing workforce (r=-2.18). (These two values

of r are chosen to reflect the empirical parameter estimates for Japan and Uganda,

respectively, which are at the two extremes of shrinking and growing populations.)14

                                                 [Figure 2 is here]

     Two properties of the population c.d.f. are important for deriving the propositions that

follow later.

     First,

                                  e ra  1
Lemma 1: For F (a, r )                    , There exists an a m  [ 0,1] such that for all a  am ,
                                  er  1

d 2F                         d 2F
      0 , and for a  a m ,      0.
drda                         drda



Proof: See appendix.




13
   This exponential form in age is a simplified version of the conventional function that captures the stable age
distribution. See Lotka (1922).
14
   The estimation of r is discussed below in section 5.1.
                                                        12
     Lemma 1 says that the rank of the middle-aged workers shifts more with a reduction in

the population growth rate than the rank of the very young and very old.           The intuition

comes from noting that F(0,r)=0 and F(1,r)=1 for all r, which means that shares cannot

change at all at the endpoints with r.

     Second, and more important for the logic of the propositions that follow later, is lemma

2.


                       e ra  1            dF
Lemma 2: For F           r
                                and 0<a<1,    0
                       e 1                dr


Proof: See appendix.



     This states that the proportion of people below age a decreases in r for all ages (0 and 1

excepted, of course). This is shown in figure 2(b) as a downward shift in the c.d.f. as r

increases.



3.2 The Value of Starting a Business

     To model business formation, think of each person as getting a random draw of an idea

for a new product or method of production in each period. The novelty of the idea affects its

market value. An idea is not sufficient, however, to create a successful business. In order to

be successful, an idea must be implemented and the probability of successful implementation

depends on the skills that a worker has acquired. Some luck is involved in getting a good idea,

but skill and youth affect the ability to come up with a significant innovation.

     The expected value of an idea combines luck, skill, and youth as follows. Let v denote

the expected value of an idea relative to a worker’s current wage. Then

v =V(h, q) ξ                                                                              (3)

where ξ is a random variable that captures luck, h reflects business skills and q captures the

advantages of youth so that V1>0 and V2>0.


                                               13
       Assume that ξ is distributed over the range (1,∞). Or equivalently, 1/ξ is distributed over

the range (0,1) with a c.d.f. P(1/ξ). The risk-neutral worker will choose to start a business if

v > 1 or if V(h,q) > 1/ξ                                                                    (4)

       The probability of starting a business is therefore P(V(h,q)).Although it is unnecessary to

specify the nature of the ξ distribution, the general structure allows for a wide range of

possibilities. For example, one possibility is to allow15

ξ = A + u                                                                                   (5)

where A is a specific person’s ability (like IQ), which remains constant over time, and u is

luck of that the individual encounters in a given period in getting an idea. At one extreme, the

variance in A could be zero, in which case there would be independence of business

formation across people over time. Prior entrepreneurship would say nothing about the

likelihood of starting a new business. At the other extreme, if the variance u were equal to

zero, then there would be serial entrepreneurship, where a person who started a business in

one period would be the one who starts a business in subsequent periods. All of the variation

in entrepreneurship would be across people with none over time.16

       Other than luck, there are two factors that affect the expected value of an idea. The first,

q, is the advantages-of-youth effect and is determined by the function q=Q(a). The

advantages-of-youth effect is assumed to decrease with age, Q'(a) < 0.The second factor, h,

reflects the stock of business skills, which is a reflection of past acquisitions of human capital.

As argued earlier, a worker’s ability to acquire skills depends on his position in the firm,

which depends on his rank, defined as the proportion of workers younger than he. Let s

denote rank. Then, h=H(s) with H’>0. In a seniority-based society, if everyone is younger

than someone of age a, then that individual has had the most opportunity to acquire the skills

necessary to start a business. Conversely, if everyone is older than someone of age a, other

cohorts have occupied the positions in the firm that provide the experience most valuable for

entrepreneurship.



15
     This transitory and permanent ability structure was used in Lazear (2004b).
16
     See LaFontaine and Shaw (2014).
                                                         14
     Assuming that the age distributions of every firm are the same as that of the general

population, then rank is simply given by s≡F(a,r). The intuition is clear. Within each age

group, the larger is the proportion of individuals who are younger than a worker or

equivalently, the smaller the proportion who are older than a worker, the more likely is that

worker to hold positions that provide him with business skills. Also, lemma 2 implies that if

r0 < r1 then F(a, r0) > F(a, r1) ∀ a ≠ 0 or 1. This implies that wokers who have opportunities

to gain business skills today also had opportunities to gain those skills in the past because

there are fewer senior workers for every age cohort when the shrinkage parameter is r0 than

when it is r1 .



3.3 Entrepreneurial Activity

     Recalling equation (4), a risk-neutral individual17 will start a business if

     V(h,q) > 1/ξ

with V1, V2 > 0. So the fraction of the workers at age a that start a business (denoted as E(a,r))

is given by:
      E ( a, r )  P(V ( H ( F ( a, r )), Q ( a )))                                                    (6)

where P(x) is the probability that x>1/ξ .

     Equation (6) provides the basis of the theoretical propositions and empirical implications,

which are tested below. It says that the entrepreneurship rate for any cohort a depends on the

age distribution of the population as summarized by r, the shrinkage rate of the population.

     The primary results to be tested and the empirical motivation for the analysis follow.



Proposition 1: Entrepreneurship at any given age a is decreasing in the population parameter,

r. As r rises, reflecting both a declining and aging population, entrepreneurship falls.

Specifically,
E ( a , r )
              0                                                                                      (7)
   r

17
   Alternatively, if we assume a constant relative risk aversion, the results in the model are essentially
unchanged. Moreover, we can assume risk aversion increases with age. The effect is similar to having a steeper
declining Q function, which will further reduce entrepreneurship of the older group.
                                                      15
Proof: This follows directly from (6) since
E (a, r )
            P'V1H F2
   r
with P’V1H’ > 0 and F2 < 0 from (2).


    Entrepreneurial activity decreases for every age group when r increases. An increase in r

tilts the age distribution in favor of older workers. This corresponds to the fact, discussed in

the introduction for selected countries, that the entrepreneurship propensity is lower at every

given age for country with higher r.

    Next, define sa as the share of the population in a country that is below age a so sa =

F(a,r) (the i subscript for country i is suppressed). Then



Corollary 1: For any given age group, a, the entrepreneurship rate rises in sa .



Proof: Noting that sa = F(a,r), rewrite (6) as

G(a,sa) = P(V(H(sa),Q(a)))                                                               (6')

Then

G (a, sa )
             P'V1H '  0
  sa



    Propositions 1 and Corollary 1 relate to the rank effect. In aging societies, a worker at

every age has a smaller proportion of the workforce below him. Because more slowly

growing populations are disproportionately older, the ability of each age group to acquire the

business skills necessary to become an entrepreneur is reduced. Consequently, the rate of

business creation slows for every given age group.

    Another corollary also follows.



Corollary 2: For any given sa, the entrepreneurship rate falls in a.


                                                 16
         G ( a , s a )
Proof:                   P 'V2Q '  0 because Q’<0 .
            a


    Corollary 2 says that older age groups should have lower entrepreneurship rates for any

given share of the population that is younger than the group in question. Put simply,

thirty-year-olds in country A should have lower rates of entrepreneurship than 29-year-olds in

country B when s30 in country A equals s29 in country B. (Note that this does not contradict

the earlier point that entrepreneurship rates first rise and then fall in age. In that comparison,

sa is not held constant.)

    Proposition 1 and its corollaries relate to entrepreneurship at the individual level and by

themselves do not guarantee that the rate of entrepreneurship for the country as a whole

declines with r. To make that statement, it must also be true that aging of the workforce does

not shift the age distribution (sufficiently) in the direction of those age groups that are most

likely to engage in entrepreneurial activity. Were this to happen, it is possible that the

entrepreneurship rate for the country as a whole could rise from the change in composition of

age groups, despite the fact that within every age group entrepreneurship rates declined. As

shown below, no additional conditions are needed to prove the results at the level of the

country. The demographic structure of equation (2), coupled with proposition 1 and its

corolaries, are sufficient to guarantee the result at the country level.

    To derive the effect of changes in population growth on overall entrepreneurship, first

integrate equation (6) over ages to obtain the total number of entrepreneurs as a fraction of

the workforce in a country
                1
               
     E ( r )  E ( a , r )dF ( a , r )
                0
                                                                                           (8)

Then the following proposition relates the country-average level of entrepreneurship to

population growth.



Proposition 2: The number of entrepreneurs as a fraction of the workforce decreases as the

population ages, i.e., dE / dr  0 .

Proof: See Appendix A.
                                                    17
      Proposition 2 says that the average rate of entrepreneurship for the country as a whole

declines as the population shrinks and ages. The expected rate of entrepreneurship varies with

population growth rates both through the combination of the rank effect and the composition

effect of weighting groups with higher rates of entrepreneurship differently as the population

parameter, r, changes.            The latter is the standard composition effect that influences all

averages across groups. It also yields the following corollary, which can be tested in the

empirical analysis.



Corollary 3: The number of entrepreneurs as a fraction of the workforce decreases with the

country’s median age.

Proof: See appendix.



      Additionally, the entrepreneurial activity of the middle-aged group is affected the most

by a reduction in the population growth rate. By lemma 1, the rank distribution shifts down

the most in the middle.           It is also true that the entrepreneurship rate shifts down the most in

the middle, as shown in Figure 1 and formalized by Proposition 4.

      First note that entrepreneurship varies with age and under certain conditions, peaks in

middle age. From (6)
E ( a, r )
             ( P )(V1 H F1  V2Q )                                                           (9)
  a
Since P’, V1H’F1, and P2 are all positive and Q’ <0 , the sign of ∂E/∂a is indeterminate. This

is as it should be because it is expected that the propensity to start businesses first rises with

age and then declines.

      More concretely, sufficient conditions can be specified that guarantee that E(a,r) first

rises in a and then declines. The conditions are, first, that the advantages-of-youth effect does

not decline much with age for the youngest individuals, specifically,

lim Q ' ( a )  0
a0


and second, that the increment to business skills declines to zero as rank goes to one


                                                      18
lim H ' ( s a )  0
s a 1



         The logic behind the latter condition is that once a cohort is older than most of the

population, it already has sufficient seniority to hold the top jobs. At that point, additional

seniority has little value for entrepreneurship training.

         Given that Q’(0)=0,
E (0, r )
            ( P)(V1H F1 )  0
  a
Also, since s=1 when a=1,
E (1, r )
            ( P )(V2 Q )  0
  a
Thus, entrepreneurship first rises in age and then eventually declines in age. Thus, it is

possible to state the following proposition.



Proposition 3:

         Given the assumptions that

                  lim Q ' ( a )  0
                  a0


and that

                      lim H ' ( s a )  0
                  s a 1



the entrepreneurship rate rises in age initially and then declines in age at the end of life.

Furthermore, there exists an age am with 0 < am < 1 such that E(am , r ) > E(a, r) ∀ a ≠ am .


                                                 E (0, r )
Proof: It has already been shown that                        0 , which means that there exists some am >
                                                    a
                                                                   E (1, r )
0 for which E(am ,r ) > E(0, r) .           Similarly, because                 0 , it is also true that
                                                                     a
E(am,r) < E(1,r) . Simply define am to be that value of a that maximizes the rate of

entrepreneurship.




                                                        19
     Proposition 3 implies that there is a peak age of entrepreneurship somewhere in the

middle of life. 18 Very young workers are less entrepreneurial than those at peak

entrepreneurial age because they have not acquired the business skills.                      Very old workers

are less entrepreneurial than peak age because they have lost the advantages of youth. The

inverted u-shape relation of entrepreneurship to age distinguishes the theory set out here from

other possible explanations of cross-country correlations between entrepreneurship and

population demographics, as discussed in section 5, below.

     The effect of demographics on the entrepreneurship rates is greater for middle-aged

individuals than it is for the very old or very young.               Specifically, it is certain that there is

some age greater than zero and less than one at which the effect of r on E is more negative

than it is at either ages of 0 or 1. This is formalized in the following proposition.


                                                                            E ( a M , r ) E ( a , r )
Proposition 4: There exists some aM with 0<aM<1 such that                                              0,
                                                                                a           a
∀ a ϵ[0,1] and a ≠ aM, under the conditions that the first and second derivatives of V, H, and

Q exist and are bounded and that the first derivatives of V and H are greater than some small

constant ε.



Proof: See Appendix A.



     This proposition says that entrepreneurship rates of the middle-aged workers are the ones

most sensitive to cross-country demographic differences. 19 In aging countries, it is the

middle-aged workers, as defined by age equal to aM, who are most prone to decrease their

rates of entrepreneurship as the population ages. Again, as spelled out in section 5, other

theories that link entrepreneurship to demographics do not provide that implication without

additional ad hoc assumptions. The intuition is similar to that associated with lemma 1.


18
   Without additional assumptions, it cannot be guaranteed that there is only one local maximum age a* such
that ∂E(a*,r)/ ∂a*=0 . It is certain, however, that one of these a* is am, i.e., E(am,r) > E(a,r) ∀ a ≠am .
19
   Note that entrepreneurship declines in r so Proposition 4 says that the effect gets closer to zero at the two
extreme ages of zero and one.
                                                        20
F(0,r)=0 and F(1,r)=1 for all r, which means that shares cannot change at all at the endpoints

with r. Consequently, entrepreneurship rates cannot be affected at 0 or 1 by r because r

operates only through the rank effect and rank does not change with r at either extreme.20



3.4 Country Level Aggregation and Summary of Empirical Predictions

      Proposition 1 and its corollaries give the key predictions to be examined using the

cross-country data. These theoretical statements imply that the rate of entrepreneurship within

any age group is directly related to the rate of population growth. Furthermore, holding

constant the share of the population below any age group, older groups have lower rates of

entrepreneurship than younger groups.

      At the country level, demographics affect aggregate entrepreneurship through two

channels – composition and rank. The effect of composition works through Q(a). Younger

workers enjoy the advantages of youth. The proportion of the workforce that is young is

determined by F(a,r) so increases in r imply a smaller proportion of young workers, which

means less overall youth in the population.

      The effect of rank works through H(F(a,r)). An older workforce prevents young workers

from obtaining the learning opportunities that help them start businesses. This skill deficiency

stays with them throughout their careers relative to the stock of skills that they would have at

any age had they acquired them when young. Aging populations generate low transmission of

business skills to the young members of society.

      The empirical implications are clear and follow directly from the theory. They are:

      1. Within any country, the effect of age on entrepreneurship is negative, holding the

share of those below that age group constant. This is the implication of Corollary 2.

20
     Empirically, because

 2 E E  2 sa          2F
                sa 
ra sa ra            ra

and because βsa is found to be positive in the empirical analysis (see column 3 of Table 3), it follows from
lemma 1 that the entrepreneurship rate shifts down more with increasing r at middle ages than at older and
younger ages. This is also what was observed in the raw data shown in Figure 1.

                                                      21
     2. At any given age, countries that have higher proportions of the population below that

age should have higher rates of entrepreneurship. This is the implication of Corollary 1.

     3. Countries that are aging more quickly, captured by higher levels of r, should have

lower rates of entrepreneurship at any given age. This follows from Proposition 1.

     4. Categorizing countries by r, those with higher values of r should have lower rates of

entrepreneurship overall. This is Proposition 2.

     5. It also follows that countries with higher median ages should have lower rates of

entrepreneurship overall. This is Corollary 3.

     6. Within a country, entrepreneurship rates rise with age and then decline after some

point. This is the result of Proposition 3.

     7. The entrepreneurship rates of the middle-aged are most sensitive to cross-country

changes in r. This is Proposition 4.



4. Data

4.1 Measures of Entrepreneurship

     The primary data source for the cross-country comparisons is the Global

Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM), collected by a not-for-profit research organization, the

Global Entrepreneurship Research Association (GERA), in the UK. Starting in 2000, GERA

conducted telephone and face-to-face individual level interviews with a representative sample

of adults across a wide range of countries, evaluating their entrepreneurial activities,

aspirations, and attitudes. The dataset has several features that suit the purposes of this study.

     First, the GEM dataset captures entrepreneurial choices and decisions at the individual

level. This is important for the purposes here because the age of the founder is a key variable

of interest.    Second, the GEM has a wide range of coverage, including both developed

countries and developing ones.21 The 2001-2010 GEM dataset used contains more than 1.3

million individuals between 15 and 60 years of age at the time of sampling and does this for

82 countries. It provides considerable cross-country variation in the age distribution, which is

21
   GEM is an ambitious project, with an estimated global budget of nearly $9 million . Its 2013 survey is
designed to cover 75% of world population and 89% of world GDP (Bosma et al., 2012).
                                                       22
helpful for testing the hypothesis that demographic structure affects entrepreneurship. Third,

the GEM questionnaires are designed under a uniform framework with the goal of producing

data that are comparable across countries.

    There are a number of different entrepreneurship rates that are reported in the GEM.

For most of the empirical analysis, entrepreneurship is defined as “manages and owns a

business that is up to 42 months old and pays wages”. For robustness, section 5.5 reports

results based on three alternative definitions of entrepreneurship. The first alternate definition,

“all new businesses” includes businesses that have died in the last twelve months in addition

to those already included by the 42 month criterion. Although the start date of a business that

failed is not reported, it is well-known that new business are much more likely to fail than old

ones so the deaths are probably dominated by newly-formed firms. The second definition

focuses exclusively on startups, defined as having an owner actively involved in a startup

effort where wages are not currently paid. The final definition, “total early stage

entrepreneurship,” includes startups that do not yet pay wages as well as those that do pay

wages and are up to 42 months old. Businesses that failed are omitted from this definition.

The qualitative conclusions are not sensitive to the choice of definition of entrepreneurship.

    The GEM also provides information on the aspiration levels of the entrepreneurs. First,

the questionnaire asks about the number of employees expected to be hired in the next five

years. Two variables are used, corresponding to those entrepreneurs who intend to hire five or

more and then ten or more employees, respectively. Second, the GEM also reports whether

the newly-created business introduces new products in an attempt to capture innovative

ambition.

    The survey was carried out in 82 countries in various years from 2001 to 2010. Many

countries were surveyed multiple times, but the panel is an unbalanced one. (Refer to table

B1 in Appendix B for detailed information on countries, timing of the survey, and sample

size in the GEM data.)      The total number of observations is 1.3 million, the number of

country-year cells is 393, and the number of country-age-year cells is 17,554. The

entrepreneurship rate can be constructed at each cell level.

                                                23
     Prior studies have confirmed the reliability of earlier waves of the GEM data (Reynolds,

et al., 2005, Ardagna and Lusardi, 2010) after some have questioned some aspects of its

design.22 Ardagna and Lusardi compare the entrepreneurship rate in the GEM with rates

reported in studies using various data sources and conclude that “the descriptive statistics on

entrepreneurship in many of the countries covered by the GEM are consistent with the results

reported in other studies on entrepreneurship”.23

     In the same vein, the analysis below on the GEM data is checked against those obtained

using another dataset, namely the Flash Eurobarometer Survey on Entrepreneurship

(FESE).24 The Flash Eurobarometer Survey is collected by the European Commission. It is

an individual level, cross-national survey on attitudes, values and beliefs covering a wide

range of topics in the socio-cultural and socio-political domain. European and other large

countries are surveyed. Table C1 reports the sample size by country-year.

     The FESE provides a reliable check on the GEM results for a number of reasons. First,

both the GEM and the FESE are individual level surveys with the same design across

countries. As a result, difficulties that might arise were the data collected by each country

individually and entered into a global dataset do not arise. Second, the FESE samples EU and

other large countries specifically, most of which are covered in the GEM. These countries are

more homogeneous in level of development, which allows for better comparisons. Third,

starting in 2002, the FESE includes information that permits construction of an

entrepreneurship variable that is similar to that used from the GEM. Appendix C gives the

details. The entrepreneurship rates reported by the GEM and the FESE are similar for the

countries that are sampled in both datasets.




22 See Lerner and Shoar, 2010. Also, Gentry and Hubbard (2004) suggest that households with more wealth (which may be
more likely to be surveyed) are more involved in entrepreneurship.
23 Ardagna and Lusardi (2010), p. 28.
24 Available at: https://dbk.gesis.org

                                                            24
4.2 Demographics

       The population statistics come from the U.S. Census Bureau’s International Data Base

(IDB).25 The IDB is updated routinely and contains estimates and projections for over 200

countries and areas of the world. The IDB provides population counts by age from age 0 to

100-plus for each of the countries every year. The age-specific population detail contained in

the IDB data is used by GEM as one important source in calculating its sampling weights

(Bosma et al., 2012, page 56). Every country in the GEM sample from 2001 to 2010 can be

matched with information from the IDB dataset to construct the share of the population below

any age in each country in a given year.



4.3 Other Country Characteristics

       A variety of country level attributes serve as controls in some of the analyses. First, year-

and country-specific GDP-per-capita and GDP growth rates are used to control for stage of

development. These data come from the Penn World Table, version 7.1 (Heston, Summers,

and Aten, 2012). These variables are measured in purchasing-power-parity 2005 constant

dollars. To further control for level of development, the share of the agricultural sector in

GDP, obtained from the World Bank database, is used.26

       The education variable, identified as “College Enrollment Rate” in the tables, is the

country- and year-specific rates of completed tertiary education among the adult population.

These are taken from an education attainment dataset constructed by Barro and Lee (2010).

       “Start-up costs,” defined as the cost of registering a business (as a percentage of

per-capita gross national income in 2010), is available from the World Bank database. This

variable is used to control for institutional constraints on business formation that may vary

across countries and over time.

       Similarly, an international property rights index from the Property Rights Alliance

(Strokova, 2010). is used. It reflects the legal and political environment, physical property

rights, and intellectual property rights for each country. The index ranges between 0 and 10.

25
     Available at: http://www.census.gov/population/international/data/idb/index.php
26
     Available at http://data.worldbank.org/
                                                        25
This variable is available for all countries in the sample only for 2010. That value is assumed

to hold in that country for all years in which the country is sampled. The bulk of the data

come from years near 2010, so this assumption is likely to be innocuous.

        Finally, because experience in the military could also provide young individuals with the

kind of high-responsibility jobs that parallel those of managers in business, information on

the length of compulsory military service is used.27

        Table 1 presents the summary statistics (in 2010) of the main variables used in this paper.

                                                        [Table 1 is here]



5. Empirical Implementation

        Equation (6) implies that the entrepreneurship rate of each age group is affected by

population growth parameters and in particular by the age distribution of the population. The

age distribution of the population is observable for each country as is the entrepreneurship

rate.

        There are two variables of interest. The first is the age of the particular group. The

advantages-of-youth effect works through Q(a) directly. Additionally, the rank effect says

that for any given age group, a, the higher the rank s of that group in the overall population,

the higher is the entrepreneurship rate because those individuals have had better opportunities

to acquire the skills necessary for entrepreneurship. This operates through H(sa), or

equivalently, through H(F(a,r)). As described in the data section, both a and sa are observable

in the GEM and population census data, respectively. Recall that a is the normalized age, a

number between zero and one, and sa is proportion of individuals in a country who have ages

younger than a.

        The basic approach then is to estimate a model that captures the essence of equation (6).

This requires examining the cross-country differences within an age group as well as

differences within the typical country as age varies.



27   Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military_service. Accessed in Dec, 2014.

                                                               26
     For most purposes, the unit of analysis is the country-age group because there is no

variation in the independent variables at levels of aggregation finer than that. Because age

and the proportion of the population below that age are the key variables, and because they

do not vary at the individual level, the proper level of aggregation for most purposes is the

age-country cell.28

5.1 Summarizing the Demographic Structure

     The demographic structure of a country is caputred by a single parameter, namely r, (see

equation (1) and (2)). However, since the actual ranks, sa, from the population data can be

used to create the explanatory variables, there is no need to rely on a single population

statistic.

     Still, it is useful for two reasons to see whether the demographic model postulated in (1)

and (2) does a reasonable job of fitting the data. First, if it does, then the theoretical

predictions of the model that are stated in terms of r are more applicable to the actual

countries studied. Second, comparative statics, which are intuitive and straightforward in

terms of the single parameter r, or almost equivalently, median age, have clear

interpretations.

     There are a variety of ways to show the goodness-of-fit of the r model. For any given

year, in each country, r can be estimated using the 45 age groups for that particular country.

Using the c.d.f. form of equation (2), r is fitted for each country and each year taken

separately, using non-linear least squares, where the dependent variable is the actual value of

sa for each age group within that country and the independent variable is simply a, with r to

be estimated.

     For the purposes of testing goodness-of-fit, only the data from 2010 are used because

most countries are included in that year.                 Non-linear estimation generates r for each

country. Given r , a predicted sa can be obtained for each of the 45 age groups in each

country as


28
  All estimates of standard errors are based on clustering at the country level, which is the level of treatment
because the key variable is r and r is estimated for each country. Additionally, standard errors are derived after
weighting for cell size
                                                        27
        e rˆa  1
sˆa                                                                                                       (10)
        e rˆ  1

Then the actual sa is regressed on the predicted ŝ a using the 57 countries included in the 2010

GEM data. There are 2,561 observations.29 The regression generates an r-squared of .998,

which means that the share of the population below any given age a is predicted almost

perfectly for the 2,561 age-country cells by a and the estimated r. Thus, the model of

equation (1) and (2) fits the actual demographic data very well.30,             31


     Additionally, r is an almost perfect predictor of the country’s median age. The

country-size weighted correlation between r and median age across the 57 countries in 2010

is 0.98. As a consequence, representing the country’s age structure by the more commonly

used median age instead of r is likely to be accurate for most purposes.

5.2 Country level analysis

     It is first instructive to examine the raw data at the country level. Figure 3(a) plots a

country’s entrepreneurship rate against the median age (among those 20 to 64) of a country in

2010. Figure 3(b) is the same as Figure 3(a), but replaces median age with the country

estimated r. The figures show 57 points, one for each country.

                                               [Figure 3 is here]

     The raw data appear to support proposition 2, which states that higher r (older) countries

should have lower entrepreneurship rates. The various panels plot the entrepreneurship rate

against r and against median age. They appear the same, which is not surprising since r and

median age are so highly correlated. The pattern holds across all countries and also just

within the OECD countries in panels 3(c) and 3(d), although the statistical relation for OECD

countries in the single year of 2010 alone, which is what is shown, is not statistically

significant.



29
   In principle, there should be (45 age groups) x (57 countries) = 2,565 age-country cells. But four of these
cells with age above 60 are empty, which leaves us 2,561 cells.
30 Even if cross-country variation is omitted by using the mean value of r rather than the estimated value of r to

predict sa , the r-squared is .96.
31
   Much of this is because sa is highly correlated with a. Despite the correlation, sa and a have independent and
important effects on entrepreneurship rates, as shown below.
                                                        28
       As a starting point, Table 2 reports the results of a more systematic analysis, presenting

results of reduced form regressions at the country level of aggregation. The unit of analysis is

a country-year. To account for the fact that different countries were surveyed in different

years and some countries were surveyed more years than other countries, year dummies are

included in all specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.32

                                                        [Table 2 is here]

       Columns 1 and 2 regress the country’s entrepreneurship rate on r.                   Column 1 does this

for all countries, whereas column 2 restricts the analysis to OECD countries only. The results

are clear - the higher the value of r, the lower the entrepreneurship rate. This is true in the full

sample and also in the OECD restricted sample, albeit somewhat weaker in the OECD

sample.

       Columns 3 and 4 repeat the analysis, but replace r with the median age in the country.33

The results are similar.

       Columns 5 and 6 add other explanatory variables. They are: the log of per-capita GDP,

the five-year per-capita average growth rate, the share of agriculture sector in GDP,34 the

tertiary education completion rate, an estimate of start-up costs as a percentage of gross

national income, an index of intellectual property and a dummy for whether the country has

more than one year of compulsory military service. 35 Although one or more of these

variables sometimes enter significantly (depending on the subsample used), it remains true

that r continues to be an important explanatory variable. The demographic structure does not

appear to be a proxy for the other potential explanatory factors, at least the obvious

candidates for which data are available. This is important because it suggests that other

interpretations of demographics, like the average age of the population proxying the growth




32
  Country-year clustering was also done, when relevant. None of the results on the demographic variables
was affected in any substantive way.
33   The median age is calculated only for those 20-64 years old.
34 We also try to use share of agricultural population, obtained from the World Bank dataset, as a control for
degree of urbanization. The conclusion does not change.
35 The logic of requiring more than one year of service is that soldiers cannot be expected to rise to a leadership

position where they are given significant responsibility in less than one year.
                                                               29
potential of the country, do not find strong support in the data. The more refined analyses

below add more credence to this result.

      One interesting result is that compulsory military service is positively related to

entrepreneurship, both alone and interacted with r. This is consistent with the view of human

capital acquisition posited by the theory. The military is one institution where very young

people are given significant managerial responsibilities, primarily because the military has

very few older individuals.   As a consequence, being in the military is like working in a firm

that has few older workers.    The interaction with r is consistent with military service being

an offset to living in an older country.    Although it may be tough for young workers to

acquire the skills necessary to start a business in an older country, one way that this is

accomplished is by having the young in positions of responsibility in the military.

      Finally, column 7, 8, and 9 repeat the analysis of column 1, 2, and 3, respectively, but

include country fixed effects. The precision of the estimates declines, but the coefficients on r

in both subsamples remain important and significant.         The fact that coefficients remain

significant is somewhat surprising because most of the variation in r is between countries, not

within countries over time. However, the demographic structure changes sufficiently over the

period in some countries, especially among the OECD countries to pick up the demographic

effect. On average, OECD countries are surveyed 7.4 years in the GEM, while non-OECD

countries are surveyed 3.2 years. Therefore, most of the within-country variations are

generated by the OECD sample. This also explains why coefficient on r for the overall

sample (column 7 in Table 2) is very similar to that for the OECD sample (column 8 in Table

2).

      The magnitudes obtained in Table 2 are substantial and suggest an important quantitative

relation of entrepreneurship to demographic structure. Based on the estimates in column 1 of

table 2, a country with r=0.22 (Japan’s value in 2010) would have a predicted

entrepreneurship rate of 0.023. A country with r=-0.10 (the United States’ value in 2010)

would have a predicted entrepreneurship rate of 0.037, which is 61% higher.



                                               30
     Recall from Corollary 3 that the analysis can be expressed in terms of median age, rather

than r (see empirical implication 5). Using the estimates from column 3 of table 2, a

one-standard deviation decrease in median age (equal to 3.5 years in 2010) results in a 2.5

percentage point increase in the entrepreneurship rate, which is over 40 percent of the mean

entrepreneurship rate across countries (equal to .061 in 2010). Based on this result, the

difference in the entrepreneurship rate between the youngest (age=31) and oldest (age=44)

country is predicted to be about 9 percentage points or about 50% more than 2010 the mean

rate.



5.3 Country-Age Relationships

     The cross-country relation of entrepreneurship to the demographic structure is an useful

starting point, but the essence of the theory is best understood at a finer level of detail. Most

of the theoretical implications laid out earlier describe the pattern of entrepreneurship as it

relates to age within a country or to the age-specific variations in the entrepreneurship rates

across countries. In this section, those predictions are tested empirically.

     Now, the country-year-age cell is the unit of observation.              The entrepreneurship rate is a

continuous variable that describes the rate of entrepreneurship within a country in a given

survey year for a particular age group.                There are 17,554 observations with a mean

entrepreneurship rate of 0.058 and a standard deviation of 0.074 in 2010. About three-fourths

of the cells have positive values for the entrepreneurship rate, with the bulk of the mass

below a 10% entrepreneurship rate.

     As noted earlier, the inverted u-shape relation of entrepreneurship to age is observed in

Figure 1. It is also apparent that the entire profile shifts down with the median age of the

country, revealing that younger countries have higher rates of entrepreneurship at every age

than do middle countries.36 This graphical representation of the data provides immediate

support for the theory, but it is important to test the propositions and corollaries more

formally, using the country-age data.          Table 3 reports the results.

36
  These age cutoffs are chosen so that each group has 20, 21, and 16 countries, respectively, i.e., approximately
one-third of the sample for each.
                                                       31
                                                      [Table 3 is here]

       As in Table 2, all specifications include year dummies. Additionally, the measures of

demographics, specifically, r, a, and sa, are year-specific. All standard errors are clustered at

the country level and the regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the

relevant cells throughout the table.37

       The first column in Table 3 provides a weak test of Proposition 1, which states that

holding age constant, older countries, as reflected by higher levels of r, have lower rates of

entrepreneurship.          The     dependent        variable     is    the    entrepreneurship       rate   for   the

country-year-age cell. The two independent variables are age, represented as a variable that

goes from zero to one, and r as estimated above.38 Holding age constant, column 1 reveals

that countries that have older populations have lower rates of entrepreneurship. Column 2

does the same analysis, but for OECD countries only. The same pattern is observed. The

prediction of proposition 1 is stronger than that revealed by columns 1 and 2 because it states

that at any given age, countries with higher values of r should have lower rates of

entrepreneurship. The complete interaction structure that is required to test proposition 1 in

its purest form is presented later in Table 4.

       Corollaries 1 and 2 of Proposition 1 are addressed by column 3 of Table 3. Corollary 1 is

another version of Proposition 1 with two differences. First, sa replaces r as a measure of the

demographic structure. Second, r varies only across countries but does not vary differently

for the different age groups. There is only one r per country. But sa can vary across countries

for one age group differently than it varies across countries for another age group. There are

forty-five sa values per country, but only one r value in any given survey year.

       The results reported in column 3 show a positive coefficient on sa, which implies that

given age, the larger the share of the population younger than the age group in question, the

higher is the entrepreneurship rate.39 This is a direct implication of corollary 1 and reflects

the rank effect. In younger countries, young individuals get more opportunities to acquire the


37
     Clustering at the country-year level reduced the standard errors.
38
     As before, r is country-year-specific.
39
     This is true despite the fact that in the entire sample, a and sa have a correlation over .9.
                                                            32
human capital necessary to start a business. As a result, in steady-state, more entrepreneurial

human capital is available in younger countries at any given age.

     The coefficient on a is negative, as predicted by corollary 2. For any given structure of sa,

age enters negatively. This is the youth effect that is the focus of corollary 2. Were it not for

the necessity of acquiring business skills, younger individuals would have higher rates of

entrepreneurship than older individuals.40 Column 4 repeats the analysis for OECD countries

only. The results are qualitatively the same. Corollaries 1 and 2 are both supported within

OECD-only countries. More complete tests of corollaries 1 and 2 are reported later using in

Table 5, which allows each age group to have its own coefficient on sa, and allows each age to

have its own coefficient as well.

     Columns 5 and 6 repeat the analysis of columns 3 and 4, but include country fixed effects.

The inclusion of fixed effects over-controls for country differences because the demographic

structure, insofar as it affects all ages similarly, is picked up by the fixed effect. As before,

the fixed effect regressions pick up within-country variation over time.                   The coefficients on

sa in columns 5 and 6 are smaller than those without fixed effects, but maintain the expected

signs and remain important.

     Column 7 examines the average (across all countries) effect of age on entrepreneurship

and allows for non-linearities. The inverted u-shape shown in Figure 1 is revealed by the

estimates in column 7, with age entering positively and age-squared entering negatively.



5.4 Age-Specific Estimation

     There are forty-five different age groups per country per year, which means that for each

age group, the relation of entrepreneurship to either r or sa can be estimated. Also, because

the country-year-age-specific entrepreneurship rate at one age is potentially independent of

the country-year-age-specific entrepreneurship rate in the same country-year at another age,

there are forty-five tests of the theory that can be performed. This is done in Tables 4 and 5.


40
   This could also reflect time horizon effects, i.e., a longer period over which to reap returns when young, but
the differences in expected present value is unlikely to vary much for young individuals because the
length-of-life effect cuts many years out, when the present value of the differences are small.
                                                        33
    The unit of analysis in table 4 is the country-year-age group and the dependent variable is

the entrepreneurship rate for that cell. In the regressions, each age group is allowed to have its

own coefficient on r, which means that each row in the table provides an estimate of the

effect of variations in the age structure, as reflected in r, on the age-specific entrepreneurship

rate. Age 20 is the omitted age group.

                                          [Table 4 is here]

    There are three columns. In the first column, only r effects enter. Within each age group,

r varies across countries.

    In column 2, r is omitted altogether and only age-dummies enter. This captures the effect

of age, per se, but ignores the variation in demographic structure across countries. Column 2

does not exploit cross-country variation because age varies in the same way in all countries

and demographic structure is ignored. Consequently, the column 2 estimates merely pick up

the average effect of age on entrepreneurship across all countries. The age dummies display

the predicted inverted-u-shape pattern that was displayed in Figure 1. (The omitted age is 20.)

The highest levels of entrepreneurship are experienced in the late-twenties through the

mid-thirties.

    Column 3 includes both age dummies and the age-specific r effects. Both columns 1 and

3 in table 4 provides strong support for Proposition 1, which states that within-age-group

rates of entrepreneurship vary inversely with r. The effect of r on the age-specific

entrepreneurship rates is negative and significant in virtually all cases. Each of these

coefficients is based on cross-country variation and provides strong evidence that the

demographic structure is closely related to the entrepreneurship rates. This prediction comes

directly from the rank, or business skills effect and is not related to the simple idea that young

people are more creative. Young people in older societies form fewer businesses than young

people in younger societies. The same holds true at virtually every age level, although it is

less important for older groups than for younger groups.

    Columns 1 and column 3 of table 4 also support the prediction of Proposition 4 that

demographic structure matters more near the peak (middle-aged groups) than it does at either

                                                34
end. The absolute values of the negative coefficients on r first rise and then decline with age.

A country’s demographic structure has a greater effect on entrepreneurship of the

middle-aged than it does for the young or old. This is shown in figure 4. Additionally, the

youth effect finds some weak support in the fact that age enters negatively for the oldest ages

in column 3 (although there are a couple of negative coefficients for the very young as well).

                                               [Figure 4 is here]

     As is clear, the age-dummies alone do not explain much of the variation, whereas the

age-specific r effects capture most of it. Specifically, in column 1, there is a single constant

term and the estimates of r are based on cross country variations in the age composition, not

on the within country variation in age. As a result, the r-squared in column 1 picks up the

effect only of cross-country demographic variation that corresponds to the hypothesized

differential business skill acquisition across countries. It is not a result of the within-country

variations in entrepreneurship rates at different ages. The average effect across countries of

age, ignoring the demographic structure of each country, is captured by the regression in

column 2, which has a much lower r-squared (0.09 versus 0.23 in column 1). Finally, the

r-squared is higher in column 3 than in column 1, as it must be, but not by much. Including

both age dummies and the age-specific r effects only improves r-squared to 0.25 from the

0.23 of column 1. This is an important result. It implies that cross-countries differences in

entrepreneurship rates observed in table 2 is not so much a reflection of the young being

inherently more entrepreneurial, but instead of the fact that the every age group is less

entrepreneurial in countries that have an old populations.

     It is also possible to allow sa and a to enter directly, which is done in Table 5.                     These

results provide more evidence on the corollaries to Proposition 1. Variations in sa can only

result from variations in the demographic structure across countries because sa is defined

specific to each age.41 The results of columns 1, 2 and 3 of Table 5 parallel those of columns

1, 2 and 3, respectively, of Table 4. As before, the unit of observation is the county-year-age

cell and the dependent variable is the entrepreneurship rate for that group.

41
   Some of the variation in sa might reflect variations over time in sa for a given country when there are multiple
years surveyed for that particular country.
                                                        35
                                          [Table 5 is here]

       Column 1 of Table 5 supports corollary 1, just as column 1 of Table 4 supports

proposition 1. The value of sa in each age row is the sa that relates to that age in each of the

countries. Countries that have a higher proportion of individuals younger than the group in

question have higher rates of entrepreneurship.

       These results support the importance of the rank effect, given that each sa coefficient is a

potentially independent test of that effect. The estimates in column 1 reflect the effect on

entrepreneurship of cross-country differences in demographic structure. Age itself plays no

direct role because the analysis is done within a given age group for every age.

       Similarly, column 3 of Table 5 provides support for corollary 2. The age-dummies tend

to become more negative (relative to age 20) as age grows. Holding sa constant, the younger

the group, the higher the rate of entrepreneurship. This reflects the pure youth effect because

population structure is held constant by the inclusion of sa.

       Note that as in Table 4, the r-squared for the sa -only regression is 0.18. Allowing only

within-country age effects to matter yields an r-squared of 0.09. When both effects are

permitted, the r-squared rises to 0.24. Also noteworthy is that r, used in Table 4, does better

at explaining variations in entrepreneurship than does sa directly, used in Table 5. Recall that

r is an estimated variable, which might be expected to be noisier than the sa on which r is

based. However, the estimated r uses the information across all age groups within a country.

As a consequence, r may be a better indicator of the demographic structure relevant for a

given age group than that age group’s own sa.

       Figure 1 showed that a country’s entrepreneurship rates rises and then falls with age, as

predicted by Proposition 3. The implication is also borne out by column 7 of Table 3, where

a enters positively and a2 enters negatively resulting in an inverted-U which peaks at age

32.42 It is also supported by the results in column 2 of tables 4 and 5, where age dummies

first rise and then fall, also peaking at age 32.




42
     20+0.045/(2*0.085)*(64-20) = 32
                                                    36
5.5 Robustness Checks

     Recall that entrepreneurship is defined as owning a business that is less than 42 months

old, which at the time of the survey, pays wages. This section speaks to the sensitivity of the

results to the definitions of entrepreneurship chosen.

     The results of the robustness checks are reported in Table 6. Panel A of Table 6

replicates the regressions of Table 2, columns 5 and 6, for three definitions of

entrepreneurship. The specifications of columns 5 and 6, Table 2, are the most general,

including all controls at the country level. Only the coefficients of interest are reported. The

alternative definitions include: (1) early-stage entrepreneur (the definition used in the analysis

thus far) plus those businesses that have died in the last twelve months (in columns 1 and 2),

(2) early-stage businesses that are less than 42 months old but do not pay wages (in columns

3 and 4) and (3) early-stage entrepreneur regardless of whether wages are paid or not (in

columns 5 and 6).

     Altering the definition of entrepreneurship has no substantive effect on the conclusions.

The coefficient on r remains negative and significant irrespective of the definition of

entrepreneurship, although the magnitudes change somewhat.43As before, the higher the

population shrinkage parameter, the lower the overall entrepreneurship rate.

     Panel B of Table 6 repeats the analysis of Table 3, columns 3 and 4, using the three

alternative definitions of entrepreneurship. As with panel A, the findings of Table 3 are

robust to alternative definitions of entrepreneurship.          The coefficients change somewhat, but

the qualitative results remain unaltered.

     Special attention is given to high aspirational entrepreneurship using various criteria to

define high aspirations. The definitions include entrepreneurial events where the founder

plans to hire more than five or more than ten employees during the next ten years. This

approach is useful to distinguish entrepreneurial events from self-employment where an




43 Of course, the dependent variables also have different means and variances, which would imply different

coefficients on the independent variables even if the effects were identical.
                                                      37
individual works alone or with a very small number of others.44 Additionally, individuals

who plan to produce new products or services are singled out as entrepreneurs.

     The results are reported in Table 7, which parallels the structure of Table 6. Panel A of

Table 7 does the cross country comparison and is a robustness check on Table 2, whereas

panel B of Table 7 is based on the country-age cells and is a robustness check on Table 3.

Once again, the coefficients on r remain negative and significant in the country level

regressions (panel A), and the coefficients on sa remain positive and significant in

country-age level regressions (panel B). These findings suggest that the results hold for

entrepreneurs with high aspirations as well.

5.6 GEM vs FESE results

     In this section, the GEM results are compared with those from the FESE.                      Recall that

the FESE provides information on entrepreneurship for European and other large countries so

comparisons can be done for the samples of countries that overlap.

     Although the FESE provides information that is similar to that in the GEM, it is not

identical.   In particular, the dependent variable in the GEM requires that to be deemed an

entrepreneur, the business in question must be paying wages. The FESE does not provide

information on whether or not wages are being paid. Entrepreneurship is defined in the FESE

as having started a new business within the past 42 months, regardless of whether or not

wages are paid.

     As a result, the definition used for the GEM is the final one in table 6, which is the most

encompassing and includes businesses, like those in the FESE, that do not pay wages. It

parallels the definition of entrepreneurship reported in the FESE.

     Table 8 reports the results. Each observation is a country-year combination. The time

period is restricted to 2002-2009, the only time during which the relevant entrepreneurship

variable is available in FESE data. The same countries are used in the analysis across the two




44
   Recall, however, that the definition of entrepreneurship used throughout the paper should exclude sole
self-employed individuals, because to qualify as an entrepreneur the firm in question must be paying wages.
                                                      38
datasets but the number of years covered is not necessarily the same in each. Year dummies

are included.45

     Columns (1) through (3) contain the results based on the GEM sample, whereas columns

(4) to (6) are results based on the FESE sample.46 The coefficients on r and median age are

virtually identical across the two datasets in all three specifications.

                                                   [Table 8 is here]

     Table 9 replicates the key analyses of table 3, where the unit of analysis is the

country-year-age cell. The structure of table 9 mimics that of table 8.                                    Once again,

coefficients from the FESE analysis are qualitatively similar to those from the GEM analysis.

Because the sample size is smaller in the FESE, some precision of estimation is lost. Still,

five of the six coefficients remain statistically significant.

                                                   [Table 9 is here]

5.7 Summary of Predictions and Findings

     The theory yielded specific empirical relations that should be observed in the data.

Here, the predictions and findings are summarized.

     1. Proposition 1 predicts that at any given age, entrepreneurship decreases as the

         population ages, as measured by the shrinkage parameter r. Table 3 and especially

         Table 4 provide strong support. In Table 3, r has the predicted negative effect on

         entrepreneurship, holding age constant. In Table 4, for column 1, at every age,

         entrepreneurship rates are negatively related to r. The same is true in Table 4, column

         3, where each age is allowed to have its own intercept.

     2. Corollary 1 states that entrepreneurship should rise in sa, given age. This is borne out

         by Table 3, columns 3, 4, 5 and 6, and by Table 5, which, analogous to Table 4,

         shows that entrepreneurship at any given age is negatively related to sa.




45 The number of observations differ across datasets because the FESE does not survey the same number of years as does
the GEM. Year dummies are included to correct for year effects.
46 Since only 7 years of data are included, not many countries are surveyed in multiple years. As a result, country-fixed

effect regressions were not run.
                                                             39
   3. Corollary 2 says that entrepreneurship should be inversely related to age, given sa.

       Table 3, columns 3, 4, 5, and 6, support this claim, as does the last column of Table 5,

       which shows age dummies tending to become more negative with age, given sa.

   4. Proposition 2 predicts that the overall entrepreneurship rate declines as the population

       ages, as measured by r. Table 2, columns 1, 2, 7 and 8 support this prediction.

   5. Corollary 3 is a restatement of proposition 2, but cast in terms of median age instead

       of r. Table 2, columns 3 and 4 bear out this prediction.

   6. Proposition 3 predicts an inverted u-shaped relation of entrepreneurship to age.

       Column 7 of Table 2 provides direct support for this proposition as does column 2 of

       both tables 4 and 5, which do not hold r or sa constant. The age dummies first rise and

       then fall with age. Additionally, the raw data shown in Figure 1 provide additional

       support for this prediction.

   7. Proposition 4 predicts that entrepreneurship rates decline most for middle-aged

       workers as a population ages. This is borne out by Figures 1 and 5 and by the

       analytic result that based on lemma 2 coupled with the positive coefficient on βsa in

       column 3 of Table 3.



5.8 Identification

    The approach used is one that assumes the demographic structure is given and

pre-determined. There are two potential concerns. First, one might worry that causation

might run in the other direction, where entrepreneurship causes the demographic structure,

rather than the demographic structure causing entrepreneurship. Second, there may be other

factors that are correlated with demographic structure that might generate a relation of

entrepreneurship to demographic structure other than the one featured in this analysis.

    Before addressing identification at a more technical level, it is important to point out that

the demographic theory provides very specific implications (at least seven) that have been

tested and found to hold. Some of these, and especially the collection of them, are not easily

generated by other theories. The fact that seven-out-of-seven of the empirical implications are

                                               40
supported strongly by the estimates, irrespective of the country sample and functional form,

is helpful, but there are additional reasons why the evidence points toward this theory or

some close variant of it.

       First, the relation of entrepreneurship to demographics almost certainly reflects the latter

causing the former, not the former causing the latter. The demographic structure is

determined well before a birth cohort grows to an age sufficient to be entrepreneurs. Except

for immigration, the proportion of the population that is over any given age is an exogenous

and pre-determined variable from the point of view of the entrepreneurship rate. It would be

difficult, if not impossible, to come up with a story that had an exogenously given

entrepreneurship rate in 2009 determining the number of births that occurred in a country in

1979. Even the current entrepreneurship rate is unlikely to have any strong effect on current

birth and mortality rates.

       It is possible, however, that a country that is conducive to entrepreneurship could attract

a large number of immigrants, particularly young ones. This effect is likely to be small for

two reasons. First, the flow of immigrants is almost always too small relative to the size of

the native population to make much of a difference. Second, even if there were a large flow

of immigrants, the age of immigrants is not so different from the age of the population as a

whole. For example, the Department of Homeland Security reports that in the United States,

the median age of Green Card holders is five years lower than that of the native born

population. Green Card holders are those who have immigrated to the US, but have not

obtained citizenship status.47 Although five years is significant, Green Card holders account

for only about one-thirtieth of all those living in the US, which means that the five year

difference would lower the median by about 1/6 of a year. Indeed, among the 2010 sampled

countries, median ages (among population aging between 20 to 64) range from 31 to 44 years

old, with a standard deviation of almost four years. As a consequence, immigration, even on a

large scale, is unlikely to cause much bias in the estimates.




47
     Lazear (2013) and Office of Immigration Statistics (2012).
                                                        41
    The second point supporting the theory postulated here is that it is difficult to find

alternative explanations for the fact that sa has the predicted positive effect on

entrepreneurship, r has the predicted negative effect, and that these effects are pervasive. The

next section considers some possible alternative theories.



Alternative Mechanisms

    The most novel and compelling support of the theory is that within every age group,

older countries have lower rates of entrepreneurship. The interpretation offered in this study

is that older workforces reduce the ability of young workers to acquire business skills, but no

direct evidence on this interpretation has been offered. There may be other reasons why older

countries would have lower rates of entrepreneurship (at all ages) that differ from the one

suggested here. A few possibilities come to mind.

    An alternative is that countries with older populations are further along in the

development cycle and have lower returns to starting new businesses. Although it is not clear

that the premise even holds, it is possible to provide evidence that speaks to this hypothesis.

Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 allow other factors to affect the country-wide entrepreneurship

rate. The coefficients on r remain significant and statistically precise, although the one for all

countries taken together does decline in absolute magnitude (compare column 5 to column 1).

Per-capita GDP would seem to be a good proxy for stage of development, but it does not

have a significant or quantitatively meaningful effect on the results.

    A second and related possibility is that the age distribution may reflect the growth

potential of countries.   Specifically, older countries may not be good places to start new

businesses because future growth prospects are poorer than they are in younger countries. If

this were the case, then it is possible that at every age, entrepreneurship rates would be

negatively related to the median age or to r.        The country fixed-effect regressions address

this in part because the country fixed effect would tend to pick up the growth prospects.     But

it is still possible that unanticipated changes in the demographic structure could affect the

incentives to start businesses.

                                                42
    Two findings argue against this view. First, columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 include the

five-year average GDP growth rate, which one would expect would be a reflection of

investment potential.   The growth rate does not do much to explain entrepreneurship and is

not significant.   Second, some of the implications of the skill acquisition story are not

obvious implications of the view that the age structure of a country proxies growth potential.

In particular, the theory presented here implies an inverted u-shape relation of

entrepreneurship to age, which comes about because two effects work in opposite directions.

It is the combination of the two effects that yields the prediction of an inverted u, borne out

by the results. There is no obvious reason why an inverted u-shape pattern would be

produced in an environment where investment potential was proxied by the age distribution.

Similarly, the prediction that r affects middle-aged entrepreneurship rates by more than the

old or young is not an obvious prediction of the age-distribution-proxying investment

potential story.



5.9 Extensions

Industries

    The analysis here is aggregate in the sense that the country’s demographic structure is

assumed to be relevant for all industries in the country.       That assumption is made by

necessity because data are not readily available across countries that would relate to

industry-specific demographics.     Data of this kind could prove relevant and might permit

interesting extensions of the analysis.

    For example, the age structure of the United States might not be a good proxy for the

age-structure of the technology industry during the dot.com boom. Because technical skills

in computing were needed and because those skills tended to be concentrated among the

young, the median age in the tech industry was lower than that for the working population as

a whole.     As a consequence, young workers in technology held positions with more

responsibility than would have been predicted given their rank in the overall age distribution.



                                              43
    From the point of view of bias, this is not likely to be a problem, at least with respect to

table 2.     Because this relates to a mismeasured independent variable (r or median age), the

coefficients reported in that table are biased toward zero.   The estimated effects, if anything,

understate the true effects because the country r captures the industry-relevant r with error.

    The more important issue is that more direct tests of the theory are available, at least

conceptually. As a result, a useful extension would be to do industry-based analysis, using

more appropriately defined demographic variables. The rank and youth effects can be

separated from overall industry effects by doing within-age across-industry analysis.



Individuals

    It is also possible to use individual-based data to test the hypotheses of the model. A

particular individual’s experience should be a predictor of entrepreneurship.         In Lazear

(2004, 2005), having broad prior experience was used as a predictor of entrepreneurial

activity.    But additionally, the theory of the current analysis suggests that those who had

positions that were high up in a firm’s hierarchy should be more likely to be entrepreneurs

later on.

    This prediction can be tested using the Stanford MBA data described in depth in Lazear

(2005).      Those data contain information on the number of others supervised in prior

positions.     A simple check reveals that those who supervised more workers on their prior

jobs are more likely to have founded a business on subsequent job events. This is consistent

with the theory here, but is not conclusive for the obvious reason that those who were

assigned to supervisory roles may have already possessed the talents necessary to later found

businesses. An appropriate test would examine the subsequent entrepreneurial experiences

of people who were randomly thrust into supervisory positions.




6. Conclusion



                                               44
    Using a human capital framework like that proposed by Becker, coupled with an

economic focus on fertility patterns, again studied by Becker, a connection between

demographics and entrepreneurship is proposed. To become an entrepreneur, an individual

needs to have an idea for a business, energy and risk tolerance, which may be more prevalent

among the young. But making a new business a success also requires skills that are best

acquired through on-the-job training.     In an older society, the important positions in firms

are likely to be dominated by older individuals, whereas in a younger society, young workers

may get the opportunity to experience situations that will better enable them to start their own

businesses. As a consequence, a young society provides more opportunities for workers to

acquire business skills early in their careers, which implies that they will be more skilled at

any given age.

    The theory proposes a basic demographic equation that relates the age structure of a

society to one parameter, namely the population shrinkage rate. The one parameter structure

fits the demographic data very well, explaining almost perfectly the demographic structure

across a large number of countries.       More important, the theory that is based on this

structure has a number of testable implications that apply to entrepreneurship, all of which

are borne out using an unusual dataset called the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor and

verified using a second dataset, the Flash Eurobarometer Survey on Entrepreneurship

    Most basic of the predictions is that the older the population, the lower is the overall rate

of entrepreneurship. The model predicts that this holds, both with respect to the population

shrinkage parameter, which measures the speed with which a population ages, and with

respect to the median age of a country.     Both relationships show up clearly in the data and

are robust to various definitions of entrepreneurship. They are not eliminated, or even

substantially weakened, by the inclusion of other variables that might relate to alternative

theories linking entrepreneurship to age structure of the population.         In particular, the

hypothesis that the age structure is a mere proxy for stage of development or growth potential

finds no support.



                                               45
    The model implies that entrepreneurship should display an inverted u-shape relation to

age. The very young do not possess the business skills necessary to start a business and the

very old lack the creativity, energy or willingness to engage in entrepreneurship.         The

inverted u-shape holds throughout and is found in almost all countries sampled.

    Perhaps the prediction most specific to this model is that at any given age, countries that

have younger populations have higher entrepreneurship rates than do countries with older

populations.     This is because of the “rank” effect, which implies that younger countries

allow for higher rates of human capital acquisition than older countries.   As a consequence,

workers in younger countries have more skills relevant for entrepreneurship at every age.

The evidence supports this view and is robust to all empirical specifications. Furthermore,

the rank effect accounts for the bulk of the difference in entrepreneurship rates across

countries.     The age composition effect, which says that younger countries have higher rates

of entrepreneurship simply because they have more younger workers, is much less important

in explaining cross country variation in entrepreneurship rates.

    Finally, the entrepreneurship rates of the middle-aged are predicted by the framework to

be the most sensitive to the rate at which a population is aging.    Entrepreneurship rates of

the very young and very old are predicted to be more similar across countries than are the

entrepreneurship rates of the middle aged.           The theory implies that middle-aged

entrepreneurship rates should be most sensitive to variations in the demographic structure.

This result is found to hold.

    The linkage between entrepreneurship and demographics that is studied here goes back

to Becker’s early work on both human capital and fertility. More than fifty years after the

work was done, new implications of his profound theories continue to be discovered and

borne out.




                                               46
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and Murat Alp Celik. “Young, Restless and Creative:
    Openness to Disruption and Creative Innovations,” NBER Working Paper, 19894,
    2014.

Acht. J., J. Stam., A.R. Thurik., and I. Verheul. 2004. “Business Ownership and
      Unemployment in Japan.” Discussion Papers on Entrepreneurship, Growth and Public
      Policy No. 0904. Max Planck Institute for Research into Economic Systems. Jena,
      Germany.

Ardagna, Silvia and Annamaria Lusardi, “Explaining International Differences in
     Entrepreneurship: The Role of Individual Characteristics and Regulatory Constraints,”
     Chapter 1 (pp 17-62) of Joshua Lerner and Antoinette Shoar, International Differences
     in Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER. 2010.

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee. 2010. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
     World. 1950-2010.” Journal of Development Economics 104(C): 184-198

Becker, Gary S. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” In Demographic and Economic
     Change in Developed Countries, eds. George B. Roberts, Universities-National
     Bureau Committee for Economic Research. Chapter 7, pp. 209-240. Columbia
     University Press: New York, NY.

Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of
     Political Economy 70(5): 9-49.

Becker, Gary S. 1975. “Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
     Reference to Education.” 2nd edition. Columbia University Press: New York, NY.

Blanchflower, David G., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1994. “ A Longitudinal Analysis of the Young
     Self-Employed in Australia and the United States.” Small Business Economics 6(1):
     1-19.

Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald. 2009. “What Makes a Young
     Entrepreneur? ” in International Handbook on Youth and Young Adulthood, ed. Andy
     Furlong. Routledge: London, UK.

Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Gunther Fink. 2010. "Implications of Population
     Ageing for Economic Growth." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26(4): 583-612.

Bosma, Niels, Alicia Coduras, Yana Litovsky, and Jeff Seaman. 2012. “Global
    Entrepreneurship Monitor Manual.” Version 2012-9: May. Retrieved From:
    http://www.gemconsortium.org/docs/download/2375


                                            47
Dore, R. 1996. "The End of Jobs for Life?: Corporate Employment Systems: Japan and
     Elsewhere." Centre for Economic Performance Occasional Paper No. CEPOP11.
     London School of Economics and Political Science. London, UK.

Evans, David and Linda Leighton. 1989 “Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,”
     American Economic Review, June 1989,519-35.

Florida, R. 2002. The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure,
      Community and Everyday Life. Basic Books: New York, NY.

Galenson, David W. 2001. Painting Ouside the Lines: Patterns of Creativity in Modern Art.
     Havard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

Gentry, William M. and R. Glenn Hubbard. 2004. “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving,”
     B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 4,1, (August, 2004).

Global Entrepreneurship Research Association (GERA). 2010. Global Entrepreneurship
     Monitor (2001-2010). Adult Population Survey. Retrieved From:
     www.gemconsortium.org.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. "Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
     Embeddedness." The American Journal of Sociology 91(3): 481-510

Greve, Arent and Janet W. Salaff. 2003. "Social Networks and Entrepreneurship."
     Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice 28(1): 1-22.

Herrmann, Michael. 2012. “Population Aging and Economic Development: Anxieties and
     Policy Responses.” Journal of Population Aging 5(1): 23-46.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 7.1, Center for
     International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
     Pennsylvania, Nov 2012.

Karlin, Andrew R. 2013. “The Entrepreneurship Vacuum in Japan: Why It Matters and How
      to Address It.” Knowledge at Wharton. Retrieved From:
      http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm? articleid=3145.

Kaufman, A. S. and J. L. Horn. 1996. “Age Changes on Tests of Fluid and Crystallized
    Ability for Women and Men on the Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test
    (KAIT) at Ages 17-94 Years.” Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 11(2): 97-121.

Lafontaine, Francine and Kathryn Shaw. 2014. “Serial Entrepreneurship: Learning by
     Doing?” NBER Working Paper No. 201312. National Bureau of Economic Research.
     Cambridge, M.A.


                                            48
Lerner, Josh and Antoinette Schoar. 2010. International Differences in Entrepreneurship.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Lotka, Alfred J. 1922. "The Stability of the Normal Age Distribution." Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 8(11): 339-345.

Lazear, Edward P. 2004a. "Balanced Skills and Entrepreneurship." American Economic
     Review 94(2): 208-211.

Lazear, Edward P. 2005. “Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23:4 (October
     2005): 649-80.

Lazear, Edward P. 2004b. “The Peter Principle: A Theory of Decline.” Journal of Political
     Economy 112(S1): S141-S163.

Lazear, Edward P. 2013. “The Young, the Restless and Economic Growth.” Wall Street
     Journal. Retrieved From:
     http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB100014240527023032936045792539325346010
     74.

Mondragon-Velez, Camilo. 2009. “The Probability of Transition to Entrepreneurship
    Revisited: Wealth, Education and Age.” Annals of Finance 5(3-4): 421-441.

Office of Immigration Statistics. 2012. Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: Table 8. U.S.
      Dept. of Homeland Security. Retrieved From:
      http://www.dhs.gov/yearbook-immigration-statistics.

Parker, C. Simon. 2004. The Economics of Self-Employment and Entrepreneurship.
     Cambridge University Press: New York, NY.

Prettner, Klaus. 2013. “Population Aging and Endogenous Economic Growth.” Journal of
      Population Economics 26(2): 811-834.

Reynolds, P., N. Bosma, E. Autio, S. Hunt, N. De Bono, I. Servais, P. Lopez- Garcia, and N.
    Chin. 2005. “Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: Data collection design and
    implementation 1998– 2003”. Small Business Economics 24 (3): 205– 31.

Ruth, K.-E. and J. E. Birren. 1985. “Creativity in Adulthood and Old Age: Relations to
      Intelligence. Sex and Mode of Testing.” International Journal of Behavioral
      Development 8(1): 99-109.

Ryan. J. J., J. M. Sattler and S. J. Lopez. 2000. “Age Effects on Wechsler Adult Intelligence
     Scale-III Subsets.” Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 15(4): 311-317.




                                              49
Schwarz, A. and Asli Demirgue-Kunt. 1999. “Taking Stock of Pension Reforms around the
    World.” Social Protection Discussion Paper Series No. SP 9917. The World Bank:
    Washington, D.C.

Stone, P. B., 1969, "Japan surges ahead: Japan’s economic rebirth", London, Weidenfeld and
     Nicholson.

Strokova, Victoria. 2010. “International Property Rights Index: 2010 Report.” Property
     Rights Alliance. The Liberal Institute of the Friedrich Naumann Foundation:
     Potsdam-Babelsberg.

Vogel, Edgar, Alexander Ludwig, and Axel Borsch-Supan. 2013. “Aging and Pension
     Reform: Extending the Retirement Age and Human Capital Formation.” NBER
     Working Paper No. 18856. National Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA.

Wang, J.-J. and A. S. Kaufman. 1993. “Changes in Fluid and Crystallized Intelligence across
    the 20- to 90-Year Age Range on the K-BIT.” Journal of Psychoeducational
    Assessment 11(1): 29-37.

Watanabe, Susumu, 1970, “Entrepreneurship in Small Enterprises in Japanese
     Manufacturing”, International Labour Review, Issue 6, page 531-576.

Wellman, B. (Ed.). 1999. Networks in the Global Village: Life in Contemporary
     Communities. Westview Press: Boulder, CO.




                                             50
Figure 1: Countries with young and old labor forces


            .14
  .04 .06 .08 .1 .12
  Entrepreneurship Rate
            .02
            0




                          20   30            40               50           60
                                                  Age

                                    Young countries (Median age<=37)
                                    Middle countries (37<Median age<=41)
                                    Old countries (Median age>41)



Note: This figure presents the raw relationship entrepreneurship rates and age. Using the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor 2010 data, countries are grouped into three categories: (1) young countries,
defined as having a median age younger than 38, (2) middle countries, defined as having a median age
between 38 and 41, and (3) old countries, defined as having a median age greater than 41. These age
cutoffs are chosen so that each group has 20, 21, and 16 countries, respectively, i.e., approximately
one-third of the sample for each.




                                                               51
Figure 2: Age Distribution F(a,r)


           2.5                                                                                    1

                                                                                                 0.9

            2                                                                                    0.8

                                                                                                 0.7

           1.5                                                                                   0.6




                                                                                        F(a,r)
  f(a,r)




                                                                                                 0.5

            1                                                                                    0.4

                                                                                                 0.3

           0.5                                                                                   0.2
                                                           r = -2.18(Uganda)                                                                     r = -2.18(Uganda)
                                                           r=0                                   0.1                                             r=0
                                                           r = 0.22(Japan)                                                                       r = 0.22(Japan)
            0                                                                                     0
                 0   0.2            0.4          0.6           0.8             1                       0   0.2            0.4          0.6           0.8             1
                           Normalized age (0=age 20, 1=age 65)                                                   Normalized age (0=age 20, 1=age 65)




                                     (a) p.d.f                                                                           (b) c.d.f




                                                                                   52
Figure 3: Entrepreneurship Rates and Demographics (2010)
                                                                          VUT                                                                                                                                 VUT


                                                                    GHA                                                                                                                                 GHA
    Entrepreneurship rate for entire country




                                                                                                                                  Entrepreneurship rate for entire country
                                        .25




                                                                                                                                                                      .25
                                                    UGA                                                                                                                        UGA
                                .2




                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                          ZMB AGO                                                                                                                     ZMB         AGO
                      .15




                                                                                                                                                    .15
                                                                    BOL                                                                                                                                 BOL


                                                                                ECU BRA COL                                                                                                                             ECU      BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COL
                                                                                                        CHN                                                                                                                                            CHN
              .1




                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                             GTM                                                                                                                                  GTM
                                                             IRN                PER         ARG TTO
                                                                                                CHL                                                                                                IRN                     PER           ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TTO CHL
                                                             JAM                                                                                                                                     JAM
     .05




                                                                                                                                   .05
                                                                                                          KOR                                                                                                                                                   KOR
                                                                    EGY               TUN
                                                                                      TUR                 AUS                                                                                                    EGY          TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUR                             LVAAUS
                                                             SAU                      CRI
                                                                                      MYS         URY TWN LVA         FIN                                                                         SAU                         CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MYS                       URY TWN                  FIN
                                                                                                          HUN GRC
                                                                                                  MNE MKD ISL
                                                                                                          BIH
                                                                                                          PRT NOR
                                                                                                              CHE
                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                                              USA DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MNE  ISLBIH GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PRTGBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HUN     DNK
                                                                    PAK         MEX         ISR
                                                                                                  IRL         SWE NLD
                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                              FRA JPN
                                                                                                      ESP RUS SVN
                                                                                                              HRV                                                                                   PAK                   MEX                ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IRL   RUSESP USASWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HRV  NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DEU JPN
                                                                                                      ROU     ITA BEL                                                                                                                                       ROU             BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA
                         0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                               30                     35                            40                      45                                                       -2            -1.5                   -1                       -.5                   0
                                                                            Median age (20-64)                                                                                                                         Parameter r




                                           (a) Overall sample                                                                                                                       (b) Overall sample
                      .08




                                                                                                                                                      .08
 Entrepreneurship rate for entire country




                                                                                                                                 Entrepreneurship rate for entire country
                                                                                CHL                                                                                                                              CHL
                                  .06




                                                                                                                                                                  .06
                                                                                                  KOR                                                                                                                             KOR


                                                             TUR                                  AUS                                                                                       TUR                                        AUS
                   .04




                                                                                                                                                   .04




                                                                                                         GRC          FIN                                                                                                                      GRC                 FIN
                                                                                                  ISL    NOR
                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                         GBR                                                                                                                     ISL           NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GBRCHE
                                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                                  PRT                                                                                                                                  PRT     HUN
                                                                                IRL                      USA    DNK
                                                                                                                NLD                                                                                               IRL                        USA          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                         FRA    DEU                                                                                                                                SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FRADEU
                                                                                                         SVN                                                                                                                                        SVN
                                                     MEX                                                                                                                              MEX
     .02




                                                                                                                                     .02




                                                                      ISR                                       JPN                                                                                     ISR                                                  JPN
                                                                                       ESP                                                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                BEL                                                                                                                                        BEL
                                                                                                         ITA                                                                                                                                             ITA
                      0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                               35           37              39             41                  43           45                                               -1.2           -.9            -.6              -.3                    0              .3            .6
                                                                            Median age (20-64)                                                                                                                          Parameter r




                                           (c) OECD sample                                                                                                                          (d) OECD sample




                                                                                                                                                                             53
Figure 4: Absolute Value of the Coefficients on r by Age in the Age-specific
Entrepreneurship Rate Regression

                    0.06
  Absolute value of coefficient on r
      0.02            0.04
                    0.00




                                       20   30   40         50    60
                                                      Age


Note: This figure plots the magnitude of the age-specific coefficient on r reported in column 1 of
Table 4. The effect of a country’s demographic structure on entrepreneurship rates is greatest for
those near in the middle-aged groups, as Proposition 4 predicts .




                                                             54
         Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                            Overall            OECD                 Non-OECD
                                                                            (N=57)             (N=26)                  (N=31)
                                                                         Mean         Std    Mean       Std        Mean          Std
Entrepreneurship rate
   Alternative definitions
   Early-stage, pays wage                                                0.061    0.063      0.030    0.012        0.087      0.075
   Early-stage, pays wage + Shutdown firms                               0.106    0.107      0.055    0.019        0.150      0.130
   Early-stage, does not pay wage                                        0.061    0.055      0.035    0.023        0.083      0.064
   Early-stage, irrespective of whether or not wages are paid            0.121    0.108      0.064    0.029        0.170      0.126


  High aspiration
   Plans to hire 5 employees in 5 years                                  0.010    0.009      0.006    0.004        0.013      0.011
   Plans to hire 10 employees in 5 years                                 0.005    0.005      0.003    0.002        0.006      0.006
   New product/service                                                   0.011    0.015      0.007    0.006        0.015      0.020


Demographics (among age 20-64)
   Cohort shrink rate ( r)                                               -0.63        0.64   -0.17      0.35        -1.01       0.58
   Average age                                                           39.55        2.52   41.34      1.40       38.04        2.25
   Median age                                                            38.74        3.50   41.19      1.96       36.68        3.18
   Percentage of young (20-45)                                            0.52        0.09    0.46      0.05         0.57       0.08

Other Characteristics
   GDP per capita                                            $           19032   13230       30036    9819          9802        7306
   GDP growth rate in the past 5 years                          %         2.54        2.96    0.70      1.57         4.08       2.99
   Percentage of agriculture in GDP                             %         6.71        6.62    2.45      1.97       10.41        7.03
   College enrollment rate                                      %        11.23        6.73   15.59      6.28         7.58       4.64
   Start-up cost (% of GNP per capita)                          %        17.01    34.51       6.47      6.90       25.86      44.80
   Property right index                                                   6.02        1.34    7.10      1.00         5.11       0.79
   Military service of more than a year                                   0.09        0.29    0.08      0.27         0.10       0.30


Note:
The summary statistics presented in this table are for the countries surveyed in 2010 in GEM. Refer to Table B1 for the list of the
countries.




                                                                    55
              Table 2: Country-Year Level Entrepreneurship Rate Regression


Dep. Var.                                             Entrepreneurship Rate (early stage, pays wages)
Sample                     All       OECD           All             OECD        All         OECD           All      OECD         All
Specifics                   (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)
r                        -0.041       -0.023                                   -0.026        -0.027      -0.047     -0.050
                     [0.007]***     [0.007]***                               [0.008]***   [0.006]***    [0.024]*   [0.023]**
Median age                                         -0.007           -0.004                                                     -0.002
(age 20-64)                                      [0.001]***   [0.001]***                                                       [0.002]

                                                                               -0.006        -0.003
log(GDPpc)
                                                                              [0.009]       [0.009]
GDP growth rate                                                                0.001         0.001
(Average of the past 5 years)                                                 [0.001]       [0.001]
Percentage of Agriculture in GDP                                               0.003         0.002
                                                                              [0.002]*     [0.001]**
College Enrollment Rate                                                        0.048         0.029
                                                                              [0.036]       [0.030]
Start-up Cost                                                                  0.020         0.005
(% of GNP per capita)                                                         [0.016]       [0.018]
Property rights index                                                          0.004         0.007
                                                                              [0.003]     [0.002]***
Military service > 1 year                                                      0.043         0.044
                                                                             [0.020]**    [0.010]***
(Military service > 1 years) x r                                               0.052         0.062
                                                                             [0.015]***     [0.031]*
Constant                 0.010        0.022        0.318            0.17       0.037         -0.014      -0.024     0.027       0.128
                        [0.004]**   [0.004]***   [0.051]***   [0.043]***      [0.086]       [0.082]      [0.040]   [0.010]**   [0.071]*
Country FE                                                                                                  Y         Y           Y
Obs                       393          230          393              230        393           230          393       230         393
R-square                  0.40         0.24         0.37            0.19        0.57          0.41        0.91       0.72       0.90


Note:
Observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-year cell.
Year dummies are included in all regressions. Standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                       56
Table 3: Country-Age Regressions


Dep. Var.        Entrepreneurship rate (early stage, pays wages) within country-age cell
Sample
                 All            OECD          All            OECD         All          OECD         All
Specifics
                 (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
a                -0.028         -0.023        -0.376         -0.191       -0.189       -0.104       0.045
                 [0.003]***     [0.003]***    [0.057]***     [0.049]***   [0.025]***   [0.036]***   [0.009]***
r                -0.038         -0.021
                 [0.007]***     [0.007]***
sa                                            0.336          0.164        0.156        0.079
                                              [0.054]***     [0.048]***   [0.024]***   [0.036]**
a2                                                                                                  -0.085
                                                                                                    [0.008]***
Constant         0.025          0.033         0.038          0.04         0.046        0.04         0.035
                 [0.004]***     [0.004]***    [0.003]***     [0.003]***   [0.003]***   [0.002]***   [0.004]***
Country FE                                                                Y            Y
Obs              17554          10309         17554          10309        17554        10309        17554
R-square         0.26           0.12          0.25           0.12         0.56         0.24         0.11
Note:
Observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-age-year cell.
Year dummies are included in all regressions.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses.
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                        57
Table 4: Age-specific Coefficient on r

                 Dep. Var.     Entrepreneurship Rate (early stage, pays wages)
                               (1)                (2)               (3)
                 Coefficient on r for age shown on left
                 21            -0.031***                            -0.039***
                 22            -0.034***                            -0.040***
                 23            -0.042***                            -0.046***
                 24            -0.048***                            -0.049***
                 25            -0.048***                            -0.046***
                 26            -0.054***                            -0.047***
                 27            -0.054***                            -0.049***
                 28            -0.059***                            -0.048***
                 29            -0.063***                            -0.050***
                 30            -0.055***                            -0.046***
                 31            -0.061***                            -0.051***
                 32            -0.062***                            -0.049***
                 33            -0.058***                            -0.044***
                 34            -0.061***                            -0.051***
                 35            -0.056***                            -0.047***
                 36            -0.056***                            -0.049***
                 37            -0.051***                            -0.043***
                 38            -0.053***                            -0.045***
                 39            -0.049***                            -0.042***
                 40            -0.044***                            -0.039***
                 41            -0.045***                            -0.041***
                 42            -0.045***                            -0.039***
                 43            -0.046***                            -0.044***
                 44            -0.047***                            -0.044***
                 45            -0.047***                            -0.044***
                 46            -0.036***                            -0.032***
                 47            -0.039***                            -0.042***
                 48            -0.033***                            -0.035***
                 49            -0.031***                            -0.031***
                 50            -0.035***                            -0.040***
                 51            -0.039***                            -0.046***
                 52            -0.028***                            -0.032***
                 53            -0.024***                            -0.026***
                 54            -0.030***                            -0.036***
                 55            -0.026***                            -0.034***
                 56            -0.021***                            -0.027***
                 57            -0.018***                            -0.024***

                                                   58
58          -0.025**                     -0.038***
59          -0.026***                    -0.041***
60          -0.018**                     -0.034***
61          -0.008                       -0.021***
62          -0.014**                     -0.031***
63          -0.009                       -0.025***
64          -0.005                       -0.019***
Coefficient on age group dummies
21                            0.006***   -0.015***
22                            0.010***   -0.012**
23                            0.015***   -0.010*
24                            0.020***   -0.007
25                            0.022***   -0.004
26                            0.028***   0.003
27                            0.027***   0.000
28                            0.032***   0.007
29                            0.036***   0.009
30                            0.029***   0.004
31                            0.033***   0.006
32                            0.035***   0.008
33                            0.033***   0.009**
34                            0.033***   0.005
35                            0.030***   0.005
36                            0.029***   0.002
37                            0.027***   0.003
38                            0.028***   0.003
39                            0.025***   0.003
40                            0.022***   0.001
41                            0.020***   -0.002
42                            0.023***   0.002
43                            0.020***   -0.004
44                            0.022***   -0.001
45                            0.021***   -0.003
46                            0.016***   -0.001
47                            0.014***   -0.009*
48                            0.011***   -0.008*
49                            0.012***   -0.005
50                            0.010***   -0.011**
51                            0.012***   -0.013**
52                            0.008***   -0.009*
53                            0.006**    -0.008*
54                            0.007***   -0.012**

                               59
   55                           0.005**          -0.013**
   56                           0.003            -0.012***
   57                           0.001            -0.012***
   58                           0.001            -0.019***
   59                           0.001            -0.021***
   60                           -0.005*          -0.023***
   61                           -0.008***        -0.019***
   62                           -0.007***        -0.024***
   63                           -0.009***        -0.023***
   64                           -0.011***        -0.021***
   Obs         17,554           17,554           17,554
   R-square    0.232            0.086            0.248


Note: Standard errors are clustered at the country level, but not
reported to save space. Year dummies are included in all regressions.
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                 60
Table 5: Age-specific Coefficient on sa

                  Dep. Var.     Entrepreneurship Rate (early stage, pays wages)
                                (1)               (2)                (3)
                  Coefficient on sa for age shown on left
                  21            2.216***                             2.783***
                  22            1.175***                             1.449***
                  23            0.855***                             1.132***
                  24            0.689***                             0.928***
                  25            0.562***                             0.717***
                  26            0.508***                             0.608***
                  27            0.432***                             0.559***
                  28            0.403***                             0.491***
                  29            0.374***                             0.476***
                  30            0.311***                             0.406***
                  31            0.299***                             0.415***
                  32            0.278***                             0.384***
                  33            0.252***                             0.328***
                  34            0.234***                             0.368***
                  35            0.213***                             0.336***
                  36            0.197***                             0.347***
                  37            0.180***                             0.304***
                  38            0.173***                             0.316***
                  39            0.159***                             0.292***
                  40            0.144***                             0.273***
                  41            0.135***                             0.291***
                  42            0.134***                             0.277***
                  43            0.124***                             0.327***
                  44            0.123***                             0.326***
                  45            0.117***                             0.333***
                  46            0.104***                             0.252***
                  47            0.098***                             0.347***
                  48            0.090***                             0.296***
                  49            0.088***                             0.291***
                  50            0.084***                             0.354***
                  51            0.083***                             0.425***
                  52            0.076***                             0.293***
                  53            0.072***                             0.278***
                  54            0.071***                             0.391***
                  55            0.067***                             0.406***
                  56            0.062***                             0.385***
                  57            0.059***                             0.329***

                                                   61
58          0.058***                     0.544***
59          0.057***                     0.709***
60          0.050***                     0.671***
61          0.045***                     0.568***
62          0.045***                     1.028***
63          0.043***                     1.278***
64          0.040***                     1.949***
Coefficient on age group dummies
21                            0.006***   -0.066***
22                            0.010***   -0.066***
23                            0.015***   -0.074***
24                            0.020***   -0.077***
25                            0.022***   -0.072***
26                            0.028***   -0.067***
27                            0.027***   -0.075***
28                            0.032***   -0.070***
29                            0.036***   -0.075***
30                            0.029***   -0.076***
31                            0.033***   -0.085***
32                            0.035***   -0.085***
33                            0.033***   -0.077***
34                            0.033***   -0.101***
35                            0.030***   -0.099***
36                            0.029***   -0.114***
37                            0.027***   -0.106***
38                            0.028***   -0.118***
39                            0.025***   -0.117***
40                            0.022***   -0.118***
41                            0.020***   -0.135***
42                            0.023***   -0.132***
43                            0.020***   -0.171***
44                            0.022***   -0.175***
45                            0.021***   -0.188***
46                            0.016***   -0.148***
47                            0.014***   -0.220***
48                            0.011***   -0.195***
49                            0.012***   -0.197***
50                            0.010***   -0.252***
51                            0.012***   -0.312***
52                            0.008***   -0.221***
53                            0.006**    -0.216***
54                            0.007***   -0.313***

                              62
   55                            0.005**          -0.336***
   56                            0.003            -0.328***
   57                            0.001            -0.287***
   58                            0.001            -0.486***
   59                            0.001            -0.645***
   60                            -0.005*          -0.628***
   61                            -0.008***        -0.544***
   62                            -0.007***        -0.992***
   63                            -0.009***        -1.252***
   64                            -0.011***        -1.933***
   Obs          17,554           17,554           17,554
   R-square     0.176            0.086            0.238


Note: Standard errors are clustered at the country level, but not
reported to save space. Year dummies are included in all regressions.
* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% .




                                  63
Table 6: Robustness Checks - Alternative Entrepreneurship Definitions


                            Early stage plus                                         Early stage businesses
                                                            New business that do
Dep. Var.               businesses that have died                                   irrespective of whether or
                                                               not pay wages
                         within last 42 months                                         not wages are paid

Sample                     All           OECD                 All        OECD           All         OECD
specifics                   (1)            (2)                (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)


Panel A: Country level regressions
r                         -0.046         -0.05              -0.028       -0.027       -0.054         -0.054
                       [0.013]***     [0.011]***        [0.008]***      [0.013]**   [0.014]***    [0.013]***
Country
                            Y              Y                   Y            Y           Y              Y
Characteristics
Obs                        393            230                 393          230         393            230
R-square                   0.56           0.48               0.43         0.32         0.53           0.37


Panel B: Country-age level regressions
sa                        0.666          0.336               0.331        0.217       0.667          0.381
                       [0.102]***     [0.107]***        [0.052]***      [0.098]**   [0.094]***    [0.130]***
a                         -0.715         -0.361             -0.372       -0.245       -0.748         -0.437
                       [0.107]***     [0.107]***        [0.054]***      [0.100]**   [0.098]***    [0.131]***
Obs                       17554          10309              17554        10309        17554          10309
R-square                   0.33           0.14               0.22         0.13         0.33           0.18
Note:
In panel A, observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-year cell.
In panel B, observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-age-year cell.
Year dummies are included in all regressions.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       64
Table 7: Robustness Check - Entrepreneurship with High Aspiration

 Types of              Plan to hire more than 5             Plan to hire more than 10                     Involve new
 early-stage entre.     employees in 10 years                employees in 10 years                   products/services
 Sample                   All          OECD                     All         OECD                     All            OECD
 Specifics                (1)             (2)                   (3)           (4)                    (5)              (6)


 Panel A. Country level regressions
 r                      -0.005          -0.008                -0.003        -0.004                 -0.006           -0.008
                      [0.002]***      [0.001]***            [0.001]**     [0.001]***             [0.002]***        [0.003]**
 Country
                           Y              Y                     Y              Y                      Y                 Y
 Characteristics
 Obs                      393             230                  393            230                    393             230
 R-square                0.33            0.48                  0.26          0.44                   0.31             0.43


 Panel B: Country-age level regressions
 sa                      0.058          0.046                 0.031          0.024                  0.054           0.051
                      [0.011]***      [0.017]**             [0.007]***     [0.012]**             [0.010]***        [0.028]*
 a                      -0.068          -0.054                -0.036        -0.029                 -0.062           -0.058
                      [0.012]***      [0.017]***            [0.007]***     [0.012]**             [0.011]***        [0.029]*
 Obs                    17554           10309                 17554         10309                  17554            10309
 R-square                0.08            0.06                  0.05          0.04                   0.09             0.07
 Note:
 In panel A, observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-year cell.
 In panel B, observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-age-year cell..
 Standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses. Year dummies are included in all regressions
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       65
Table 8: Country Level Entrepreneurship Rate Regression

Dep. Var.                     Early stage businesses irrespective of whether or not wages are paid
Dataset                           GEM Sample (2002-09)                  FESE Sample (2002-09)
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)       (6)
r                             -0.037                       -0.033          -0.034                 -0.039
                            [0.013]***                   [0.013]**       [0.016]**               [0.021]*
Median Age                                   -0.005                                    -0.004
(age 20-64)                                [0.002]**                                  [0.003]
Country Characteristics                                      Y                                     Y
Obs                               171         171           171             103         103       103
R-square                          0.19        0.13          0.37            0.21        0.18      0.39
Note:
Observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-year cell. The
number of observations differ between the two data sets because the number of years surveyed is not the
same in both for all countries.
Column (3) and (6) include the same set of country level characteristics and those in Table 2.
Year dummies are included in all regressions.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       66
Table 9: Country-age Level Entrepreneurship Rate Regression


 Dep. Var.             Early stage businesses irrespective of whether or not wages are paid
 Dataset                      GEM, 2002-2009                                FESE, 2002-2009
                       (1)            (2)         (3)                (4)          (5)          (6)
 a                   -0.053         -0.361       0.08            -0.087         -0.316        0.047
                   [0.006]***     [0.130]**   [0.014]***       [0.004]***     [0.099]***   [0.018]**
 r                   -0.047                                      -0.022
                    [0.020]**                                    [0.014]
 sa                                 0.301                                        0.224
                                  [0.126]**                                    [0.097]**
     2
 a                                               -0.132                                       -0.131
                                              [0.010]***                                   [0.016]***
 Obs                  7790           7790        7790                4618        4618         4618
 R-square              0.2           0.18         0.2                0.09        0.09          0.1
 Note:
 Observations are weighted by the number of individuals who make up each country-age-year cell.
 The number of observations differ between the two data sets because the number of years surveyed
 is not the same in both for all countries.
 Year dummies are included in all regressions.
 Standard errors clustered at the country-year level are in parentheses
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          67
Appendix


A       Proofs of propositions
                              e ra  1                                                            d 2F
Lemma 1: For F                        , there exists an a m  [ 0,1] such that for all a  a   ,       0 , and
                              er  1                                                          m
                                                                                                  drda
                 d 2F
for a  a m ,         0.
                 drda
Proof:       Note that

     d 2F    e ra
           r      [(e r  1)(1  ar )  re r ]                                                        (A1)
     drda (e  1)2

Therefore

      d 2F      er
lim         r       2
                       [1  e  r  r ]  0                                                           (A2)
a  0 drda  ( e  1)


and

     d 2F      er
lim        r         [e r  1  r ]  0                                                               (A3)
a 1 drda  ( e  1) 2


In addition, the function has a unique root

              r  er  er  1
a  am                         (0,1)                                                                 (A4)
                r  ( e r  1)

                                                                                                d 2F
Given (A2), (A3), and (A4),                    48
                                                    it must be true that for all a  a m ,            0 and
                                                                                                drda
                d 2F
for a  a m ,        0                  |||
                drda


                            e ra  1                     dF
Lemma 2: For F                      , and 0<a<1,           0.
                            er  1                       dr
Proof:      Note that

dF ae ra ( e r  1)  ( e ra  1)e r
                                                                                                       (A5)
dr             ( e r  1)2


Therefore


48   The inequalities in (A2), (A3), and (A4) hold because r>1-e-r and r<er-1.
                                                               68
     dF
lim     0                                                                                         (A6)
a 0 dr

       dF
lim       0                                                                                       (A7)
a 1   dr

Given (A6), (A7), and Lemma 1, dF/dr<0 for aϵ[0,1].               |||




Proposition 2: Number of entrepreneurs as a fraction of the workforce decreases as the cohort size

shrinks, i.e., dE / dr  0 .



                          1
Proof:    Define G  F         as the inverse of F on variable a, such that

G(F(a,r),r)≡a                                                                                       (A8)

Totally differentiate this equation with respect to r, we have G1 F2  G2  0 . Hence

        G
G2         G1 F2  0                                                                             (A9)
        r

                                                     F 1
The inequality is true because G1  0 and F2               0.
                                                      r

Replace F(a,r) with s,
          1
E (r )   E (h( s), q(G( s, r )))ds                                                                (A10)
          0


Given (18) and q’<0, we know dE / dr  0 .                |||



Corollary 3: The number of entrepreneurs as a fraction of the workforce decreases with the

population’s median age.
                                                                              e ra  1
Proof: The median age, amed, is defined by F(amed, r) = 0.5, or by solving              0.5 .The solution
                                                                              er  1
      1 er  1
is a  ln(     ) , which increases monotonically in r (The function resembles the standard logistic
      r    2

shape). Since, by proposition 2, dE / dr  0 , it follows that dE / damed  0 .              |||




                                                     69
                                                                   E ( a M , r ) E ( a, r )
Proposition 4: There exists some aM, 0<aM<1 such that                                         0 , ∀ a ϵ[0,1] and
                                                                       a           a
a ≠ aM, under the conditions that the first and second derivatives of V, H, and Q exist and are

bounded and that the first derivatives of V and H are greater than some small constant ε.

Proof:      Notice that

2E                   P 'V1H '
      P 'V1H 'F12            F2                                                                           (A11)
ar                    a

                                                                  2E
       Since F2 (0, r )  0 and F2 (1, r )  0 , the value of           is dominated by P'V1H 'F12 when a
                                                                  a r

is closed to 0 or 1. Moreover, as shown by Lemma 1, F12 (0, r )  0 and F12 (1, r )  0 , therefore


 2 E (0, r )          2 E (1, r )
               0 and               0                                                                       (A12)
   a r                 ar

as long as the first derivatives of V and H are greater than some small constant ε.

      Given the continuity of P, V, and H, along with the condition (A12), there exist one49 a M  (0,1) ,

               2 E (aM , r )         E ( a M , r ) E ( a , r )
such that                      0 and                             0 , ∀ aϵ[0,1] and a ≠ aM.          |||
                   ar                   a           a




49   There might exist more than one such local minimum point.
                                                            70
        B: Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) data coverage

                               Table B1. GEM Sample Sizes by Country and Year
                       2001    2002     2003    2004    2005    2006     2007    2008    2009    2010
Algeria                 -       -        -       -       -       -        -       -      2,000    -
Angola                  -       -        -       -       -       -        -      1,518    -      2,167
Argentina              1,992   1,999    2,004   2,003   2,008   2,007    2,018   2,031   2,008   2,001
Australia              2,072   3,378    2,212   1,991   2,465   2,518     -       -       -      2,000
Austria                 -       -        -       -      2,197    -       2,002    -       -       -
Belgium                2,038   4,057    2,184   3,879   4,047   2,001    2,028   1,997   3,989   2,000
Bolivia                 -       -        -       -       -       -        -      2,000    -      3,524
Bosnia & Herzegovina    -       -        -       -       -       -        -      2,028   2,000   2,000
Brazil                 2,000   2,000    2,000   4,000   2,000   2,000    2,000   2,000   2,000   2,000
Canada                 1,939   2,007    2,028   2,004   6,418   2,038     -       -       -       -
Chile                   -      2,016    1,992    -      1,997   2,007    4,008   2,000   5,000   7,195
China                   -      2,054    1,607    -      2,109   2,399    2,666    -      3,608   3,677
Colombia                -       -        -       -       -      2,001    2,102   2,001   2,055   11,029
Costa Rica              -       -        -       -       -       -        -       -       -      2,003
Croatia                 -      2,001    2,000   2,016   2,000   2,000    2,000   1,996   2,000   2,000
Czech Republic          -       -        -       -       -      2,001     -       -       -       -
Denmark                2,022   2,009    2,008   2,009   2,010   10,000   2,001   2,012   2,012   1,957
Dominican Rep.          -       -        -       -       -       -       2,081   2,019   2,007    -
Ecuador                 -       -        -      2,010    -       -        -      2,142   2,200   2,077
Egypt                   -       -        -       -       -       -        -      2,636    -      2,769
Finland                2,001   2,005    2,005   2,000   2,010   2,005    2,005   2,011   2,004   2,006
France                 1,991   2,029    2,018   1,953   2,005   1,909    2,005   2,018   2,019   2,012
Germany                7,058   15,041   7,534   7,523   6,577   4,049     -      4,751   6,032   5,552
Ghana                   -       -        -       -       -       -        -       -       -      2,447
Greece                  -       -       2,000   2,008   2,000   2,000    2,000   2,000   2,000   2,000
Guatemala               -       -        -       -       -       -        -       -      2,190   2,285
Economy                2001    2002     2003    2004    2005    2006     2007    2008    2009    2010
Hong Kong               -      2,000    2,000   2,004    -       -       2,058    -      2,000    -
Hungary                2,000   2,000     -      2,878   2,878   2,500    1,500   2,001   2,000   2,000
Iceland                 -      2,000    2,011   2,002   2,002   2,001    2,002   2,002   2,005   2,001
India                  2,011   3,047     -       -       -      1,999    1,662   2,032    -       -
Indonesia               -       -        -       -       -      2,000     -       -       -       -
Iran                    -       -        -       -       -       -        -      3,124   3,350   3,359
Ireland                1,971   2,000    2,000   1,978   2,000   2,008    2,007   2,001    -      2,000
Israel                 1,869   2,004     -      1,933    -       -       2,019   2,030   2,073   2,007
Italy                  1,973   2,002    2,003   2,945   2,001   1,999    2,000   3,000   3,000   3,000
Jamaica                 -       -        -       -      2,180   3,669     -      2,407   2,012   2,298
Japan                  1,999   1,999    2,000   1,917   2,000   2,000    1,860   2,001   1,600   2,006
Jordan                  -       -        -      2,000    -       -        -       -      2,006    -
Kazakhstan              -       -        -       -       -       -       2,000    -       -       -
Korea                  2,008   2,015     -       -       -       -        -      2,000   2,000   2,001
Latvia                  -       -        -       -      1,964   1,958    2,000   2,011   2,003   2,001
Lebanon                 -       -        -       -       -       -        -       -      2,000    -
Macedonia               -       -        -       -       -       -        -      2,000    -      2,002


                                                        71
                         2001         2002      2003     2004      2005      2006      2007      2008      2009      2010
Malaysia                  -            -         -        -         -        2,005      -         -        2,002     2,010
Mexico                   2,014        1,002      -        -        2,011     2,015      -        2,605      -        2,605
Montenegro                -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -         -        2,000
Morocco                   -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        1,500      -
Netherlands              2,013        3,510     3,505    3,507     3,582     3,535     3,539     3,508     3,003     3,502
New Zealand              1,960        2,000     2,009    1,933     1,003      -         -         -         -         -
Norway                   2,874        2,036     2,040    2,883     2,015     1,999     1996      2049      2029      2,002
Pakistan                  -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -         -        2007
Panama                    -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        2000       -
Peru                      -            -         -       2007       -        1997      2000      2052      2021      2108
Philippines               -            -         -        -         -        2,000      -         -         -         -
Poland                   2000         2000       -       2001       -         -         -         -         -         -
Portugal                 2000          -         -       1000       -         -        2023       -         -        2,002
Puerto Rico               -            -         -        -         -         -        1,998      -         -         -
Romania                   -            -         -        -         -         -        2046      2206      2093      2235
Russia                   2012         2,190      -        -         -        1,894     1,939     1,660     1,695     1,736
Saudi Arabia              -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        2,000     2,000
Serbia                    -            -         -        -         -         -        2,200     2,297     2,300      -
Singapore                2004         2005      2008     3852      4004      4011       -         -         -         -
Slovenia                  -           2030      2012     2003      3016      3,008     3020      3019      3030      3012
South Africa             1,827        6,993     3,262    3,252     3,268     3,248      -        3,270     3,135     3,279
Spain                    2016         2000      2000     16980     19384     28306     27,880    30,879    28,888    26388
Sweden                   2056         2000      2025     26,700    2002      2003      2001       -         -        2,492
Switzerland               -           2001      2003      -        5456       -        2148       -        2024      2,002
Syria                     -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        2,002      -
Taiwan                    -           2,236      -        -         -         -         -         -         -        2,001
Thailand                  -           1,043      -        -        2,000     2,000     2000       -         -         -
Tonga                     -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        1184       -
Trinidad & T.             -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -         -        2,016
Tunisia                   -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        2,000     2,001
Turkey                    -            -         -        -         -        2,417     2400      2400       -        2,401
Uganda                    -            -        1035     2005       -         -         -         -        2095      2267
United Arab Emirates      -            -         -        -         -        2001      2180       -        2056       -
United Kingdom           4899         16002     22010    24006     11203     43033     41829     8000      30003     3000
United States            1,983        7,059     9,197    2,007     2,021     3,093     2,166     5,249     5,002     4,000
Uruguay                   -            -         -        -         -        1997      2000      2,027     2001      2,034
Vanuatu                   -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -         -        1,182
Venezuela                 -            -        2,000     -        2,000      -        1,794      -        1,693      -
West Bank & Gaza Strip    -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        2080      1992
Yemen                     -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -        2,065      -
Zambia                    -            -         -        -         -         -         -         -         -        2,039
Total                    66,602       115,770   96,712   145,189   117,833   171,631   155,183   134,990   183,074   176,699

       Source: Bosma et al. (2012).




                                                                   72
C: Comparison between GEM and Flash Eurobarometer Survey on Entrepreneurship
(FESE) data
    Table C1 reports the sample size of FESE data by country and year during the survey

period.
                     Table C1. FESE Sample Size by Countries and Year
           Country                    2002        2003   2004   2007    2009
           Austria                    500         500    500    504     501
           Belgium                    510         519    1000   1005    1007
           China                                                        1002
           Croatia                                                      500
           Czech Republic                                1008   1003    1001
           Denmark                    501         500    503    511     500
           Finland                    500         500    501    505     500
           France                     503         1002   1007   1000    1005
           Germany                    503         1000   1000   1006    1005
           Greece                                               1016    1006
           Hungary                                       1000   1021    1002
           Iceland                    502         501    501    500     504
           Ireland                    500         500    500    500     500
           Italy                      502         1001   1004   1006    1017
           Japan                                                        1000
           Korea                                                        1000
           Latvia                                        510    501     504
           Netherlands                500         500    1000   1000    1003
           Norway                     500         503    500    500     503
           Poland                                        1000   1011    1005
           Portugal                   500         500    1000   1010    1006
           Romania                                                      504
           Slovenia                                      500    502     503
           Spain                      502         1001   1001   1005    1009
           Sweden                     500         500    500    502     501
           Switzerland                                                  510
           Turkey                                                       504
           United Kingdom             500         1001   1006   1029    1000
           United States              500         1011   1003   1009    1010




                                             73
       Table C2 reports the summary statistics of entrepreneurship variables for the two datasets.

The entrepreneurship variables in both datasets are defined as early stage businesses

irrespective of whether or not wages are paid.             For comparability, the same countries are used in

both the GEM and FESE analyses.50

       It is evident that the entrepreneurship rates are comparable. The correlation of this

variable across the two datasets is 0.50, where the unit of analysis is the country-year.


                  Table C2. Comparison of Entrepreneurship Rate between GEM and FESE
                                               Number of
                  Year       Data                                 Mean     Std        Min        Max
                                               Countries
                  2002       GEM                  21              0.061   0.032       0.018     0.150
                             FESE                 16              0.055   0.026       0.018     0.136
                  2003       GEM                  19              0.056   0.029       0.014     0.119
                             FESE                 16              0.057   0.022       0.032     0.109
                  2004       GEM                  20              0.057   0.028       0.016     0.133
                             FESE                 21              0.053   0.023       0.024     0.120
                  2007       GEM                  24              0.058   0.025       0.023     0.128
                             FESE                 22              0.066   0.022       0.028     0.126
                  2009       GEM                  21              0.062   0.024       0.031     0.118
                             FESE                 28              0.065   0.027       0.028     0.139


D. Table 1 of Dore (1996)

                                 Table D1. Occupants of Selected Ranks by Age Group


                     Sub-Section Chief (Kakari-cho)                                  Division Chief (Bucho)
               Under 35                35-39           40 or over         Under 45            45-49       50 or over
 1976           31.80%            31.90%                36.30%            24.50%              31.10%          41.40%
 1984           18.30%            33.10%                48.60%            12.50%              37.30%          50.20%
 1994           16.40%            23.50%                60.10%             7.60%              27.80%          64.60%


 Source: Basic Survey of Wage Structure, various years.




50   All of them are OECD countries.
                                                             74
