                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FINISHING DEGREES AND FINDING JOBS:
        U.S. HIGHER EDUCATION AND THE FLOW OF FOREIGN IT WORKERS

                                          John Bound
                                         Murat Demirci
                                         Gaurav Khanna
                                          Sarah Turner

                                       Working Paper 20505
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20505


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Funding from The Sloan Foundation: Pathways to Science
and Engineering Employment.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by John Bound, Murat Demirci, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Finishing Degrees and Finding Jobs: U.S. Higher Education and the Flow of Foreign IT Workers
John Bound, Murat Demirci, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 20505
September 2014
JEL No. I23,J24,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

The rising importance of Information Technology (IT) occupations in the U.S. economy has been
accompanied by an expansion in the representation of high-skill foreign-born IT workers. To illustrate,
the share of foreign born in IT occupations increased from about 15.5% to about 31.5% between 1993
and 2010, with this increased representation particularly marked among those younger than 45. This
analysis focuses on understanding the role that U.S. higher education and immigration policy play
in this transformation. A degree from a U.S. college/university is an important pathway to participation
in the U.S. IT labor market, and the foreign-born who obtain U.S. degree credentials are particularly
likely to remain in the U.S. Many workers from abroad, including countries like India and China where
wages in IT fields lag those in the U.S., receive a substantial return to finding employment in the U.S.,
even as temporary work visa policies may limit their entry. Limits on temporary work visas, which
are particularly binding for those educated abroad, likely increase the attractiveness of degree attainment
from U.S. colleges and universities as a pathway to explore opportunities in the U.S labor market in
IT.


John Bound                                           Gaurav Khanna
Department of Economics                              Economics Department
University of Michigan                               University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                             Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                             gkhanna@umich.edu
jbound@umich.edu
                                                     Sarah Turner
Murat Demirci                                        University of Virginia
University of Virginia                               Department of Economics
md8bh@virginia.edu                                   Monroe Hall, Room 237
                                                     248 McCormick Rd
                                                     Charlottesville, VA 22903
                                                     and NBER
                                                     sturner@virginia.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20505
1. Introduction


         The growth in occupations for high-skill workers in information technology (IT) has been

dramatic over the past two decades – beginning in the mid-1990s with the start of the internet

boom and continuing with rapid expansions in information technology (IT) innovation. Broadly

encompassing programmers, computer scientists, and electrical engineers, the IT workforce

increased by more than 1.2 million workers, or by 112%, between 1993 and 2010 (Table 1).1

Sectors served by these workers have responded to dramatic increases in internet commerce,

giving rise to technology firms like Google, Yahoo, and Amazon, as well as maintaining the

prosperity of firms like Microsoft and IBM.

         One of the distinguishing features of the internet boom in the U.S. has been the extent to

which foreign-born workers have been part of the supply response. Among IT workers with at

least a bachelor’s degree, foreign-born workers have grown from about 16% of the IT workforce

in 1993 to nearly 32% in 2010 (Table 1). This kind of labor market response to demand shocks

would not have occurred in the 1970s or in an environment with more restrictive immigration

policies (Bound, Braga, Golden, Turner 2013; Bound, Braga, Golden, Khanna, 2014).2 This

analysis focuses on understanding the role that U.S. higher education and immigration policy

play in the flow of foreign-born IT workers.

         To the extent that the U.S. labor market provides a substantial wage premium relative to

countries like China and India (Clemens, Montenegro and Pritchett 2008; Clemens, 2013), high-


         1
            More concretely, we restrict our analysis to the workers with at least bachelor’s degree credentials, and
include the following occupations in IT field: computer and information scientists, computer network architects,
computer support specialists, computer system analysts, database administrators, information security analysts,
network and computer system administrators, software developers, web developers, other computer information
science, computer engineers, electrical and electronic engineers, computer and information system managers, and
computer programmers from the occupation list of the National Survey of College Graduates.
2
  Bound et al (2013) argue that the increased availability of foreign high skilled labor increased the labor supply
elasticity to the sector, leading to both a larger growth in sectoral output and a dampened increase in wages.

                                                                                                                        3
skill workers have a strong incentive to immigrate. Yet, limits in the availability of temporary

(H-1B) visas, which require employer sponsorship, may limit direct flows from foreign countries

to the U.S. labor market. Since the number of foreign students who can enroll in U.S. higher

education is not limited by visa policy (but rather by conditions in the higher education market)

foreign students have incentives to pursue degrees in the U.S., both to acquire skills and to

improve the potential likelihood of finding a job in the U.S. labor market (Rosenzweig 2006).

Degree attainment in the U.S. advantages foreign students searching for jobs over those educated

abroad, to the extent that U.S. employers have more confidence in worker skills acquired at

familiar educational institutions and find it more straightforward to interview candidates on site.

       Our analysis provides supporting evidence of this employment and migration behavior.

We demonstrate that U.S. degree receipt has been an important pathway for the foreign born to

participate in the IT workforce over the past two decades. Those entering the U.S. on student

visas and then transitioning to temporary or permanent work visas comprise a significant share of

the IT workforce, and the degree receipt of foreign students in IT fields is highly sensitive to the

labor market conditions. Despite a substantial literature on high-skill immigration in the

workforce, few studies have focused on how a U.S. college education, and its interaction with

U.S. visa policies, impact foreign-born flows into high-skill occupations.

       Our analysis begins by presenting a picture of the current level and recent changes in

educational attainment of foreign-born and natives working in IT occupations. Notably, foreign-

born IT workers are more likely than their U.S.-born peers to hold advanced degrees and a

significant portion of them have received their highest degrees from U.S. institutions.

Furthermore, foreign-born IT workers are more likely than their US counterparts to hold degrees

in Science and Engineering (S&E) fields, the credentials of which are easier to evaluate by US



                                                                                                       4
employers. The next section reviews the institutional parameters that determine entry to the U.S.

for high-skill workers, where we emphasize that unlike student visas, work-visas are subject to

caps and costly employer petitions student.

       We then examine the growth in enrollment and degrees awarded to the foreign born by

U.S. universities. An important finding is that, in the past two decades, degrees received by

foreign students at U.S. institutions, particularly at the master’s level, have been very responsive

to labor market conditions, more so than the responsiveness of their US-born counterparts. In the

final section we provide an examination of how the degree receipt location (U.S. or abroad)

affects persistence and earnings in the U.S. labor market for foreign-born workers. Notable

findings include that foreign-born workers with U.S. degrees are more likely than their

counterparts to remain in the U.S., and that labor market premiums/penalties for a U.S. degree

vary considerably by country of origin, with workers from China paying a penalty and those

from Europe receiving a premium for being educated abroad. For IT workers, the impact on

wages for receiving US-degree is almost non-existent, suggesting that a large component of this

influx of foreign-students can be attributed to the fact that rather than better wages, a US

education provides improved access to the US labor market.

       An important conclusion of this analysis is that U.S. higher education institutions and

immigration policies both play critical roles in determining the flow of high-skill immigrants to

the U.S. labor market. Notably, the expansion in capacity of U.S. graduate programs –

particularly in science and engineering – and restrictions in work-visa policies has influenced

foreign student entry to the U.S., which in turn has affected the level and composition of high-

skill worker immigration. Similarly, wage differentials across countries have influenced the

inflow of foreign students, and in turn facilitated the expansion of master’s programs. Looking



                                                                                                    5
ahead, changes that affect access to U.S. post-secondary education for the foreign born,

including the cost of U.S. higher education and student visa options, will likely affect the flow of

high-skill workers to the U.S. labor market. In turn, changes in the attractiveness of the U.S.

labor market – particularly in IT occupations – or changes in the availability of work visas are

expected to affect the demand from foreigners for degrees from U.S. universities.



2. Descriptive Backdrop: The Changing Composition of IT Workers

         Using any national survey data from the past two decades, we find unambiguous

increases in the total of number of IT workers and in the representation of foreign-born workers

in IT.3 These foreign-born IT workers are more likely to hold advanced degrees, most of which

are from US institutions, and are also more likely to graduate with degrees in computer science

or engineering fields than their US counterparts.



Broad Trends

         We focus here on the sharp increase in college-educated workers employed in the U.S. IT

sector, a number that rose from 1.1 million in 1993 to nearly 2 million in 2003, with a more

incremental rise to 2.4 million in 2010. This first interval is often referred to as the “internet

boom” era. To put it in perspective, these increases account for 0.4% of the total U.S. population

in 1993, 0.7% in 2003, and 0.8% in 2010 (Table 1). While slightly more than half (54%) of this

total increase is accounted for by the growth in U.S.-born IT workers, about 575,000 of the IT

         3
          This finding is clear in the Current Population Survey (CPS), the American Community Survey (ACS),
the Decennial Census enumerations, and the periodic National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG: 1993, 2003,
2010), which includes detailed information on the location, year, and field of post-secondary attainment. The
National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) draws on the Census and ACS for the sampling frame. While the
advantage of this survey for the analytics that follow is that we are able to identify whether an individual’s post-
secondary degrees were obtained in the U.S. or abroad, a disadvantage is that the NSCG will underrepresent college-
educated workers residing in the U.S. for short periods of time and those leaving the country owing to the expiration
of work visas.

                                                                                                                   6
workers added between 1993 and 2010 were born abroad, representing an increase from 15.5%

to 31.5% of all IT workers during the period, with the increase concentrated among workers

younger than 45.

       While a college-degree is widely regarded as a prerequisite to employment in high-skill

IT fields, native-born and foreign-born workers differ somewhat in the extent to which they hold

post-baccalaureate credentials. In terms of highest degree attained, about 75% of U.S.-born and

50% of foreign-born IT workers held a bachelor’s degree, while about half as many U.S.-born as

foreign-born (23% vs. 44%) held a master’s degree, and only a third as many U.S.-born as

foreign-born IT workers (2% vs. 6%) held PhDs (Table 2, Panel B). Notably, foreign-born IT

workers were more likely and U.S.-born IT workers were less likely than all college-educated

workers in the U.S. economy to hold advanced degrees (Table 2, compare Panels A and B). This

“educational differential” is particularly noteworthy among younger cohorts in recent years

(Figure 1).



Location of Degrees among Foreign Born

       Not only are foreign-born college-educated workers more likely than their native

counterparts to hold advanced degrees, but large proportions of them are likely to have attained

their highest degree from a U.S. university. Table 3 presents the distribution of college-educated

immigrant workers who received their highest degree from a U.S. institution both overall and for

those employed in IT fields, by year and degree.

       Among foreign-born IT workers, those with advanced degrees are appreciably more

likely to have received their degrees from U.S. institutions than those with only a bachelor’s

degree. For example, for IT workers 25-34 years old in 2010, 73% of those with a master’s



                                                                                                   7
degree and 95% of PhD recipients received their highest degree from a U.S. institution, versus

52% of those with a bachelor’s degree (Table 3). In fact, the proportion of foreign-born

bachelor’s degree-only IT workers who attained their degree in the U.S. has declined over the

period, from 86% to 52%. This change in the composition of degree location is concurrent with a

marked change in the pathway of entry by foreign-born IT workers, shifting from an early-age of

arrival in the U.S. – often with parents – to arrival as graduate students or young workers.

         Several explanations account for the attractiveness of U.S. degree programs to high-skill

workers from abroad. First, with more than 3,000 institutions of higher education and many large

research universities, the U.S. market may present a supply of educational opportunities

unavailable in many home countries. In addition, U.S. institutions may be perceived as providing

higher quality educational experiences than are available in many home countries. While higher

education quality varies widely in the U.S., U.S. universities often dominate global rankings,

and hold a particular global advantage in research education in the sciences (Bound, Turner and

Walsh, 2009; Bird and Turner, 2013).4 To this end, the earnings of foreign-born IT workers may

be treated differently in the labor market based on whether they were educated entirely abroad,

or came to the U.S. for their entire post-secondary experience or just for graduate school. Finally,

as previously mentioned, holding a U.S. degree may improve immigrants’ access to the U.S.

labor market because U.S. employers have more information about U.S. degree programs than

foreign programs and a greater opportunity to observe candidate qualifications.




         4
           Based on rankings of research universities, 6 of the top 10 universities and 15 of the top 30 universities
are located in the U.S.

                                                                                                                        8
Formal Post-Secondary Training of IT Workers

        While it is natural to associate degrees in fields like computer science and electrical

engineering with employment in IT occupations, the educational credentials of workers in these

occupations are more diverse, particularly for natives. Indeed, among native-born IT workers

between the ages of 25 and 34 in 2010, only 37% and 43%held a bachelor’s or a master’s degree,

respectively, in computer science and 18% and 22% held a bachelor’s or a master’s degree,

respectively, in engineering, leaving more than 45% with bachelor’s degrees in other fields and

35% with master’s degrees in other fields (Table 4, Panel B). A clear implication of this finding

is that inflows from other fields, in addition to net new degrees in computer science and

engineering, is an important source of supply for the domestic market for IT professionals.

        For foreign-born IT workers, the concentration of formal training in computer science

and engineering is much more marked. In 2010, 82% of foreign-born IT workers held a

bachelor’s degree in either computer science or engineering, while 81% held a master’s degree in

one of these two areas (Table 4 Panel B). This finding suggests that U.S. IT employers select

highly skilled immigrants, as computer science and engineering skills are among the most

“portable” skills, and perhaps that they find it easier to evaluate nontraditional degree credentials

among natives than among foreign-born. The finding may also reflect the greater proportion of

Science and Engineering (S&E) degree programs abroad than in the U.S. For example, the rate

of S&E degree awards among all first university degrees is about 50% in China, 35% in India,

and 31% in the U.S. (Science and Engineering Indicators, 2014; Appendix Table 2-37).5




        5
           S&E fields include physical and biological sciences, mathematics and computer sciences, agricultural
sciences, social and behavioral sciences, and engineering in Science and Engineering Indicators, 2014. The figure
for India is based on enrollment numbers in 2010 and does not cover social sciences (Government of India,
Education Statistics at a Glance 2010–11, Table 12).

                                                                                                                    9
3. Policy and Institutional Context

        The factors that determine the flow of high-skill workers to the U.S. labor market include

the quality and quantity of educational institutions in the home country, opportunities for post-

secondary study in the U.S., relative labor market opportunities, and U.S. visa policies. In this

section we focus on the role of U.S. visa policies and its potential behavioral implications. In

particular, we note that U.S. visa policies may affect not just decisions to participate in the U.S.

labor market and the type and duration of employment, but also educational investments of high-

skill foreign-born workers.6 Work-visa caps may encourage foreign-born job-seekers to access

the US labor market by entering as students instead.

        Until about 1990, the primary source of high-skill immigrants to the U.S. labor market

was via permanent residency or “green card” provisions. But in recent decades, avenues to

temporary residency of high-skill individuals from abroad – via both temporary work status

(primarily H-1B) and student status (primarily F visas) – has become a significant step on the

pathway to permanent residency.7



Permanent Residents

        Some degree of preference for high-skill immigrants has long been a part of U.S.

immigration policy. The Displaced Persons Act of 1948 established a pathway to permanent

residency for high-skill immigrants and gave priority to displaced persons “possessing special


        6
           For jobs most likely to engage foreign-born workers, permanent residence status or appropriate visa
permitting work are most likely required given the difficulty of formal sector transactions with undocumented
workers. While nearly 75% of unauthorized immigrants (compared to about 26% of all immigrants) are estimated
to hold a high school degree or less, only about 15% are estimated to hold a BA degree or higher (Passell and Cohn,
2010).
         7
           Permanent residents may also become naturalized citizens; typically, permanent residents may apply for
citizenship five years after attaining permanent residency. While it is possible to enter the U.S. directly with
permanent residency status, Lowell (2010) estimates that 90% of employment-based and 55% of family-based visa
holders move up from temporary visa status.

                                                                                                                 10
educational, scientific and technological or professional qualifications” (Tichenor, 2012). The

Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 set national quotas, but reserved 50% of each nation’s

quota for high-skill immigrants.

         Employment endorsement is one of the four avenues for permanent immigration

identified by the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 (Hart-Celler Act), which replaced the

country-wise quotas with a preference system focusing on skills and family ties.8 Employment-

based immigration generally follows a transition from another visa type. Indeed, in 2011, 90% of

all employment-based green cards were designated an “adjustment of status” rather than new

entry (Handbook of Immigration Statistics, 2011). However, the capacity to enter the U.S. as a

permanent resident through an employment-based green card is quite limited: only 140,000 such

visas are offered each year.9 An employment-based green card also has significant requirements

for employers, who must certify their firm’s inability to hire a qualified citizen or permanent

resident for the employee’s position and file an immigration petition (form I-140) on the

employee’s behalf.

         Beyond employer certification, education and skills play a key role in determining

preference groupings for permanent visa priority. The highest priority is reserved for those with

extraordinary capabilities, including researchers, professors, and multinational executives. Next

in line are those who have advanced degrees or whose abilities benefit U.S. interests (e.g.,

physicians practicing in designated underserved areas). Third in priority are skilled workers,

college-educated professionals, and unskilled workers. Two lower levels of priority are also


         8
           The four main avenues for permanent residency are: family reunification, employment,
humanitarian/refugee interests, and diversity (Martin, 2012). Family-based immigration is the largest channel for
immigration. Immediate relatives (parents, spouses, minor children) are admitted without limit, while there is a cap
of 480,000 for other family-based immigration. Some high-skill immigrants are admitted as children via this
channel, completing their pre-collegiate and post-secondary training in the U.S.
         9
           Less than one-half of the employment based visas have gone to workers themselves, as this total includes
dependents of these immigrants in the employment-based visa cap (Orrenius and Zavodny, 2010).

                                                                                                                  11
designated.10 Of all the employment-based green cards awarded in 2011, 66% were issued to

foreign-born workers who met one of the first two priorities, and 92% went to those who met one

of the first three.

         Adding to the complexity of this system, visas for any given country are capped at 7% of

the annual U.S. limit for family- and employment-based immigration. This rule, intended to

allow immigration from a variety of places,11 causes considerable lags for those coming from

China, India, Mexico, and the Philippines who are not in the highest priority category. Martin

(2012) notes that Indian professionals, entering under lower priorities, have had to wait between

5 and 10 years. In March 2014, Indians hoping to acquire visas who fell into the second priority

category had waited since November of 2004, while those in the third priority had waited more

than 10 years from September 2003.12

         Constraints on employment-based permanent residency opportunities may have several

behavioral implications. First, high-skill foreign-born workers may face constraints in their

capacity to stay in the U.S. or to switch jobs. These constraints are most likely to bind for those

from countries like India and China and those with lower educational attainment or priority

rankings. Lowell and Avato (2013) provide some evidence that those with temporary work visas

tend to face substantial earnings penalties in S&E occupations. While Mithas and Lucas (2010)

demonstrate a similar result for temporary work visa holders in the IT industry, who earn less

than green card holders. Kandilov (2007) and Mukhopadhyay and Oxborrow (2011) estimate



         10
             Additional “priorities” include: Fourth priority is given to individuals who have specialized jobs such as
physicians, religious workers, and international organization employees. Last priority goes to entrepreneurs who
invest at least $500,000 to create and sustain at least 10 permanent jobs. See
http://travel.state.gov/visa/immigrants/types/types_1323.html for details.
          11
             U.S. State Department. (May 2013) “The Operation of the Immigrant Numerical Control System.”
Retrieved from http://www.travel.state.gov/pdf/Immigrant%20Visa%20Control%20System_operation%20of.pdf
          12
             U.S. State Department. (March 2014) Visa Bulletin for March 2014, Volume IX Number 66. Retrieved
from http://travel.state.gov/content/visas/english/law-and-policy/bulletin/2014/visa-bulletin-for-march-2014.html

                                                                                                                     12
that the acquisition of a green card increases earnings by up to 18%.13 Second, those with the

highest returns to staying may make investments in advanced degrees in order to increase their

priority status for a permanent visa. In addition to the traditional employment-based pathway to

permanent residency for high-skill immigrants, Congress has occasionally given special

treatment to foreign groups that likely included a disproportionate share of high-skill

immigrants.14



Temporary Work and Student Visas

      For those without permanent U.S. residency, two other possibilities for immigration and

entry into IT and high-skill occupations are the H-1B visa for temporary workers and the F visa

for students. Clearly, the direct path to employment as a temporary worker is through the H-1B

program, while an indirect route to either a temporary or permanent work visa is through a

student visa that yields an in-demand degree. It is critical to understand both options, as together

they represent the dominant pathway to entrance to the U.S. labor market among foreign born.

Indeed, in 2010, temporary work visas (H-1B) accounted for about 39% of the first visa status of

IT workers ages 25-34 and student visas (F) accounted for about 35%, with these shares

markedly smaller in older cohorts for whom entry via permanent residency was far more

common (Table 5 Panel B).

         13
             Lan (2012) studies the impact of the Chinese Student Protection Act on the labor market performance of
Chinese doctorate students and finds that the provision of green cards increases earnings and the probability to be
employed in non-postdoc positions.
          14
             The Chinese Student Protection Act (CSPA, 1992) allowed Chinese nationals (including students) who
were present in the U.S. at the time of the Tiananmen Square violence in 1989 to apply for legal permanent resident
status. Of the nearly 50,000 individuals making the transition to legal permanent resident status under CSPA, at least
60% had initial visa classifications indicating high-skill characteristics and about 40% held student visas (Orrenius,
Zavodny, Kerr, 2012). Notably, nearly all of these students would have been graduate students given the trivial
number of undergraduate students from China enrolled at U.S. institutions in the 1980s. A similar country specific
program is the Soviet Scientists Immigration Act (1992) allowed permanent visa status to 750 scientists from the
USSR and former Baltic states. Note that the Soviet Scientists Immigration Act is distinguished from the CSPA in
that it applies mostly to those who have completed post-secondary education.

                                                                                                                   13
The H-1B: Temporary Work

         The H-1 visa designation dates to the passage of the 1952 Immigration and Nationality

Act and is intended to provide an employment window for aliens of “distinguished merit and

ability.” The original expectation of the H-1 designation was that residency in the U.S. would be

temporary. The Immigration and Naturalization Act of 1990 transformed the H-1 visa program

into what is now known as the H-1B program, which includes a “dual purpose provision” that

creates the potential for workers to transition to permanent residency.15 H-1B visas are valid for

three years with the potential for a three-year extension.16 H-1B visas are employer-specific and

require the employer to post a substantial application fee and certify that the foreign employee

will be paid the prevailing wage.17 Workers may enter the U.S. directly on an H-1B visa or may

transfer to an H-1B from another visa classification such as an F student visa. In 2012, about

45% of initial H-1B visa beneficiaries had transferred from another visa classification (U.S.

Citizenship and Immigration Services, 2013).




         15
             By statute, H-1B visas are “… are reserved for high-skill workers, requiring that the employee be in a
specialty occupation, defined as one that requires “theoretical and practical application of a body of highly
specialized knowledge and attainment of a bachelor’s or higher, or its equivalent …” While the H-1B is the most
widely recognized temporary visa, there is a substantial portfolio of other temporary work visa options which can
connect foreign-born high skill workers to the U.S. labor market. Appendix Table 1 of Bound and Turner (2013)
summarizes these alternative types. Other temporary visa categories include the L-1 visa for Intracompany
Transfers, the O-1 visa for “Workers with Extraordinary Ability or Achievement,” the TN visa for NAFTA
Professional Workers, and the E-1 visa for Treaty Traders and Treaty Investors. Behind H-1B issuances, L-1
Intracompany Transfer visas are the most issued of the other temporary worker visa categories. In addition, there is
some evidence that research universities increasingly use the J-1 category for foreign post-docs and visiting research
scientists rather than the more costly H-1B visa. While occupational categories typically using J-1 visas include
physicians, (including medical residents), teachers, and visiting scholars, the largest single group of J-1 visa
recipients is foreign nationals traveling to the U.S. for summer work or travel – comprising 31% of the 2012 total.
          16
             In cases where an H-1B holder has applied for a “green card” or permanent residences status but has not
achieved current priority date for processing, they may receive a three-year H-1B extension, following from the
American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000.
          17
             The minimum application fees total $3575 in the most recent year and are somewhat larger for firms with
more than 25 employees (an additional $750 per employee) and cases requesting expedited processing ($1225 per
employee).

                                                                                                                   14
         The annual number of H-1B visas is currently capped at 65,000, though visas issued to

individuals employed at colleges and universities (e.g., researchers and faculty) or non-profit

research organizations are exempt from the cap. During the early 1990s the cap was not reached,

but after the cap became binding in the mid-1990s it was raised to 115,000 in 1999 and then to

195,000 in 2001. This limit was maintained until 2004, when the H-1B cap reverted to 65,000

once again, and has been binding ever since. However, also in 2004 the Visa Reform Act18

authorized that an extra 20,000 H-1B visas be reserved for foreign workers holding advanced

degrees from U.S. universities, which may have encouraged foreign students to pursue advanced

degrees from U.S. universities to increase the likelihood of eventually obtaining an H-1B visa.19



The F Student Visa

      Given the constraints on permanent and temporary work visas, the U.S. higher education

system may function as an important pathway for the foreign-born to gain access to the U.S.

labor market. Unlike H-1B employment visas, which are subject to a numerical cap and require a

costly petition from an employer, visas for postsecondary study in the U.S. are effectively

unlimited in number and do not require expensive institutional intervention.

      The full-time student visa (F-1), which is the vehicle of entry for most degree programs, is

issued to foreign-born students accepted by any certified U.S. higher education institution.20 As


         18
             U.S. Government Accountability Office, “H-1B Visa Program: Reforms are Needed to Minimize the
Risks and Costs of the Current Program,” January, 2011: http://www.gao.gov/assets/320/314501.pdf
         19
            In addition, country-specific free trade agreements designate 1,400 H-1B1 visas for Chilean nationals and
5,400 H-1B1 visas for Singapore nationals. It is notable that neither country-specific visa quota has been filled since
inception: the total number of H-1B1 visas for both Chile and Singapore is less than 1,000.
         20
            The mechanics of receiving an F visa are as follows. Foreign students who wish to study in the United
States must first apply to and be accepted by a Student and Exchange Visitors Program (SEVP)-certified school.
The school them provides the form Form I-20A-B, Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant (F-1) Student Status-
For Academic and Language Students. The student’s information given on this form is recorded in the SEVIS
database. After submitting the I-20 form, students are required to submit the SEVIS I-901 fee. For F-1 visas, this
amount is currently $200 (U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Website, “Fact Sheet: I-901 SEVIS

                                                                                                                    15
depicted in Figure 2, the number of annually issued F-1 visas has risen sharply and steadily since

the late 1980s, with the notable exception of a non-trivial decline following both the contraction

in the U.S. IT sector and the events of 9/11, which generated greater administrative hurdles to

obtaining student visas. Students from Asia contribute the majority of students on F-1 visas, with

the number from China increasing very dramatically over the last decade (Figure 2).

        Entry through the F visa program has the potential to improve access to the U.S. labor

market by allowing for a limited-period work permission through the Optional Practical Training

(OPT) program, which is not subject to a quota. The OPT program, available to international

students who have attended a certified U.S. university on a full-time basis for at least one

academic year, extends the F visa status for one year for work in jobs related to the eligible

student’s major area of study.21 In 2008, Congress revised the OPT program by limiting the

possible unemployed period to a maximum of 90 days, and by extending the duration of the visa

from 12 to 29 months for those in eligible STEM fields.22 Our analyses indicate that from 1999

to 2009, about 30% of foreign-born students initially entered the U.S. labor market under the

OPT program. 23




Fee for F, M and J Nonimmigrant Students and Exchange Visitors.”
http://www.ice.gov/sevis/factsheet/090104_fs.htm). After receiving the SEVIS I-901 receipt, the student can apply
for a visa at any US Embassy. To maintain the F visa, an individual must refrain from unauthorized employment
and maintain a full course load.
          21
             The mechanics of adjusting to OPT program are as follows: a foreign student who wishes to work in the
U.S. labor market must apply to the Designated School Office of his/her school within the 60 days of graduation.
Designated School Officials renews his/her Form I-20, by making appropriate notation in SEVIS, then send it out to
the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), with the application fee paid by the student. The amount of
the fee is currently $380. When the Employment Authorization Document (Form I-765) is issued by USCIS, the
student becomes eligible to work.
          22
             A further administrative change extended the number of designated STEM programs from about 200 to
nearly 400 in May 2011 and June 2012. For further details of the program, and the impact of these policy changes
on the stay rate and labor market outcomes of foreign students, see Demirci (2013).
          23
             To find the transition rates of foreign students into U.S. labor market through the OPT program, we
compare the number of OPT beneficiaries in a year to the number of foreign graduates of U.S. colleges in the
previous year. From 1999 to 2009, this transition rate has been around 0.3, which implies that three tenths of
students enter the U.S. labor market initially under the OPT status (Figure 6).

                                                                                                                16
        In addition to the OPT program opportunity, a U.S. degree versus a foreign degree

confers other potential advantages to entering the U.S. labor market. These include an

information advantage, as U.S. employers may be more knowledgeable about and confident in

hiring individuals with U.S. degrees, and an access advantage, as employers may find it more

convenient to interview U.S.-based students or graduates. Furthermore, universities screen

applicants before offering them admission, which is information useful to the employers and a

good signal for prospective job-seekers. For their part, foreign-borns who want to work in the

U.S. may recognize and exploit these advantages. U.S. employment is especially attractive to

those from developing countries like India and China, where the same college degrees/skill sets

tend to yield lower wages than they would in the U.S. (Clemens, Montenegro and Pritchett

2008; Clemens, 2013).

        Although student visas can ease access to U.S. labor markets, demand is restricted by

the prerequisite skills for admission and the capacity to finance the course of study. Because

costs of attendance differ across program levels (BA, MA, PhD) and types, we expect – and

observe – that the feasibility of student visas differs across country of origin and by level of

study. Also, the demand for post-secondary education in the U.S. may be influenced by both the

option value of U.S. education and the lack of educational opportunities in home countries. In the

next two sections, we assemble evidence from U.S. higher education and labor market data that

is consistent with the option value interpretation in the context of the IT industry from 1993 to

2010.




                                                                                                    17
4. U.S. Enrollment and Degree Attainment: Cyclicality and Foreign Expansion

         The last three decades have seen substantial changes in the number of foreign students

coming to the U.S. for post-secondary education, the primary countries of origin, and the

destination institutions, as established in data collected by the U.S. Department of Education

(DOE) and the Institute of International Education (IIE).24 While there is a rising trend in foreign

enrollment since the 1980s, computer science degrees for foreign-born students closely follow

labor market cycles.



Overall Trend in Foreign Enrollment

         Figure 3 shows total enrollment of graduate and undergraduate students from abroad at

U.S. colleges and universities from 1954 to 2011.25 Since 1980, the average annual growth rate

in foreign enrollment for graduate programs has been somewhat greater, at 1.9%, than the

average rate for undergraduate programs, but since 2005 enrollment has grown faster for

undergraduate (4.6%) than for graduate ( 2.5%) programs. While foreign students represent a

relatively small share of undergraduate enrollment (3.3% in our sample of 4-year public and

private non-profit institutions in 2011), they are a much larger share of enrollment in graduate

programs. According to the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Survey of Earned Doctorates

data, temporary visa holders accounted for 29% of all doctorate degrees awarded in 2011, 34%

of doctorates in S&E fields, and 56% of doctorates in engineering (Science and Engineering

Indicators, 2014).


         24
             The DOE distinguishes enrollment and degrees conferred for all students at the level of the institution,
further disaggregating by level of enrollment and field of degrees. The IIE has gathered data on the internationally
mobile student population since 1948, and provides counts of students by country of origin studying in the U.S. at
the undergraduate and graduate levels. Unfortunately, data providing enrollment by country of origin at the
institution level is not available.
          25
             The year corresponds to the fall year of the academic year. For example, 1954 corresponds to the
1954/55 academic year.

                                                                                                                    18
        In the most recent decade, the post 9/11 dip in enrollment is clearly evident, and would be

more marked if we were able to disaggregate by new entrants. While it is often conjectured that

the more stringent visa requirements initiated after 9/11, along with a perceived hostile

environment, stifled foreign enrollment, some evidence indicates that the decline started before

9/11 in response to contracting economic opportunities in the U.S.26 Still, in the period since the

collapse of the financial markets in 2008, enrollment of foreign students in U.S. higher education

has continued on an upward trajectory, rising 14.6% in the 2008-11 interval among

undergraduates and 6.0% among graduate students. As we show below, persistent growth is

driven by countries less affected by the recent global financial crisis, such as China.



Trends by Country of Origin

        The relatively steady increase in the enrollment numbers for all foreign students disguises

substantial variation by region and country of origin. Table 7 presents leading source countries

for U.S. enrollment in 1993 and 2011 for undergraduate and graduate levels. As shown in the

top panel, China led the way in 2011 undergraduate enrollment, with nearly 75,000 students,

followed by South Korea (38,232) and Saudi Arabia (14,344). Including India, Canada,

Vietnam, and Japan, the top 7 sending countries account for about 56% of total undergraduate

foreign enrollment in 2011. This pattern of enrollment differs markedly from 1993, when Japan

was the leading source country and China did not crack the top 7 sending countries.




        26
           Recessionary conditions which limited U.S. job opportunities and continued growth in higher education
abroad placed downward pressure on demand for U.S. degree programs. Lowell and Khadka (2011) document the
post 9/11 decline and find a 20% decrease in F visas issued between 2001 and 2002, a more modest decline in 2003,
and then a period of rebound beginning in 2004. Lowell and Khadka emphasize that, consistent with retrenchment
in temporary student enrollment in the mid-1980s, visa declines are most closely aligned with changes in economic
conditions, rises in real tuition costs at U.S. universities, and eroding post-degree job prospects in the U.S.

                                                                                                              19
       The bottom panel of Table 7 shows that China and India led the way sending graduate

students to the U.S. in both 1993 and 2011. Notably, these two countries have experienced

appreciably growth over the 1993-2011 interval, with U.S. graduate enrollment increasing by a

factor of 2.4 for China and by a factor of 2.1 for India. The nature of Chinese and Indian

enrollment at the graduate level has changed somewhat over time, shifting from enrollment

nearly exclusively at the PhD level to enrollment dispersed between PhD and master’s programs

and professional degrees. Participation among students from Taiwan in U.S. graduate education

y dropped dramatically (about 45%) between 1993 and 2011, perhaps reflecting some maturation

in the university structure in Taiwan.

       Country-of-origin participation in U.S. higher education has changed over time and by

undergraduate and graduate enrollment, as shown in Figure 4. For countries whose development

trajectories have been steep over the period, such as China and India, evidence suggests that

growth in enrollment at the doctorate level precedes growth at the undergraduate or master’s

levels. A significant reason for this may be that PhD programs in the U.S offer substantial

financial aid (in terms of teaching and research positions) unavailable to foreign students at the

pre-doctorate level. Yet, as we discuss in detail below, doctorate education is a relatively small

component in graduate education. For affluent western economies with well-developed home

country education systems, such as Germany and Canada, undergraduate and graduate

enrollment are near the same scale and exhibit modest variation over our period of analysis.

       In understanding the demand for enrollment at different levels of U.S. education, it is

important to consider the barriers created by cost of attendance. Not only must foreign students

pay international rates for tuition and fees, but must demonstration the ongoing capacity to meet

all costs of attendance in order to obtain the F visa. While these costs may be prohibitive for



                                                                                                     20
foreign-born undergraduates without generous home country support or affluent parents, 27

foreign doctoral-level students of modest means can take advantage of the substantial financial

support often available for U.S. doctoral study. Overall, the IIE data show that about 82% of

foreign undergraduate students finance their studies through “personal and family funds,”28

while only about 5% of foreign doctoral students rely on their own sources as the primary means

of educational support.



Degrees Conferred: Trends by Field for U.S. and Foreign Students

         Examining degree outcomes provides an indication of the skills that foreign-born and

native students bring to the labor market – either in the U.S. or elsewhere. Foreign-born students

are more likely than their U.S.-born counterparts to choose S&E fields of study, and they

comprise a substantial share of the graduates from U.S. programs in these fields.

          Figure 5 focuses on the fields of computer science (CS) and engineering, showing trends

over time in degrees awarded at the bachelor’s, master’s, and PhD levels. A first point of

observation is that in 2012 more than 40% of the degrees awarded at the graduate level (master’s

and PhD) were to temporary residents, demonstrating a substantial increase since the mid-1980s,

while degrees awarded to temporary residents remain a fairly modest share of bachelor’s degrees

in these fields.

         In particular, there has been a marked increase in the number of master’s degrees

awarded to temporary residents in these fields since the mid-1990s. The number of master’s



         27
             To be sure, a small number of the “super-elite” colleges and universities in the U.S. are able to offer
need-blind admission and full financial aid to international undergraduate students; these institutions include, MIT,
Harvard, Princeton, Dartmouth, Williams, and Middlebury, with most of these institutions opening aid to
international students around the year 2000. See http://www.edupass.org/finaid/undergraduate.phtml for a list of
universities that offer significant financial aid (both need-based and merit, but not athletic) to international students.
          28
             Open Doors 2007 “Table 15 International Students by Primary Source of Funding 2005/06 & 2006/07.”

                                                                                                                       21
degrees in CS awarded to foreign-born students increased from 5,007 in 1995 to 12,087 in 2012,

while the number in engineering increased from 9,699 to 17,583. The increase in master’s

degrees in CS and engineering accounts for 37% of the total increase in master’s degrees

awarded in this period and dwarfs the increase in the number of PhD and bachelor’s degrees

awarded to temporary residents over this period.29 The importance of master’s degrees awarded

to the foreign born from U.S. institutions to the supply IT workers is also apparent in Table 6,

which shows an estimated 63% (122,619 in total) of foreign-born master’s degree recipients

from U.S. universities had student visas as their first visa, relative to about 21% (or 30,802) of

bachelor’s recipients.

        An examination of the institutional sources of master’s degrees in CS awarded to

temporary residents provides some insight into the nature of adjustment in the U.S. higher

education institutions. First, there is substantial concentration of foreign students in a relatively

modest number of programs, with 10 institutions awarding nearly 25% of the master’s-level CS

degrees earned by temporary residents (U.S. Department of Education, 2011). The largest

producers include: Carnegie Mellon University (464), Illinois Institute of Technology (397),

University of Southern California (377), Columbia University, (292) and University of Texas at

Dallas (214). This list represents considerable heterogeneity in institutional ranking – only one

(Carnegie Mellon) was ranked in the top-5 for CS in 2014 by U.S. News & World Report30 – as

well as the mix of public and private control, suggesting that it may be difficult to make strong


        29
            While the number of Master’s degrees in all fields to temporary students increased from 48,756 to
89,145; the number of Master’s degrees in CS and engineering increased from 14,711 to 29,670. Thus the increase
in CS and engineering, in the amount of 14,959, accounts for 37% of the total increase in Master’s degrees. On the
other hand, PhD degrees to temporary residents in CS and engineering increased by 2,728, and BA degrees
increased by 2,886. Both of these figures are substantially smaller than the increase in Master’s degrees.
         30
            See: http://grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-science-
schools/computer-science-rankings The most highly ranked programs in computer science are: Carnegie Mellon
University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford University, University of California—Berkeley, and
University of Illinois—Urbana-Champaign.

                                                                                                                 22
statements about the qualitative characteristics of CS degree receipt in the U.S. relative to foreign

countries.

        Much research has examined the adjustment of choice of major to changes in labor

market conditions. A classic set of papers, including Freeman (1971, 1975, 1976) and Ryoo and

Rosen (2004), models student enrollment as functions of their expectations of future earnings.

These “closed economy” modeling approaches, in which the labor supply adjustments in a

particular occupation are achieved by the transfer of workers from another occupation and the

entrance of new workers from the domestic educational pipeline, were quite successful in

predicting the supply–response in choice of major to demand shocks in S&E fields. Examining

the response to recent U.S. IT booms in the supply of bachelor’s degrees, Bound, Braga, Golden

and Turner (2013) identified cycles of response with an approximately four-year lag, which

produced peaks in 1986 and 2003. They found undergraduate degree adjustments to demand

shocks more muted in the more recent period, owing to the flow of foreign-born high-skill

workers into the IT labor pool.31 Yet, as the U.S. higher education market is unquestionably

“international” – particularly at the graduate level – an open question concerns the cyclicality of

the foreign student enrollment.

        Figure 5 shows that the share of temporary residents in each degree category appears to

demonstrate more cyclicality than does the total level of degrees awarded. For example, the share

of master’s degrees awarded to temporary residents decreased by 15% in CS and by 10% in

engineering between 2001 and 2007, before rebounding as the market picked up in recent years.




        31
           Between 1975 and the local peak in 1986, CS and Electrical Engineering (EE) undergraduate degrees
increased by 446%, from 15,285 to 68,307 based on data from the Department of Education’s annual “Earned
Degrees Conferred Surveys”. Then, from 1995 to 2004, degree awards increased by a more modest – though still
appreciable – 186%, from 42,348 to 78,747.

                                                                                                               23
This greater cyclicality is consistent with the notion that foreign students are using a master’s

education in the U.S. to enter the labor market.



5. Foreign Born Degree Recipients and the U.S. Labor Market

       Evaluating the impact of U.S. post-secondary degree acquisition on the U.S. labor market

depends markedly on whether U.S. education – particularly among temporary visa recipients –

leads to long-term work in the U.S. Our evidence, presented in more detail below, makes two

striking points. First, “stay rates” for degree recipients are extraordinarily high – much higher

than for other temporary visa recipients. Second, not only do we observe marked differences in

cross-country flows into U.S. degree programs (as discussed in the prior section), but we see

marked differences across countries in pathways to entering the labor market and in labor market

performance.



Coming and Going

       Gauging how country of origin differs with the location of highest degree receipt and

how degree receipt links to persistence in the U.S. labor market helps to model the determinants

of the decision among the foreign born to invest in U.S. higher education.

     Persistence in the U.S. labor market following degree receipt is hard to measure. Here we

present data from several sources that provide a sense of both high overall stay-rates and of high

propensities to stay among advanced degree recipients. To begin, we consider the likelihood that

those studying in the U.S. transfer from F visas to either permanent residency or temporary work

permits (H-1B). While data are limited, in 2000, the most recent year in which the Department

of Homeland Security (DHS) released the transition tables, 16,161 international students



                                                                                                    24
adjusted from an F student visa to a permanent residency status , which comprises about 16% of

the total number of international students graduating in 1999 (Yearbook of Immigration

Statistics, 2001).32 Using administrative data, Lowell and Avato (2013) estimate that

approximately 31,000 H-1Bs were awarded to foreign students in 2003, a total that represents

about 40% of the prior year’s entire graduating class of international students earning master’s

and PhD degrees, and about 90% of all foreign graduates in science and engineering. An

alternative measure, shown in Figure 6, presents the ratio of initial H-1B visas awarded to those

who have been in the U.S. under another visa classification to the number of international

graduates of U.S. universities. Our calculation indicates that, on average, about a half of each

graduating class of international students, 1999-2009, changed from student (F) visa status to H-

1B status.

        For doctorate recipients, administrative data merges provide a much better measure of

stay rates. Tabulations conducted by the Social Security Administration for Michael Finn (2012)

link the NSF’s Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED), a census of those receiving PhDs from U.S.

institutions, to Social Security Administration data to identify how many of the foreign-born on

temporary or permanent visas at the time they received their PhD continue to work in the U.S. at

intervals of one, two, five, and ten years after degree receipt. Finn estimates that, in 2009, 64%

of those who received their PhD five years earlier and 66% of those who received their PhD 10

years earlier continued to live in the U.S.

        Stay rates for doctorate recipients tend to be somewhat higher in STEM fields than in

other degree areas, and have been trending up over recent years. They also vary by country of

origin, the strength of the degree holder’s ties to the US, and their academic ability (indicated by


        32
           This measure includes all types of transitions to permanent residency including those based on family
green cards.

                                                                                                                   25
fellowship receipt) (Grogger and Hanson 2013). Focusing solely on PhD holders in STEM fields

with temporary visas, Finn finds that 89% of those from China and 79% from India remain in the

U.S. five years after receiving their PhD.33

         Analyzing data from the National Survey of College Graduates, we also find considerable

cross-country variation in U.S. degree receipt by educational level and, among high-skill foreign-

born U.S. workers. This variation can be related to the likelihood that foreign-born degree-

holding workers used the U.S. education market as a pathway to enter the U.S. labor market.

Table 8 presents distributions for highest degree receipt and the proportions earning these

degrees in the U.S. for foreign-born high-skilled workers from four origin areas: Europe,

Canada, India and China. We note that U.S. workers from China are the most educated in terms

of degree attainment, followed by workers from India. In 2010, 68% of Chinese-origin workers

in all high-skill jobs and 81% in the IT sector held master’s or PhD degrees; among those from

India, 56% of workers overall and in the IT sector held advanced degrees. Comparable numbers

for immigrants from Europe or Canada are appreciably lower (Table 8).

         Workers from China are also distinguished by the extent to which the U.S. education

market is the source of individuals’ highest degree. As shown in the right side of Table 8, among

master’s degree holders from China currently working in all high-skill U.S. jobs, 83% to 86%

received their highest degree from a U.S. institution across all years – and these proportions are

higher in the IT sector. In contrast, among European-origin U.S. workers with advanced degrees

in 2010, only 27% of those with a terminal master’s degree and 36% of those with a PhD had



         33
             However, for a number of other countries like Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, Finn finds 5-year stay
rates under 50%. An inference following Bound, Turner, Walsh (2009) is that persistence rates reflect market
forces, not just visa availability. Doctorate recipients from high-income countries with well-established universities
may face better home-country options than those from low-income countries. As a result, those from Western
Europe and Canada may not choose to stay permanently in the U.S. unless they obtain employment in top research
universities or labs.

                                                                                                                    26
received these in the U.S. That U.S. post-secondary degree receipt is a pathway to entry is

validated by review of the data on visa at entry by country of origin. Overall, about 55% of all

high-skill Chinese-origin U.S. workers (and about 64% of those who entered the U.S. on other

than a permanent visa) first came to the U.S. on a student visa (authors’ tabulations from NSCG:

2010).

         An implication, then, is that entry on a temporary student visa is likely to be a strong

proxy for persistence in the U.S. labor market. Without identifying causality, it is useful to

consider the multiple mechanisms through which a U.S. education may lead to labor market

persistence. First, self-selection may play an important role: that is, individuals with the most to

gain from access to the U.S. labor market may be the most likely to invest in U.S. higher

education, which comes at a non-trivial cost of both tuition and forgone earnings. Second, a

higher education from the U.S. may be more valued by U.S. employers than one from abroad.

U.S. employers may feel less sure about the quality of programs or the skill sets of graduates

from foreign institutions. U.S. higher education credentials may serve as a low-cost screening

function – helping firms to identify high-skill/high-quality candidates when the costs of vetting

candidates from less familiar origins are likely to be prohibitive.



Valuing Skills: Differences by Degree Location

         How country of origin and location of post-secondary education correspond to earnings

in the U.S. labor market helps explain the incentives for immigration and degree completion in

the U.S. We continue to focus on those employed in the IT sector because this set of occupations

encompass well-defined skills subject to broadly similar demand shocks, but use the overall

labor market for college-educated workers as a point of comparison.



                                                                                                    27
         We consider the earnings for foreign-born relative to native workers with the same

degree qualifications and the differences associated with the location of highest degree (U.S.

versus abroad) and timing of U.S. entry, distinguishing between those entering as young children

and those entering as adults.34 We use data from both the NSCG (1993, 2003 and 2010), which

has the advantage of precisely measured location and timing of degrees, and the American

Community Survey (ACS), which provides more limited education coverage but a much larger

sample.

         Focusing on the wage differentials in the high-skill sector for those arriving in the U.S.

after high school, we analyze earnings differentials between those who completed all of their

post-secondary training abroad and those completing their highest degree in the states. The sign

and magnitude of this coefficient is indicative of several factors.

    Perceived quality of U.S. versus foreign post-secondary education. While it is widely

     acknowledged that the U.S. universities represent a disproportionate share of the most

     highly-ranked options at the doctorate level, the extent to which undergraduate or master’s

     preparation abroad differs from the U.S. is far from clear.

    Improved job search: Foreigners graduating from U.S. institutions may be in a better position

     to search for U.S. jobs than are those living abroad, and this advantage is likely to show up

     both in terms of increase employment prospects and higher wages.

    Better employer screening: Employers may be better able to evaluate transcripts and

     academic performance at U.S. universities relative to foreign institutions, while also finding

     degree information to be more trustworthy when presented by U.S. institutions.

34
   We find that foreign-born individuals who arrive in the U.S. at relatively young ages earn a labor market premium
relative to those arriving at older ages, on the order of 0.17-0.18 log points, while also garnering a premium relative
to natives among IT workers. This is a net-effect which includes the potential for substantial assimilation and the
likely selection by family circumstances. The same broad pattern holds for all college educated workers. We report
parallel regressions for all workers in the Appendix.

                                                                                                                    28
   Foreign-born individuals entering the U.S. labor market directly may be “selected”

    differently from those continuing on from the post-secondary system, with the former group

    having to be more distinguished in quality to gain work in the U.S.

While we are unable to distinguish these effects empirically, we are able to provide an estimate

of the net effect. Among foreign-born IT workers, those who received their highest degree

abroad earned – on average in recent years – a modest premium over those who received their

highest degree in the U.S. The magnitude of this effect differs somewhat over samples and time

periods analyzed. First, in the NSCG, which requires three years of residence in the U.S. by

sample construction, the effect changes from a negative coefficient of -0.0607 in 1993 (in log-

points, with the negative sign indicating foreign-borns who received their highest degree from

abroad earned less than foreign-borns who earned their highest degree from the U.S.) to positive

coefficients of 0.0622 and 0.0956 in 2003 and 2010, respectively (see Panel B of Table 9).

       Examining the ACS over the last decade, we find a differential between degrees granted

abroad and in the U.S. of -0.0095 for the 2001-2010 period and 0.0242 for 2008-2010. This

range of coefficients suggests no difference or a modest positive earnings advantage for the

foreign-born in being educated abroad. That these modest effects shifted over time suggests that

the composition of foreign-born IT professionals by country of origin changed somewhat over

this period, along with the perceived quality of degree receipt in the U.S. and abroad.

       It is worth noting that these results for the IT sector are somewhat different from those

found in the high-skill labor market at large, where both parallel regressions and evidence from

prior research (e.g. Zeng and Xie, 2004) indicate a substantial premium for U.S. relative to

foreign post-secondary education for foreign-born workers. Indeed, we find an overall penalty

for foreign education of nearly -.233 in the most recent NSCG and about -.172 log points in the



                                                                                                   29
ACS over the most recent decade (see top panel of Table 9). 35 The implication is that, across all

high-skill occupations, the foreign born with U.S. degrees out earn not only other immigrants

with degrees from abroad but also US-born workers. This result could be explained by U.S.

employers applying greater selectivity in hiring the foreign born, or by their perception that post-

secondary education received by U.S.-trained immigrants is of higher quality than education

received abroad.36

         Two factors may help explain the difference in results found in all job sectors versus in

IT occupations. First, location of degree may matter less in IT fields than in other occupations.

Second, the changing composition of foreign-born IT professionals by country of origin may

have an effect. Hunt (2013) and others note that the returns to English language fluency –

associated with a U.S. post-secondary experience – may be smaller in IT than in other fields,

which could dampen the wage advantage of a U.S. degree in IT jobs. Moreover, consistent with

the lack of a penalty for IT workers, Peri and Sparber (2009) suggest that U.S. natives and

foreign-borns educated in U.S. institutions may find it easier to transfer their skills from IT fields

to management positions and other occupations.

         Country-specific factors may also play a role in the differential effects of a U.S.

education among all foreign-born high-skill workers versus foreign-born IT workers. Using data

from the NSCG and the ACS (Table 10), we disaggregate the foreign-born place of education

effect by country of origin. It is striking that foreign-born IT workers educated in European


         35
             Using the NSCG allows for the observation of field of study in addition to location of degree. As shown
in the additional rows of Table 9A (and Appendix Table 11), the estimated effects of the “location” of degree receipt
change only modestly with the inclusion of field of study and occupation fixed effects.
          36
             It is noteworthy that even as the Appendix Table 9A results include fixed effects for occupation
(Columns 3,6, and 9), when we limit the analysis to those in the IT profession we see a decided change in the
interaction between “Foreign Born” and “Foreign Degree Receipt”, with this coefficient ceasing to be negative and
significant after 1993. As we discuss in the next paragraph, two factors are at play: first, location of degree may
matter less in IT fields than in other occupations and, secondly, the composition of foreign-born IT professionals by
country of origin changes somewhat over this period.

                                                                                                                  30
countries and Canada appear to benefit from degrees from abroad, while those from China face a

disadvantage. For IT workers from India, place of post-secondary training has virtually no effect.

       Given the significant contribution made by foreign workers – particularly workers from

China and India – to the U.S. IT labor market over the last two decades, it is striking that the

penalty for foreign education is dramatically attenuated in the IT sector relative to all high-skill

workers (see Tables 10 A & B). One might ask why young people from India, China, and other

countries would continue to pursue degrees in the U.S. given a low, nonexistent, or negative

earnings advantage and the relatively high out-of-pocket costs. One explanation is that while

U.S. degrees may not provide a strong wage advantage, they do provide improved access to the

U.S. labor market given the U.S. visa system. The OPT program allows an extended window of

opportunity to look for jobs and H-1B visas can be extended for obtaining an advanced degree –

increasing in both cases the potential for employment in the U.S.

       In sum, we find variation by country of origin in the labor market penalty/premium for

foreign degree receipt. At the extremes, workers from China pay a penalty and those from

European countries receive a premium. Such differences likely reflect the combination of

differences across countries in the quality of home-country university options and home-country

labor market opportunities which affect selection into the U.S. labor market. Because student

visas are not subject to a numerical cap and the foreign born who receive U.S. degrees are

advantaged in the award of temporary work visas, studying in the U.S. is likely to improve U.S.

employment prospects even if the obtained degree confers no wage premium and costs more

than one available from their country of origin.




                                                                                                   31
6. Concluding thoughts and Implications for Policy

         The key takeaway from this analysis is that U.S. higher education institutions and U.S.

immigration policy both play a critical role in determining the flow of high skill immigrants to

the U.S. labor market. About 9.5% of the current high-skill labor force is comprised of those

entering the U.S. on student visas and then transitioning to temporary or permanent work visas.

In occupations like IT, the share is higher still at 15.7%. Focusing on just those workers under

the age of 35 – the cohort more likely to be affected by the restrictive H-1B visa policy of the last

decade – we find a magnified effect for U.S higher education, with 16.7% of all current high-

skill workers and 26.4% of IT workers entering the U.S. on student visas (authors’ tabulations

from NSCG:2010). And focusing still more on foreign-born IT workers who did not arrive in the

U.S. at young ages on permanent visas, we find the share receiving their highest degree from

U.S. institutions is yet higher.

         The flow of foreign-born students to U.S. higher education institutions and – potentially –

the U.S. labor market depends on home-country economic conditions and education options,

labor market opportunities in the U.S., and the supply side of the U.S. higher education market.

Rosenzweig (2006) proposes two models for foreign student mobility: a “constrained domestic

schooling model” in which foreign students seek education in the U.S. due to a lack of home

country options; and a “migration model” in which foreign students enroll in the U.S. to increase

the probability that they will find employment in the U.S. when they graduate.37 To the extent


         37
           Using a cross-section of data, Rosenzweig finds that the number of foreign students is positively related
to the number of universities in a home country, and negatively related to the home country “skill-price”, the market
wage for a given skill level. Rosenzweig concludes that the migration model is the correct model, meaning foreign
students come to the U.S. for education for an option value to enter the U.S. labor market. However, Hwang (2009)
uses a panel of data from an alternate source, and finds a positive relationship between a home country’s skill-price
and enrollment in the U.S. She also performs a survey of foreign students at Harvard, from which 35.8%
respondents revealed that their primary reason for studying in the U.S. was a lack of high-quality options in their
home country. In addition, only half of respondents expressed the desire to work in the U.S. after graduation, and
only 22% wished to work in the U.S. long term. Rosenzweig and Hwang do not disaggregate foreign students into

                                                                                                                  32
that foreign students come from countries with large wage differences with the U.S. labor market

and their enrollment rates are sensitive to the U.S. labor market conditions rather than the

expanding education opportunities at the home country, the “migration model” is fairly

important.

         In this paper, we emphasize that there is substantial interaction between visa policies

providing access to the U.S. labor market and education decisions of foreign born students if the

motivation for U.S. education is as described in the “migration model”. More restrictive work

visa policies may boost the option value of gaining employment subsequent to graduation for

those with the weakest home-country options to the extent that the likelihood of employment

with a U.S. degree, particularly at the advanced level, is quite high relative to having a degree

from abroad.38

         Simply put, our analyses point to the interpretation that demand among foreign students

for U.S. higher education is high not because of the relative value of the degree itself, but

because studying in the U.S. is a pathway to employment in the U.S., effectively lowering search

costs, increasing networking opportunities, and providing a more easily interpretable skill

set.39 On the market demand side, U.S. employers may prefer U.S.-trained workers because

choosing workers from domestic institutions reduces their search and recruitment costs and the

uncertainty in skill assessment. Given the high returns in the U.S. labor market for S&E degrees,


education levels, i.e. undergraduate versus graduate, yet we would expect demand determinants are likely very
different for undergraduate, Master’s, professional, or doctorate level students.
          38
             Kato and Sparber (2013) test how decreasing H-1B visa quotas for most countries in the mid-2000s
affected foreign enrollment. They find that not only do smaller quotas decrease foreign enrollment, but these
restrictions also decrease the average quality of foreign interested in applying to U.S. institutions. Kato and
Sparber’s results are consistent with the migration model proposed by Rosenzweig, as applicants become less likely
to secure employment in the U.S. after graduation. However, their results may be confounded by the fact that the
U.S. student visa program also suffered from additional restrictions and delays in the years following the 9/11
attacks in 2001. Kato and Sparber’s results are also limited to the undergraduate level.
          39
             We do not intend to imply that foreign students only motive for studying in the U.S. involves hopes that
doing so will increase their employment prospects in the U.S. Our claim is only that employment prospects are an
important motivating factor, especially in IT.

                                                                                                                   33
students from India and China are willing to pay for education in the U.S. and increasingly have

the means. In turn, U.S. educational institutions value foreign students at least in part for tuition

revenues (Bird and Turner, 2013). It is for this combination of reasons that there is an expansion

of degree programs at the sub-doctoral level provided by U.S. educational.

       Our analyses indicate that post-secondary policies that affect opportunities for study in

the U.S., such as student visa restrictions or increases in the direct costs for educational

programs, will have a substantial effect on the flow of high-skill workers to the U.S. labor

market. In turn, elasticity in the supply of U.S. graduate programs – particularly in science and

engineering – to meet foreign demand is likely to affect the level and composition of high-skill

immigration to the U.S.

       Future changes in the supply of U.S. higher education could have dramatic effects on the

flow of high-skill foreign born workers to the U.S. economy. For example, U.S. universities may

be able to expand opportunities for graduate study – in particular, in master’s-level S&E

programs –by using technology to increase the scale of programs while reducing marginal costs.

On the other hand, continued fiscal contractions, particularly at public universities, may force the

shuttering of doctorate programs, which would narrow a channel of entry for foreign graduate

students.

       Of course, the demand side of foreign flows to the U.S. higher education market also

merits attention in projections. Two factors may serve to reduce demand for post-secondary

study in the U.S.: the development of university capacity abroad and a decreasing earnings

advantage in the U.S. labor market. Particularly at the graduate level, where students from

abroad are a large constituency, a large decline in the foreign demand for U.S. degree programs

would have a substantial effect on the U.S. market for higher education.



                                                                                                    34
                                           References


Bird, Kelli and Sarah Turner (2014) “College in the States: Foreign Student Demand and Higher
Education Supply in the U.S.” unpublished working paper.

Blanchard, E., J. Bound, and S. E. Turner (2009). “Opening (and closing) doors: Country-
specific shocks in U.S. doctoral education.” In Doctoral education and the faculty of the future,
edited by R. G. Ehrenberg and C. V. Kuh, pp. 224-248. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Borjas, G. J. (2004). “Do foreign students crows out native students from graduate programs?”
NBER Working Paper 10349.

Bound, J. and S. Turner (2013). “U.S. High-Skill Immigration.”

Bound, J., S. Turner and P. Walsh (2009). “Internationalization of U.S. doctorate education.” In
Science and engineering careers in the United States: analysis of markets and employment,
edited by R. B. Freeman and D. L. Goroff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bound, John; Breno Braga, Joe Golden and Sarah Turner. (2013). “Pathways to Adjustment: The
Case of Information Technology Workers” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings,103(3): 203-207

Bound, John; Breno Braga, Joe Golden and Gaurav Khanna (2014) “Recruitment of Foreigners
in the Market for Computer Scientists in the US” (forthcoming in the Journal of Labor
Economics)

Clemens, Michael; Claudio Montenegro and Lant Pritchett. (2008). “The Place Premium: Wage
Differences for Identical Workers across the U.S. Border,” Working Papers 148, Center for
Global Development

Clemens, Michael A. (2013). “Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston Than Hyderabad?
Evidence from Randomized Processing of US Visas.” American Economic Review, Papers &
Proceedings, 103(3): 198-202.

Demirci, M. (2013) “Foreign Science and Engineering Majors and the U.S. Labor Market: The
Extension of the Optional Practical Training Visa”, Unpublished Manuscript, Department of
Economics, University of Virginia.

Farrar, L. (2012). “Smaller U.S. Colleges Try to Crack Chinese Market.” New York Times,
December 14, 2012.

Freeman, Richard. (2010). What Does Global Expansion of Higher Education Mean for the
United States? In American Universities in a Global Market, ed. C. Clotfelter. NBER, University
of Chicago Press, pp. 373-404.

                                                                                                35
Grogger, J. and G. H. Hanson (2013). “Attracting talent: Location choices of foreign-born PhDs
in the US. No. w18780. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

Hunt, J. (2011). “Which Immigrants are most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions by
Entry Visa”, Journal of Labor Economics 29:3, 417-457.

Hwang, J. E. (2009). “MIT or Tsinghua? A panel data analysis of the determinants of domestic
higher education and international student mobility.” Department of Economics, Harvard
College.

Institute of International Education (2012) "Open Doors Data: 2000-2012", available
at http://www.iie.org/en/Research-and-Publications/Open-Doors.

Johnson, J. (2011). “Chinese students enroll in record numbers at U.S. colleges.” The
Washington Post, 11/14/2011.

Kandilov, Amy M. Gass. (2007) “The Value of a Green Card Immigrant Wage Increases
Following Adjustment to US Permanent Residence.” Unpublished Manuscript, Department of
Economics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Kato, T. and C. Sparber (2013). “Quotas and quality: The effect of H-1B visa restrictions on the
pool of prospective undergraduate students from abroad.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, March 2013, 95(1): 109-126.

Kerr, W. R. (2013). “U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship:
Empirical Approaches and Evidence.” Harvard Business School Working Paper Number 14-
017.

Lan, Xiaohuan. (2012) "Permanent visas and temporary jobs: evidence from postdoctoral
participation of foreign PhDs in the United States." Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 31(3): 623-640.

Lowell, Lindsay. (2010). “A Long View of America’s Immigration Policy and the Supply of
Foreign-Born STEM Workers in the United States.” American Behavioral Scientist 53: 1029-
1044.

Lowell, B. L. and J. Avato (2013). “The Wages of Skilled Temporary Migrants: Effects of Visa
Pathways and Job Portability.” International Migration.

Lowell, B. L. and P. Khadka (2011). “Trends in foreign-student admissions to the United States:
Policy and competitive effects” in B. R. Chiswick, High-Skilled Immigration in a Globalized
Labor Market, Washington DC: American Enterprise Institute, 83-108.

Martin, Susan. (2012). “Labor Migration to the United States: Challenges and Opportunities”
Paper Draft Paper presented at 2012 Mortimer Caplin Conference on the World Economy:
Resources and Scholarship, Miller Center.

                                                                                              36
Mithas, Sunil, and Henry C. Lucas Jr. (2010) "Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? US Visa
Policies and Compensation of Information Technology Professionals."Management
Science 56(5): 745-765.

Mukhopadhyay, Sankar, and David Oxborrow (2012) "The Value of an Employment-based
Green Card." Demography 49(1): 219-237.

National Science Board. (2014). Science and Engineering Indicators 2014. Arlington VA:
National Science Foundation (NSB 14-01).

Orrenius, Pia and Madeline Zavodny. (2010). Beside the Golden Door. Washington DC: AEI.

Orrenius, Pia; Madeline Zavodny and Emily Kerr. (2012). “Chinese Immigrants in the U.S.
Labor Market: Effects of Post-Tianamen Immigration Policy.” IZA DP No 6287., [Retrieved
from: http://www.iza.org/en/webcontent/publications/papers/viewAbstract?dp_id=6287]

Passel, J. and D. Cohn. (2011). “Unauthorized Immigrant Population: National and State
Trends, 2010.” Washington, D.C. Pew Hispanic Center. [Retrieved from:
http://www.pewhispanic.org/2011/02/01/unauthorized-immigrant-population-brnational-and-
state-trends-2010/]

Peri, G. (2009). “The Determinants and Effects of Highly-Skilled Labor Movements: Evidence
from OECD Countries 1980-2005”, CEPR Report.

Peri, G. and C. Sparber (2009) “Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages”, American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1:3, July.

Rosenzweig, M. R. (2006). “Global Wage Differences and International Student Flows.”
Brookings Trade Forum, pp. 57-86.

Ryoo, Jaewoo, and Sherwin Rosen. (2004). “The Engineering Labor Market.” Journal of
Political Economy 112, no. 1(2): S110-40.

Tichenor, Daniel. (2013). “High-Skilled Immigration Reform in Historical Context: New
Opportunities and Enduring Constraints” Paper presented at 2012 Mortimer Caplin Conference
on the World Economy: Resources and Scholarship, Miller Center. [Retrieved from:
http://web1.millercenter.org/conferences/caplin/2012_caplinBackgroundPaper.pdf ]

U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (2013) "Characteristics of Specialty Occupation
Workers (H-1B): Fiscal Year 2000-2012", available at http://www.uscis.gov/tools/reports-
studies/reports-and-studies.

U.S. Department of Education. (2011)”Integrated Postsecondary Education Survey.” Institute of
Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.


                                                                                            37
Table 1: Representation of foreign-born among all workers and IT workers, by year and age-
group

Panel A: All Workers                                                                           Change from
                    1993                      2003              2010            Total          1993 to 2010
Native           23,784,160                31,992,012        37,422,597       93,198,770        13,638,437
Foreign Born      2,437,745                 4,864,934         6,943,759       14,246,438         4,506,014
Total            26,221,905                36,856,946        44,366,356       107,445,208        18,144,451

% Fore ign Born, by Age group
25 to 34             9%                       14%                15%
35 to 44            10%                       16%                20%
45 to 54            10%                       12%                16%
above 54             8%                       11%                12%
Total                9%                       13%                16%


Panel B: IT Workers                                                                            Change from
                   1993                       2003              2010              Total        1993 to 2010
Native            943,192                   1,476,963         1,627,328         4,047,483         684,135
Foreign Born      174,204                    540,480           749,613          1,464,297         575,409
Total            1,117,396                  2,017,443         2,376,941         5,511,780        1,259,544

% Fore ign Born, by Age group
25 to 34            16%                       34%                35%
35 to 44            17%                       29%                37%
45 to 54            14%                       19%                27%
above 54            13%                       16%                19%
Total                16%                      27%                32%

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) -1993, 2003 and 2010
Panel A: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
Panel B: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older




                                                                                                                   38
Table 2. Distribution of college-educated foreign -born and US-born workers, by highest degree
achieved and year (Panel A: All workers; Panel B:IT workers only)

Panel A: All Workers
                                              Natives
                           1993         2003          2010       1993-2010
Bachelor's               15,526,091   20,556,119 23,871,814       59,954,023
Percentage of total          65           64           64             64

Master's                 5,822,671     8,402,498    10,214,300   24,439,469
Percentage of total          24            26           27           26

PhD                       812,200      1,050,539    1,122,285     2,985,024
Percentage of total          3             3            3             3

Professional Degrees     1,623,199     1,982,857    2,214,199     5,820,254
Percentage of total          7             6            6             6

Total                    23,784,160   31,992,012    37,422,597   93,198,770
                            100           100          100           100


                                           Foreign Born
                           1993          2003        2010        1993-2010
Bachelor's               1,394,163     2,767,936   4,046,264      8,208,363
Percentage of total          57            57          58             58

Master's                  618,548      1,362,724    1,970,894     3,952,166
Percentage of total         25             28           28            28

PhD                       207,833      379,256       528,096      1,115,184
Percentage of total          9            8             8             8

Professional Degrees      217,201      355,019       398,506      970,726
Percentage of total          9            7             6            7

Total                    2,437,745     4,864,934    6,943,759    14,246,438
                            100           100          100          100




                                                                                            39
Panel B: IT Workers
                                                        Natives
                                  1993             2003         2010             1993-2010
Bache lor's                      694,431         1,077,515    1,236,683           3,008,628
Percentage of total                74                73           76                  74

Master's                         223,737          361,020         358,024          942,780
Percentage of total                24               24              22               23

PhD                               22,052           32,541          27,390           81,983
Percentage of total                 2                2               2                2

Profe ssional Degre e s           2,973            5,887            5,231           14,091
Percentage of total                 0                0                0               0

Total                            943,192         1,476,963       1,627,328        4,047,483
                                    100              100             100              100



                                                     Fore ign Born
                                  1993             2003         2010             1993-2010
Bache lor's                       92,767          265,431      374,171             732,370
Percentage of total                 53              49           50                  50

Master's                          68,359          239,426         330,448          638,233
Percentage of total                 39              44              44               44

PhD                               12,786           34,636          44,638           92,061
Percentage of total                 7                6               6                6

Profe ssional Degre e s            292              987              355             1,634
Percentage of total                 0                0                0                0

Total                            174,204          540,480         749,613         1,464,297
                                   100              100             100              100

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) -1993, 2003 and 2010
Panel A: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
Panel B: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older




                                                                                                                   40
Table 3. Distribution of all college-educated foreign-born workers earning highest degree in

U.S., by age and year (Panel A: All workers; Panel B: IT workers only)

Panel A: All Workers                                       Panel B: IT Workers
Pe rcentage of De grees earned in U.S.                     Pe rcentage of De grees earned in U.S.

Bachelor's Highest degree                                  Bachelor's Highest degree
             1993      2003                 2010                        1993      2003                 2010
25 to 34      74%       61%                  59%           25 to 34      86%       50%                  52%
35 to 44      53%       54%                  45%           35 to 44      62%       57%                  41%
45 to 54      41%       43%                  47%           45 to 54      56%       56%                  50%
above 54      42%       37%                  33%           above 54      47%       48%                  63%


Master's Highest degree                                    Master's Highest degree
             1993      2003                 2010                        1993      2003                 2010
25 to 34      87%       78%                  69%           25 to 34     92%        72%                  73%
35 to 44      77%       73%                  69%           35 to 44     82%        74%                  60%
45 to 54      75%       70%                  67%           45 to 54     78%        74%                  79%
above 54      70%       70%                  64%           above 54     74%        62%                  66%


PhD Highest degree                                         PhD Highest degree
             1993              2003         2010                        1993              2003         2010
25 to 34      76%               81%          77%           25 to 34     83%                85%          95%
35 to 44      73%               67%          62%           35 to 44     85%                69%          78%
45 to 54      74%               65%          59%           45 to 54     84%                63%          63%
above 54      60%               62%          60%           above 54     68%                61%          67%


Professional Highest degree                                Professional Highest degree
              1993      2003                2010                         1993      2003                2010
25 to 34       65%       80%                 68%           25 to 34      100%        0%                 0%
35 to 44       52%       54%                 49%           35 to 44       0%         0%                100%
45 to 54       32%       44%                 46%           45 to 54      100%        0%                100%
above 54       34%       29%                 29%           above 54       0%        57%                 0%

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) -1993, 2003 and 2010
Panel A: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
Panel B: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older




                                                                                                                   41
Table 4. Distribution of Bachelor’s degree and Master’s degree workers aged 25-34 by Field of Highest Degree
Panel A: All Workers

                                                               Bachelor's Highest Degree
              Computer/Math          Life Sciences    Physical Sciences   Social Sciences         Engineering       S&E Related     Non S&E Fields
              1993     2010         1993      2010     1993      2010      1993      2010        1993    2010      1993   2010       1993   2010
  Foreign-
                10%       13%        5%        5%        3%        2%        11%       11%       16%       11%              12%      56%     46%
   Born
  Natives       5%        4%         4%        6%        2%        1%        11%       15%        8%        6%               7%      70%     61%

                                                               Masters's Highest Degree
              Computer/Math          Life Sciences    Physical Sciences   Social Sciences         Engineering       S&E Related     Non S&E Fields
              1993     2010         1993      2010     1993      2010     1993       2010        1993    2010      1993   2010       1993   2010
  Foreign-
                13%       14%        5%        5%        3%        2%        7%         7%       26%       19%              11%      47%     42%
   Born
  Natives       4%        3%         3%        2%        2%        1%        7%         7%        8%        4%              12%      75%     72%




Panel B: IT Workers

                                                               Bachelor's Highest Degree
              Compute r/Math        Life Sciences     Physical Sciences   Social Scie nces       Engineering        S&E Relate d   Non S&E Fields
              1993      2010       1993      2010      1993      2010      1993      2010       1993    2010       1993   2010      1993   2010
  Foreign-
               31%        55%       1%        1%        1%         2%        4%        3%       43%       27%               6%      19%      6%
    born
  Natives      35%        37%       1%        2%        2%         1%        4%        8%       29%       18%               4%      30%     31%

                                                               Master's Highest Degree
              Compute r/Math        Life Sciences     Physical Sciences   Social Scie nces       Engineering        S&E Relate d   Non S&E Fields
              1993      2010       1993      2010      1993      2010     1993       2010       1993    2010       1993   2010      1993   2010
  Foreign-
               32%        41%       0%        1%        1%         1%        2%        0%       49%       40%               7%      16%     10%
    born
  Natives      28%        43%       1%        1%        1%         2%        3%        2%       40%       22%               4%      27%     27%

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) -1993, 2003 and 2010
Panel A: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
Panel B: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older


                                                                                                                                                     42
Table 5. First Visa Status

Pane l A: All Worke rs
                  Permane nt                  Te mporary Work              Temporary
                                                                                                  Dependent Visa          Othe r Temp Visa
                Re side nt Visa                     Visa                Student/Training
 Age group      2003       2010                2003      2010            2003     2010             2003            2010    2003     2010
  25 to 34      41%        36%                 14%       14%             24%      27%              15%             19%      5%       4%
  35 to 44      38%        33%                 13%       22%             26%      21%              13%             17%      9%       7%
  45 to 54      46%        35%                 12%       16%             23%      25%               9%             11%     10%      12%
  above 54      52%        49%                  8%       11%             23%      19%               7%              7%     10%      14%


Pane l B: IT Workers
                 Permane nt                   Te mporary Work              Temporary
                                                                                                  Dependent Visa          Othe r Temp Visa
               Re side nt Visa                      Visa                Student/Training
 Age group     2003       2010                 2003      2010            2003     2010             2003            2010    2003     2010
  25 to 34     25%        16%                  32%       39%             30%      35%              11%              9%      2%       1%
  35 to 44     29%        22%                  23%       46%             32%      23%               9%              7%      7%       3%
  45 to 54     34%        28%                  13%       23%             34%      36%               8%              7%     11%       6%
  above 54     40%        34%                  14%       12%             37%      30%               3%              6%      6%      19%

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) - 2003 and 2010
Panel A: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
Panel B: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older

First-Visa status not available for the 1993 survey.




                                                                                                                                             43
Table 6. First Visa Status by Highest Degree (2010 survey)

Panel A: All Workers

Bachelor's Highest Degree
                                    Location of Highest
                                           Degree
                                    Abroad         US          Total
Permanent Resident Visa             772,412      850,052     1,622,464
Percentage of total                   35           59           45

Te mporary Work Visa                599,500       35,604     635,104
Percentage of total                   27             2         17

Temporary Student/Training          181,701      262,412     444,113
Percentage of total                    8           18          12

Dependent Visa                      335,297      204,367     539,663
Percentage of total                   15           14          15

Othe r Temp Visa                    300,842       93,183     394,024
Percentage of total                   14             6         11

Total                              2,189,752     1,445,617   3,635,368
                                      100           100         100

Master's Highest Degree
                                    Location of Highest
                                           Degree
                                    Abroad         US         Total
Permanent Resident Visa             171,686      358,184     529,870
Percentage of total                   27           32          30

Te mporary Work Visa                207,964       61,751     269,715
Percentage of total                   33             6         15

Temporary Student/Training          68,443       520,075     588,518
Percentage of total                   11           47          34

Dependent Visa                      86,683       127,957     214,640
Percentage of total                   14           12          12

Othe r Temp Visa                    102,883       42,209     145,092
Percentage of total                   16             4          8

Total                               637,658      1,110,177   1,747,835
                                      100           100         100


                                                                         44
Panel B: IT Workers

Bachelor's Highest Degree
                                            Location of Highest
                                                   Degree
                                            Abroad         US                  Total
Permane nt Resident Visa                    30,595        75,265              105,860
Percentage of total                           16            52                  31

Temporary Work Visa                          132,600          12,744          145,344
Percentage of total                            68                9              43

Temporary Student/Training                   11,901           30,802           42,703
Percentage of total                             6               21               13

Dependent Visa                                9,696           15,106           24,801
Percentage of total                             5               11                7

Other Temp Visa                               8,873            9,493           18,365
Percentage of total                             5                7                5

Total                                        193,664          143,409         337,073
                                               100              100             100

Master's Highest Degree
                                            Location of Highest
                                                   Degree
                                            Abroad         US                  Total
Permane nt Resident Visa                    12,052        29,724               41,776
                                              12            15                   14

Temporary Work Visa                          68,301           22,003           90,303
                                               67               11               30

Temporary Student/Training                    9,778           122,619         132,397
                                               10               63              44

Dependent Visa                                7,707           16,656           24,363
                                                8                9                8

Other Temp Visa                               4,522            4,351            8,873
                                                4                2                3

Total                                        102,359          195,352         297,711
                                               100              100             100

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) – 2010
Panel A: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
Panel B: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older


                                                                                                                   45
Table 7. Leading Countries of Origin for U.S. Enrollment, 1993 and 2011




                          Undergraduate Enrollment
                 2011                                      1993
    1      China                 74,516     1     Japan             31,960
    2      South Korea           38,232     2     Canada            13,149
    3      Saudi Arabia          14,344     3     South Korea       12,521
    4      India                 13,509     4     Malaysia          11,289
    5      Canada                12,866     5     Taiwan            11,067
    6      Vietnam               11,244     6     Hong Kong         10,427
    7      Japan                  9,359     7     Indonesia          7,982

Leading Country Total           174,070                             98,395
Top 7 as % of total             56.27%                             46.10%
 TOTAL                          309,342                            213,610

                            Graduate Enrollment
                 2011                                      1993
    1      China                 88,429     1     China             36,370
    2      India                 59,014     2     India             27,533
    3      South Korea           21,260     3     Taiwan            24,623
    4      Taiwan                12,007     4     South Korea       15,785
    5      Canada                11,190     5     Canada             8,455
    6      Turkey                 6,198     6     Japan              7,755
    7      Saudi Arabia           6,133     7     Thailand           5,621

Leading Country Total           204,231                            126,142
Top 7 as % of total             67.98%                             62.70%
 TOTAL                          300,430                            201,030
Source: IIE Open Doors




                                                                             46
Table 8: Distribution of Highest-Degrees achieved, and its location by Country of Birth

                             Degree distribution                             % Highest Degrees from US
               Bachelor's    Master's     PhD            Prof              Bachelor's Master's     PhD

                                                            Europe
All Workers
1993              54%          27%          10%           8%                  70%          68%          55%
2003              53%          30%          10%           7%                  62%          61%          47%
2010              53%          30%          12%           5%                  56%          50%          49%
IT workers
1993              58%          35%           7%           0%                  71%          58%          44%
2003              53%          38%           9%           0%                  59%          49%          46%
2010              54%          38%           8%           0%                  46%          27%          36%

                                                            Canada
All Workers
1993              58%          23%           8%          11%                  75%          82%          81%
2003              61%          22%           8%          10%                  60%          77%          65%
2010              60%          23%           7%          10%                  51%          74%          59%
IT workers
1993              75%          20%          5%            0%                  78%          70%           79%
2003              80%          16%          3%            1%                  42%          57%           76%
2010              64%          22%          13%           1%                  45%          69%          100%

                                                               India
All Workers
1993              37%          37%          13%          13%                  23%          69%          69%
2003              44%          41%          8%           7%                   21%          57%          67%
2010              44%          42%          7%           7%                   19%          58%          70%
IT workers
1993              26%          62%          12%           0%                  37%          84%          83%
2003              41%          55%          4%            0%                  14%          60%          66%
2010              44%          54%          2%            0%                  17%          62%          78%

                                                            China
All Workers
1993              43%          34%          17%           5%                  43%          86%          88%
2003              30%          43%          22%           4%                  43%          84%          77%
2010              32%          37%          27%           5%                  47%          83%          70%
IT workers
1993              30%          54%          16%           0%                  67%          97%          94%
2003              19%          65%          16%           0%                  45%          88%          79%
2010              19%          58%          23%           0%                  50%          86%          79%

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) – 1993, 2003 and 2010

All workers: Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.
IT workers: Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older




                                                                                                                      47
   Table 9A: Coefficient on Foreign Born and Educated Abroad for Various Specifications, All workers

                                                      NSCG                                                     Census-ACS
        Specification                    1993          2003           2010                  1990           2000        2001-2010      2008-2010

           Base Specification (see     -0.0858***    -0.191***      -0.223***            -0.0444***     -0.137***       -0.173***      -0.172***
                 footnote)              (0.0107)     (0.0204)       (0.0470)              (0.0087)       (0.0059)       (0.0066)       (0.0088)


          Base Specification with      -0.0698***    -0.192***      -0.225***
          field of study dummies        (0.0107)     (0.0203)       (0.0459)


                                       -0.0605***    -0.178***      -0.211***
          Base Specification with
            field of study and          (0.0104)     (0.0198)       (0.0441)
           occupation dummies
Source: National Survey of College Graduates (1993, 2003 and 2010); Census (1990 and 2000) and ACS (2001 to 2010)
Note: Weighted regressions for all college-educated full-time workers.
The Census/ACS does not report location of institution for degrees. Based on age of immigration and educational qualifications, and comparing it to the NSCG
tabulations, it was estimated whether the individual obtained their degree from inside or outside the US. The ACS regressions are estimated separately for each year,
the average coefficient values are reported for the period of interest in this table. See Appendix for the full set of estimation results.
The base specification includes a constant, dummy variables for foreign born, foreign born and immigrated after 18, highest degree levels, sex, and age groups.

   Table 9B: Coefficient on Foreign Born and Educated Abroad for Various Specifications, IT workers

                                                        NSCG                                                      Census-ACS
                  Specification            1993          2003           2010                  1990           2000        2001-2010      2008-2010
             Base Specification (see     -0.0607**     0.0622**       0.0956*                0.0128       -0.0610***        -0.0095       0.0242
                   footnote)              (0.0253)     (0.0276)       (0.0518)              (0.0194)       (0.0117)       (0.0123)       (0.0202)


            Base Specification with      -0.0506**     0.0593**       0.0878*
            field of study dummies        (0.0248)     (0.0277)       (0.0513)
   Source: National Survey of College Graduates (1993, 2003 and 2010); Census (1990 and 2000) and ACS (2001 to 2010)
   Note: Weighted regressions for IT workers (Computer or Information Scientists; and Electrical or Computer Hardware Engineers) The Census/ACS does not
   report location of institution for degrees. Based on age of immigration and educational qualifications, and comparing it to the NSCG tabulations, it was estimated
   whether the individual obtained their degree from inside or outside the US. The ACS regressions are estimated separately for each year, the average coefficient
   values are reported for the period of interest in this table. See Appendix for the full set of estimation results. The base specification includes a constant, dummy
   variables for foreign born, foreign born and immigrated after 18, highest degree levels, sex, and age groups.

                                                                                                                                                                    48
   Table 10A: Coefficient on Country of Birth and Educated Abroad for Various Specifications, All workers
                                                    NSCG                                                                        Census-ACS
            Country              1993               2003                 2010                       1990                 2000            2001-2010         2008-2010
                                                                                  Base Specification (see footnote)
             China             -0.270***           -0.174**           -0.459***                  -0.232***             -0.237***         -0.242***          -0.225***
                                (0.0462)           (0.0761)            (0.1230)                   (0.0175)              (0.0123)         (0.01058)           (0.0153)
             India             -0.181***          -0.281***           -0.380***                  -0.168***             -0.224***         -0.138***          -0.119***
                                (0.0278)           (0.0468)            (0.1030)                   (0.0185)              (0.0115)          (0.0124)           (0.0191)
            Europe             0.0754***           0.00937              -0.031                     0.0163             -0.0422***         -0.056***          -0.038***
                                (0.0216)           (0.0432)            (0.0796)                   (0.0115)              (0.0093)          (0.0078)           (0.0111)
            Canada              0.376***           0.447***             0.316                     0.106***              0.186***          0.133***           0.134***
                                (0.0503)           (0.0965)            (0.2800)                   (0.0235)              (0.0192)          (0.0148)           (0.0217)
             Others           -0.0911***          -0.289***           -0.251***                 -0.0642***             -0.154***         -0.230***          -0.237***
                                (0.0176)           (0.0315)            (0.0716)                   (0.0087)              (0.0065)          (0.0057)           (0.0078)

                                                                                Base Specification with field of study
             China             -0.250***            -0.146*           -0.430***
                                (0.0464)           (0.0759)            (0.1300)
             India             -0.148***          -0.248***           -0.349***
                                (0.0277)           (0.0458)            (0.0964)
            Europe             0.0489**             -0.0235             -0.0546
                                (0.0217)           (0.0433)            (0.0812)
            Canada              0.350***           0.418***              0.252
                                (0.0497)           (0.0975)            (0.2690)
             Others           -0.0827***          -0.287***           -0.232***
                                (0.0175)           (0.0317)            (0.0709)

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (1993, 2003 and 2010); Census (1990 and 2000) and ACS (2001 to 2010)
Note: Weighted regressions for all college-educated full-time workers.
The Census/ACS does not report location of institution for degrees. Based on age of immigration and educational qualifications, and comparing it to the NSCG tabulations, it was
estimated whether the individual obtained their degree from inside or outside the US. The ACS regressions are estimated separately for each year, the average coefficient
values are reported for the period of interest in this table. See Appendix for the full set of estimation results.
The base specification includes a constant, dummy variables for foreign born, foreign born and immigrated after 18, highest degree levels, sex, and age groups.




                                                                                                                                                                                   49
   Table 10B: Coefficient on Country of Birth and Educated Abroad for Various Specifications, IT workers
                                                NSCG                                                                   Census-ACS
       Country                          1993           2003              2010                       1990               2000 2001-2010      2008-2010
                                                                           Base Specification (see footnote)
            China             -0.0417           -0.039            -0.137                 -0.0902***             -0.137***        -0.048         -0.076
                             (0.0879)          (0.0779)         (0.2180)                   (0.0315)              (0.0197)       (0.0187)       (0.0259)
             India            -0.0717           -0.025           -0.0372                    -0.0152            -0.0603***         0.006         0.018
                             (0.0663)          (0.0475)         (0.0704)                   (0.0331)              (0.0175)       (0.0236)       (0.0349)
            Europe           0.0693*           0.173***         0.174**                     0.0189               -0.00029        -0.013         0.000
                             (0.0402)          (0.0604)         (0.0681)                   (0.0305)              (0.0222)       (0.0188)       (0.0298)
            Canada             0.222            -0.108           0.0947                      0.076               0.202***         0.08         0.134**
                             (0.1580)          (0.1420)         (0.1190)                   (0.0661)              (0.0530)       (0.0369)       (0.0643)
            Others            -0.0672           0.0626            0.113                   0.0528**             -0.0709***        -0.026         -0.026
                             (0.0467)          (0.0646)         (0.0857)                   (0.0213)              (0.0176)       (0.0140)       (0.0216)

                                                               Base Specification with field of study
            China             -0.0316           -0.0186           -0.123
                             (0.0895)          (0.0733)         (0.1940)
             India            -0.0757            -0.038          -0.0179
                             (0.0656)          (0.0486)         (0.0713)
            Europe            0.0598           0.148**          0.185***
                             (0.0394)          (0.0602)         (0.0697)
            Canada             0.192             -0.128           0.119
                             (0.1490)          (0.1320)         (0.1240)
            Others            -0.0574           0.0628            0.107
                             (0.0467)          (0.0652)         (0.0872)

Source: National Survey of College Graduates (1993, 2003 and 2010); Census (1990 and 2000) and ACS (2001 to 2010)
Note: Weighted regressions for IT workers (Computer or Information Scientists; and Electrical or Computer Hardware Engineers)
The Census/ACS does not report location of institution for degrees. Based on age of immigration and educational qualifications, and comparing it to the NSCG
tabulations, it was estimated whether the individual obtained their degree from inside or outside the US. The ACS regressions are estimated separately for each yer,
the average coefficient values are reported for the period of interest in this table. See Appendix for the full set of estimation results.
The base specification includes a constant, dummy variables for foreign born, foreign born and immigrated after 18, highest degree levels, sex, and age groups.




                                                                                                                                                                  50
Figure 1. Distribution of U.S. workers by nativity, sector (All vs. IT), highest degree, and age
group, 1993 and 2010

Panel A: All Workers

Foreign Born 1993                                            Foreign Born 2010

 80%                                                          70%       61%
           67%                               25 to 34                      58%                         25 to 34
 70%                                                          60%
              58%                            35 to 44                                                  35 to 44
 60%                                                          50%
 50%
                                                              40%
 40%                                                                                28%28%
                          26%                                 30%
 30%                   22%
 20%                                                          20%
                                        8%     7% 8%                                              8%
 10%                               4%                         10%                            5%          5% 6%

  0%                                                            0%




Native Born 1993                                             Native Born 2010

 90%                                                          80%
           79%                               25 to 34                   70%                            25 to 34
 80%                                                          70%          65%
              66%                            35 to 44                                                  35 to 44
 70%                                                          60%
 60%
                                                              50%
 50%
                                                              40%
 40%
                                                              30%                      26%
 30%                      24%                                                       23%

 20%                   15%                                    20%
 10%                                           6% 7%          10%                                        6% 6%
                                   1% 3%                                                     1% 3%
  0%                                                            0%




Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) – 1993 and 2010
Sample restricted to all full-time college-educated workers, that are 25 years or older.



                                                                                                                  51
Panel B: IT Workers

Foreign Born 1993                                           Foreign Born 2010

 70%                                                          60%      54%
           58%
                                              25 to 34                       50%
                                                                                                           25 to 34
 60%                                                          50%                        45%
                 52%
                                              35 to 44                             43%                     35 to 44
 50%
                             41%                              40%
                       38%
 40%
                                                              30%
 30%
                                                              20%
 20%
 10%                                     7%                   10%                                    5%
                                    4%                                                          3%
                                                0% 0%                                                         0% 0%
  0%                                                           0%




Native Born 1993                                            Native Born 2010

 90%       82%                                                90%      83%
                                              25 to 34                       79%                           25 to 34
 80%             73%                                          80%
                                              35 to 44                                                     35 to 44
 70%                                                          70%
 60%                                                          60%
 50%                                                          50%
 40%                                                          40%
 30%                         25%                              30%
                                                                                         19%
                       17%                                                         17%
 20%                                                          20%
 10%                                                          10%
                                    1% 1%       0% 0%                                           1% 1%         0% 0%
  0%                                                           0%




Source: National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) – 1993 and 2010
Sample restricted to those working in the IT industry or related occupations, and are 25 years or older.




                                                                                                                      52
Figure 2. Trends in F student visas issued, overall and by select nationality




Source: Department of State, “Nonimmigrant Visa Issuances by Visa Class and by Nationality “
and “Nonimmigrant Visas by Individual Class of Admission”; see
http://travel.state.gov/visa/statistics/nivstats/nivstats_4582.html




                                                                                          53
Figure 3: Trends in foreign enrollment in U.S. higher education by education level, 1954-2011




                                                                                                54
Figure 4: Trends in foreign enrollment by select countries of origin, 1993-2011




Source: Institute of International Education Open Doors Data.




                                                                                  55
Figure 5. Trends in U.S. degrees conferred by field and level

Computer Science                                 Engineering




Computer Science                                 Engineering




Computer Science                                 Engineering




Source: Integrated Post-Secondary Data System (IPEDS) Completions Surveys by Race.


                                                                                     56
Figure 6: Trends in the transitions from student visas to temporary work visas

                                   0.90
                                                                                 From F visas to H‐1B
                                   0.80                                          From F visas to OPT
   The Ratio of Foreign Students




                                   0.70
                                   0.60
                                   0.50
                                   0.40
                                   0.30
                                   0.20
                                   0.10
                                   0.00
                                          1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                                              Graduation Year



Source: 2000-2010 Characteristics of H-1B Specialty Workers Reports of the USCIS, 2000-2010
Open Doors Report of the Institute of International Education, and 1999-2009 Completion
Surveys by Race of the Integrated Post-Secondary Data System. The ratio of initial H-1B
petitions processed to aliens in the U.S. (OPT beneficiaries) to the number of foreign graduates
of U.S. universities in that class of graduation is an approximation of the transition rate from F
visas to H-1B (or OPT) for each year of graduation.




                                                                                                        57
