                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DUTCH DISEASE OR AGGLOMERATION? THE LOCAL ECONOMIC EFFECTS
            OF NATURAL RESOURCE BOOMS IN MODERN AMERICA

                                         Hunt Allcott
                                        Daniel Keniston

                                      Working Paper 20508
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20508


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2014, Revised June 2017




We thank Yunmi Kong and Wendy Wei for superb research assistance and Julia Garlick for help
in data preparation. We are grateful for feedback from Costas Arkolakis, Nathaniel Baum- Snow,
Dan Black, Rick Hornbeck, Guido Imbens, Ryan Kellogg, Pat Kline, Erin Mansur, Enrico
Moretti, Reed Walker, and seminar participants at the ASSA Annual Meetings, Bates White,
Berkeley, Bocconi, the Census Center for Economic Studies, Centre de Recherche en Economie
et Statistique, Cornell, Helsinki Center of Economic Research, LSE and UCL, Michigan State,
NYU, Oxford, Sussex, Toulouse, Wharton, the World Bank, and Yale. Thanks also to Randy
Becker, Allan Collard-Wexler, Jonathan Fischer, Todd Gardner, Cheryl Grim, Javier Miranda,
Justin Pierce, and Kirk White for their advice and help in using U.S. Census of Manufactures
data, and to Jean Roth for advice on the Current Population Survey. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been
reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hunt Allcott and Daniel Keniston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The Local Economic Effects of Natural Resource Booms
in Modern America
Hunt Allcott and Daniel Keniston
NBER Working Paper No. 20508
September 2014, Revised June 2017
JEL No. J2,L6,O4,Q43,R1

                                         ABSTRACT

Do natural resources benefit producer economies, or is there a “Natural Resource Curse,”0
perhaps as the crowd-out of manufacturing productivity spillovers reduces long-term growth? We
combine new data on oil and gas endowments with Census of Manufactures microdata to
estimate how oil and gas booms affect local economies in the United States. Local wages rise
during oil and gas booms, but manufacturing is not crowded out—in fact, the sector grows
overall, driven by upstream and locally-traded subsectors. Tradable manufacturing subsectors do
contract during resource booms, but their productivity is unaffected, so there is no evidence of
foregone local learning-by-doing effects. Over the full 1969-2014 sample, a county with one
standard deviation additional oil and gas endowment averaged about one percent higher real
wages. Overall, the results provide evidence against a Natural Resource Curse within the United
States.


Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu

Daniel Keniston
Yale University
P. O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
daniel.keniston@yale.edu
1        Introduction
        A long literature has debated whether natural resource abundance is good for economic growth
(van der Ploeg 2011). If markets are efficient, then standard trade models predict that resource-
abundant regions benefit from an increase in resource prices. However, there are many accounts of
a potential “Natural Resource Curse,” in which resource extraction interacts with market failures
to make producer economies worse off. Indeed, Sachs and Warner (1995, 1999, 2001) find that
resource abundance is negatively associated with growth in cross-country data, concluding that the
Resource Curse is a “reasonably solid fact.” The empirical literature remains unsettled, however,
due to problems of small samples, data quality, and endogeneity.1 Understanding these questions is
crucial for the many countries and local areas whose economies rely on natural resource extraction.
        The Resource Curse literature has identified several types of market failures through which nat-
ural resource extraction could reduce growth. In countries with strong political institutions that
limit corruption and conflict, concern has centered on the loss of local learning-by-doing spillovers
from manufacturers that might be crowded out during a natural resource boom. Indeed, a recent lit-
erature has shown that manufacturing plants exert positive productivity spillovers on other nearby
plants.2 Thus, if natural resource growth crowds out manufacturing, this also reduces produc-
tivity spillovers, which could reduce long-term overall growth. This possible chain of events—the
short-run crowd out of manufacturing, leading eventually to decreased manufacturing productiv-
ity, causing long-run manufacturing contraction and reduced overall growth and welfare—is often
called “Dutch Disease,” and the idea has been well-developed theoretically.3 Harding and Venables
(2013) and Ismail (2010) find that natural resource exports crowd out manufacturing exports in
cross-country data, and Sachs and Warner (2001) argue that Dutch Disease is what causes their
empirical finding of slower growth in resource-abundant countries.
        In this paper, we ask what have been the local economic impacts of oil and gas booms and
busts within the U.S. over the past half century? In particular, we consider whether oil and gas
extraction has benefited people who live in resource-abundant areas, or whether there might be a
Natural Resource Curse acting through a Dutch Disease-style chain of events. Aside from being
    1
      Auty and Mikesell (1998) and Gylfason, Herbertsson, and Zoega (1999) also find that natural resource abundance
is negatively correlated with growth, but others have arrived at different results when instrumenting for resource
abundance (Brunnschweiler and Bulte 2009), including country fixed effects (Manzano and Rigobon 2001), using
different measures of resource intensity (Lederman and Maloney 2007b), or conditioning on the quality of institutions
(Collier and Goderis (2009), Mehlum, Moene, and Torvik (2006)).
    2
      See Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010), Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010), Kline and Moretti (2014),
Serafinelli (2012) and others for empirical results, and see Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009) and Moretti (2010) for literature
overviews on agglomeration and local labor markets.
    3
      See Corden and Neary (1982), Krugman (1987), Matsuyama (1992), van Wijnbergen (1984), and others. Some
alternative definitions of “Dutch Disease” include only the crowd-out of tradable manufacturing, but this would arise
even in an efficient market due to standard Rybczynski effects, and is thus not really a “disease.” Like much of the
literature, we therefore think of Dutch Disease as the full possible chain of events including decreased manufacturing
productivity and decreased long-run growth.



                                                            2
important for understanding the pathways of local economic growth, this question is very relevant
to local policymakers who are deciding whether to encourage or restrain resource booms. Indeed,
Maryland, New York State, the Delaware River Basin, Bulgaria, France, Germany Scotland, South
Africa, Wales, and many other areas have recently banned hydraulic fracturing for environmental
reasons (Rosenbaum 2016), and it is important for policymakers to know the foregone economic
gains, if any.
   To organize the empirical work, we first lay out a Rosen-Roback spatial equilibrium model in
the spirit of Moretti (2010). There are two initially symmetric counties, each with natural resource,
local, and tradable goods sectors, and labor is imperfectly mobile across counties. In the local and
tradable sectors, we model intertemporal productivity spillovers from both “learning-by-doing” and
“agglomeration”—that is, we allow local productivity to be influenced both by past employment
in that sector and by the past overall population in the county. We model a resource boom as a
temporary increase in resource sector revenue productivity in one of the two counties. The resource
boom affects both counties through general equilibrium effects.
   The model predicts that during a resource boom, local population and wages increase, and
local welfare increases during the boom even as higher wages crowd out the tradable sector. In
the absence of productivity spillovers, the counties return to parity after the resource boom ends,
there are no market failures, and the resource boom unambiguously increases cumulative welfare,
i.e. the sum of welfare over time. If there are productivity spillovers, however, the cumulative
welfare effect is ambiguous. If the resource boom crowds out enough tradable sector learning-by-
doing spillovers, then tradable sector productivity decreases and the boom can reduce cumulative
welfare. This illustrates how an analogue of Dutch Disease might arise within a country, where local
manufacturing is initially crowded out by higher local wages, not by currency appreciation. On the
other hand, if the effects of crowd-out are limited and agglomerative effects are strong, this further
augments the boom’s welfare gains. In the extreme, population could concentrate in the resource-
abundant county even after the boom ends, just as population continues to be concentrated in
historical river portage sites long after these sites lost any productive advantage (Bleakley and Lin
2012).
   To empirically estimate the effects of natural resource booms, we combine county-level panel
data on employment, earnings, and population with a new dataset of county-level oil and gas
production and reserves that we constructed for this paper. Crucially, we also use restricted-
access plant-level microdata from the U.S. Census of Manufactures, which allow us both to observe
manufacturing revenue productivity and to measure differential effects across local vs. tradable
subsectors. Our empirical strategy is a “shift-share” approach inspired by Bartik (1991): the key
independent variable interacts time series variation in national oil and gas employment with cross-
sectional variation in counties’ initial oil and gas endowment. Extending our analysis back to the
1960s allows us to exploit dramatic time series variation, as hundreds of thousands of oil and gas


                                                  3
jobs are created and destroyed nationwide in the boom of the 1970s and early 1980s, the bust of
the late 1980s, and the second boom of the past decade.
   Our empirical results trace out the local economic impacts of oil and gas booms and busts,
with special attention to the possible chain of events suggested by the within-country version of
Dutch Disease. First, local wages, population, and employment in resource-abundant counties
are all procyclical with oil and gas: they rise during oil and gas booms and fall during busts.
During the most recent boom (2007-2014), wages were 1.6 to 3.0 percent higher in counties with
one standard deviation more oil and gas endowment, and wages also rose significantly in resource-
abundant counties during the boom of the 1970s and 1980s. This introduces the possibility that
some manufacturers could be crowded out.
   Second, however, while manufacturing is often thought of as largely producing tradable goods,
the sector in aggregate is not crowded out by resource booms. Instead, manufacturing in resource-
abundant counties grows during resource booms and shrinks during busts. More disaggregated
analyses show that manufacturing’s procyclicality is driven by locally-traded subsectors and those
with upstream or downstream input-output linkages to oil and gas. By contrast, more highly-
tradable manufacturing subsectors contract during booms. Thus, these tradable subsectors could
still generate a Dutch Disease effect, if their contraction leads to reduced productivity.
   Third, local manufacturing plants’ revenue-based total factor productivity (TFP-R) is procycli-
cal with local resource booms. This could either be because local output prices are procyclical
with resource booms, or because transport costs are countercyclical, as local buyer and supplier
bases grow during booms and shrink during busts. In tradable manufacturing subsectors, despite
the temporary contraction during booms, TFP-R never decreases. This rules out the productivity
decline that is central to a Dutch Disease mechanism.
   Fourth, while county-level population, employment, wages, and revenue productivity are all
procyclical, the booms are canceled out by the busts. By the end of the 1990s, we see no significant
remaining long-term effects of the boom and bust cycle of the 1970s and 1980s.
   The procyclicality of local wages plus the lack of adverse long-term effects foreshadows our
final result, on the cumulative effects of natural resource abundance. Over our full 1969-2014 sam-
ple, counties with higher oil and gas endowments average 1.0 percent higher real wages relative
to otherwise-similar counties with one standard deviation less endowment. Under additional as-
sumptions, we can control for general equilibrium effects (geographic spillovers) using an empirical
approach parallel to Miguel and Kremer (2004). Over the years in our sample, counties with one
standard deviation more endowment average 0.4 percent higher real wages compared to their own
counterfactual.
   Real wages are not a measure of local welfare if resource booms also affect local amenities such as
environmental quality, and Muehlenbachs, Spiller and Timmins (2015) and others provide evidence
of adverse environmental effects from shale gas development. Our model shows how population


                                                  4
changes identify a resource boom’s welfare effects: people “vote with their feet” by moving to
counties where they are better off, taking into account amenities that we might not observe. We
find that one standard deviation additional oil and gas endowment increases population by an
average of 0.8 percent over our sample, implying that oil and gas endowments increase cumulative
local welfare even in the presence of changes in unobserved amenities.
   In summary, we find evidence against each link in the hypothesized Dutch Disease chain of
events. Manufacturing plants in resource-abundant counties benefit a surprising amount from local
demand growth, manufacturing productivity does not decrease, and overall, there is no Natural
Resource Curse: oil and gas abundance increases cumulative local wages and welfare.
   In the remainder of this first section, we discuss related literature. Section 2 provides background
on oil and gas booms in the United States since the 1960s. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4
details the data, Section 5 outlines the empirical strategy, and Section 6 presents results. Section
7 concludes.

1.1   Related Literature
   We build on a growing literature that uses within-country variation to identify the effects of
resource booms, both in the United States (Carrington (1996), Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr (2015),
Haggerty et al. (2014), Jacobsen and Parker (2014), James and Aadland (2011), James and James
(2012), Papyrakis and Gerlagh (2007), and others) and other countries (Aragon and Rud (2011),
Asher and Novosad (2014a, 2014b), Caselli and Michaels (2013), Domenech (2008), Dube and
Vargas (2013), Monteiro and Ferraz (2012), and others). Recent papers by Bartik, Currie, Green-
stone, and Knittel (2017), Feyrer, Mansur, and Sacerdote (2015), Jacobsen (2015), Muehlenbachs,
Spiller and Timmins (2015), Munasib and Rickman (2015), Paredes, Komarek, and Loveridge
(2015), and Weber (2012) study the impacts of the recent hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) boom
on income, housing values, environmental quality, and other outcomes. Acemoglu, Finkelstein, and
Notowidigdo (2013) study the effects of oil price shocks on health spending. Black, McKinnish, and
Sanders (2005a) study the Appalachian coal boom and bust, finding positive employment spillovers
to construction, retail, and services sectors but no effect on manufacturing employment. An im-
portant paper by Michaels (2010) studies the long-term effects of oil abundance in the southern
United States, using cross-sectional estimators to compare counties that have major oil fields to
other nearby counties that do not. He finds that resource discoveries cause oil-abundant counties
to specialize in oil production, but this did not reduce growth in other sectors: higher incomes
increased population, which increased the provision of local public goods, which in turn increased
employment in agriculture and manufacturing.
   Our paper differs from existing work in four main ways. First, the U.S. Census of Manufactures
microdata allow a significant advance beyond previous work that used only publicly-available data
on sector-level aggregate employment. Unlike Michaels (2010) and Black, McKinnish, and Sanders


                                                  5
(2005a), we find some evidence that resource booms cause some manufacturers to contract, but
this finding is only possible because our microdata allow us to look at the subset of manufacturers
producing more highly-traded goods. Furthermore, we directly study how resource booms affect
manufacturing productivity, which until now was a hypothesized but unmeasured mechanism.
    Second, we have gathered very detailed data on resource abundance. Black, McKinnish, and
Sanders (2005a) proxy for resource abundance with binary variables based on initial coal sector
employment, Michaels (2010) proxies with a binary variable for whether a county lies over a large
existing oilfield, and Sachs and Warner (1995, 1999, 2001) and other cross-country studies use
rough proxies such as the share of natural resource exports in GDP. By contrast, we have con-
structed a complete measure of each county’s economically recoverable oil and gas endowment as of
1960, including subsequent production, proven reserves, and undiscovered reserves. Undiscovered
reserves are particularly important because production and proven reserves could be endogenous
to a county’s potential outcomes. For example, if local economic conditions were worse, New York
State might not have banned fracking, and its production would thus be higher.
    Third, we pay more attention to the cylicality of natural resource extraction, as boom and bust
cycles are a fundamental feature of oil and gas production. Our 46-year panel allows us to track
counties and firms through multiple booms and busts. This is important empirically because it
allows us to control for secular time trends that could be correlated with resource endowments.
By contrast, analyses focusing only on the recent fracking boom must make stronger assumptions
about such confounders, which could be particularly problematic given that the fracking boom was
contemporaneous with the Great Recession and with the rapid decline of U.S. manufacturing.
    Fourth, we provide a more careful treatment of general equilibrium effects and other forms
of geographic spillovers. Our model explicitly captures these effects, and our empirical strategy
delivers plausibly unbiased estimates of average treatment effects on the treated (or what we call
“absolute effects”) in the presence of geographic spillovers. By contrast, most previous papers on
resource booms estimated what we call “relative effects” without fully considering spillovers.4 One
recent exception is Feyrer, Mansur, and Sacerdote (2015), who estimate cross-county geographic
spillovers from the fracking boom.
    Our work is also connected to the broader empirical literature on agglomeration and productivity
spillovers. As Ellison and Glaeser (1997) point out, agglomerative spillovers are difficult to identify
because both heterogeneous local natural advantages and spillovers can cause firms to co-locate.
To identify spillovers, several recent papers have exploited natural experiments, including the siting
of large manufacturing plants (Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010), portage sites (Bleakley
and Lin 2012), exogenous worker flows across firms (Serafinelli 2012), and the boundaries of the
Tennessee Valley Authority development region (Kline and Moretti 2014). Our analysis identifies
   4
     The broader literature on local economic shocks has been more precise on this issue; see, for example, Hornbeck
and Moretti (2015) and Kline and Moretti (2014).



                                                         6
spillovers using the natural experiment of local resource booms and busts.
        More broadly, our work connects to the literature on local economic shocks, including studies of
local effects of national-level sectoral trends (Bartik 1991, Blanchard and Katz 1992), military base
closures (Hooker and Knetter 2001), place-based economic development policies (Busso, Gregory,
and Kline 2013), Chinese import competition (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013), and other factors.
Against this literature, our paper is novel in that it studies oil and gas booms, which have helped lead
the recovery from the Great Recession (Moretti 2013). Our paper is also novel in that it studies
cross-industry spillovers, while much of the local labor market literature studies how exogenous
shocks affect county aggregates. Using the tech industry as an analogy, much of this literature
essentially studies how the tech boom affects wages, unemployment, and other aggregates in places
like Silicon Valley. But while a tech boom clearly benefits local land owners and labor suppliers,
it hurts other industries that draw on the same pool of land or labor but are not experiencing
positive revenue productivity shocks. As our model and empirical strategy make clear, the policy
implications then depend on whether externalities from the booming industry are more positive
than from the industries being crowded out.

2        Background: Oil and Gas Booms in Modern America
        Figure 1 presents oil and natural gas prices in the U.S. from 1960 to 2014, using data from the
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Like all prices in this paper, these are in real 2010
dollars. Real oil and gas prices were steady and slowly declining from the end of the Second World
War through the early 1970s. Prices rose suddenly in October 1973 due to the Arab oil embargo
and again in 1979-1980 due to the Iranian Revolution and the Iran-Iraq war. Natural gas prices
closely follow oil prices over the entire study period, except for the most recent few years, when a
marked natural gas supply increase pushed natural gas prices down.
        Figure 2 shows that U.S. oil production peaked in 1970 and began to decline. The decline was
monotonic for the first few years of the 1970s, until it was arrested by the supply response to the
1973 price shock. This supply response, coupled with the recession of the early 1980s, caused prices
to drop steadily from March 1981 to the end of 1985, and then sharply in the first six months of
1986. In the early 2000s, global demand growth spurred a second boom of high prices and increased
production.
        Oil and gas production requires significant labor input. Figure 2 shows total national employ-
ment in the oil and gas sector, as reported in the Regional Economic Information System (REIS).
Closely mirroring the price trend, employment rose from under 400,000 people in the early 1970s to
over one million in the early 1980s, then dropped sharply in 1986 and continued to decline steadily
until 2002.5 Employment then surged again, more than doubling between 2002 and 2014.
    5
     We switch from the SIC to the NAICS classification system in 2000 and plot both SIC and NAICS data points
in that year.


                                                      7
        Of course, these large fluctuations in oil and gas employment are concentrated in the more
resource-abundant counties. Prior to the late 1990s, oil and gas were almost exclusively recovered
from “conventional” reserves: oil and gas accumulations trapped beneath an impermeable rock
layer where the resulting reservoir could be reached with a vertical well. Figure 3 shows each
county’s early endowment: that is, the value of oil and gas per square mile that was in the ground
in 1960 and was economically recoverable using technologies available during the boom and bust
of the 1970s and 1980s. (We detail the construction of this variable in Section 4.1.)
        More recently, prospecting and extraction has focused on extracting “unconventional” oil and
gas trapped in small pores within impermeable rocks. “Fracking” was pioneered for oil and gas
wells in 1947 and was used in some areas during the 1970s boom. There were significant advances
in horizontal drilling in the 1980s and 1990s, and commercially-viable shale gas extraction was
pioneered in the Barnett Shale in northern Texas in 1997. Since then, large amounts of tight oil
and shale gas have become economically recoverable. Figure 4 maps the additional endowment that
became economically exploitable only after the end of the 1990s. This illustrates regions where large
amounts of shale gas or tight oil are newly economically recoverable, such as the Bakken Shale in
western North Dakota, the Niobara shale in eastern Colorado, the Marcellus and Utica Shales in
Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York, and West Virginia, the Barnett Shale, Granite Wash, and Eagle
Ford in Texas, the Woodford Shale in Texas and Oklahoma, and the Haynesville Shale on the
border of Texas and Louisiana.

3        Theoretical Framework
3.1       Overview
Our theoretical model nests multi-period productivity spillovers into Moretti’s (2011) version of
the Rosen-Roback spatial equilibrium framework, illustrating a within-country version of Dutch
Disease. There are two counties, c ∈ {a, b}, with imperfectly mobile population. There are three
production sectors, indexed j ∈ {m, l, r}, representing tradable goods, local (non-tradable) goods,
and natural resources, respectively. Each sector has revenue productivity Xjc . County b does not
have natural resources, so Xrb = 0.
        There are three time periods, indexed by t. t = 0 represents the initial equilibrium, in which
the two counties are symmetric, so Xra = Xrb = 0. In t = 1, county a experiences a “resource
boom,” meaning that Xra > 0. This could reflect either a technological improvement or a price
increase. The boom is temporary, so we again have Xra = Xrb = 0 for t = 2. Below, we provide
detail on production and consumption and describe the effects of the resource boom on equilibrium
outcomes.6

    6
    We chose to simplify functional forms so that key results can be seen in closed form. Notwithstanding, the basic
predictions in Section 3.6 are very general. Our 2014 NBER working paper has a similar model with more general


                                                         8
3.2    Production
Each production sector j ∈ {m, l, r} comprises a composite firm that employs Njc workers and
                             1−γ
earns revenue Rjc = Xjc Njc      , with γ ∈ (0, 1).7 Profit maximization gives labor demand Njc =
h          i1
  Xjc (1−γ) γ
     Wc       , and county total labor demand is Nc = Nmc + Nlc + Nrc . Revenue productivity Xjc
is Pjc Ωjc , price times physical productivity. Resource revenue productivity Xrc is exogenous, as
described above. The tradable good price is exogenous and normalized to Pmc = 1, and the local
good price Plc is endogenously determined.
    Tradable and local sector physical productivities Ωjc evolve over time subject to two types of
possible productivity spillovers. First, “learning-by-doing spillovers” θj ≥ 0 would imply that a
sector’s current productivity increases in that sector’s past employment. Second, “agglomeration
spillovers” Λ ≥ 0 would imply that current productivity increases with past local population,
echoing the findings of Bleakley and Lin (2012) and others. Specifically, using lower case letters
for natural logs (so ωjc = ln(Ωjc ) , njc = ln(Njc ), and nc = ln(Nc )), we assume that physical
productivity in sector j ∈ {m, l} is


                                     ωjc,t+1 = ρj ωjct + θj njct + Λnct + ζj .                                     (1)

    We conceptualize the possible learning-by-doing spillovers as between-firm, local, and intertem-
poral. Although the exact functional forms vary, this conceptualization is consistent with Arrow’s
(1962) original formulation of learning-by-doing, with Kline and Moretti (2014), and with the pre-
vious theoretical literature on Dutch Disease, including Krugman (1987), Matsuyama (1992), and
van Wijnbergen (1984). Modeling productivity spillovers as between-firm and local matches the
empirical results of Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010), Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010),
Kline and Moretti (2014), and Serafinelli (2012), who document productivity spillovers to other
firms in the same area. While within-firm learning may also occur (see Benkard (2000) and others),
we focus on between-firm spillovers because within-firm spillovers are not externalities meriting
policy intervention. We model intertemporal learning-by-doing instead of only contemporaneous
spillovers because this admits the possibility that a natural resource boom could affect (and possibly
reduce) local productivity and welfare in the long term, after the boom is over.
    One could imagine any number of other market failures, including contemporaneous productiv-
ity spillovers and environmental externalities. The social welfare function we specify and empiri-
cally calibrate below captures these and any other factor that would manifest through real wages
or migration.
    Following Moretti (2010), we also model a housing sector that does not require local labor, with
functional forms, and our 2015 NBER working paper has a model that generates similar results in a Melitz (2003)
model of firm heterogeneity.
   7
     The model’s basic predictions generalize to the case with different γm , γl , and γr , but we choose a homogeneous
γ to highlight geographic rather than intersectoral differences.


                                                          9
constant elasticity supply function phc = knc + k0 .


3.3      Consumers and Workers
Each individual decides what to consume and where to live, supplying one unit of labor. Individual
i consumes Cil , Cih , and Cim units of local goods, housing, and tradable goods, respectively.
Individuals also receive utility Ac ic from living in county c, where Ac is county c’s “amenity” and
ic is individual i’s idiosyncratic taste for county c. Amenities could represent factors such as local
public goods, congestion, and environmental quality, some of which could change during a resource
boom. In this theoretical framework, we consider a resource boom that does not affect Ac , but
we also introduce some results that allow the empirical welfare analysis to accommodate possible
effects on Ac . Individuals have Cobb-Douglas preferences, maximizing utility

                                                  β 1−α−β
                                      Uic = Cilα Cih Cim  Ac ic ,                                    (2)

subject to budget constraint Wc ≥ Plc Cil + Phc Cih + Cim . We assume α, β, (1 − α − β) ∈ (0, 1).
   Again using lower case letters for natural logs, indirect utility is uic = wc −αplc −βphc +ac +ln ic ,
plus a constant. Individuals choose to live in county a instead of county b if uia > uib . We assume
that ln ic is distributed type I extreme value with scale parameter s2 , where s ∈ (0, ∞). This gives
a logit model, and the inverse labor supply difference between the two counties is


                  wa − wb = α(pla − plb ) + β(pha − phb ) + s(na − nb ) − (aa − ab ).                 (3)

   In equilibrium, consumers and firms optimize, and the labor, local goods, and housing markets
clear.


3.4      Social Welfare
Of course, the first-best response to unpriced productivity spillovers would be for a policymaker to
measure and price these externalities. The general problem of the social planner with learning-by-
doing or agglomeration spillovers is well-explored; see, for example, Arrow (1962) and Glaeser and
Gottlieb (2008, 2009). We therefore do not study this issue further. Instead, we focus on a different
welfare question: does the resource boom increase local social welfare in the producer county? This
question is important because it helps local policymakers to evaluate policies such as fracking bans
that restrain or prevent resource booms.
   As a measure of social welfare, we consider the indirect utility of people who live in county c in
all periods. Up to a constant, this is




                                                   10
                                        X           X
                                 uc =       uct =       δ t [wct − αplct − βphct + act ] ,                           (4)
                                        t           t

where δ is the discount factor.8
    One might also be interested in national or global-level welfare. We focus on local welfare
effects for two reasons. First, many of the significant policy decisions to discourage oil and gas
drilling, such as fracking bans, are made by state or local authorities. Second, significant additional
assumptions are required to empirically identify national social welfare impacts, due to general
equilibrium effects.


3.5    Relative and Absolute Effects
Our welfare question can be asked in two different ways, depending on what county a is compared
to. First, we can consider the relative effects of a natural resource boom: does the resource boom
increase cumulative social welfare in county a relative to county b?


                           X
              ua − ub =          δ t [(wat − wbt ) − α (plat − plbt ) − β (phat − phbt ) + (aat − abt )]             (5)
                             t

    Substituting labor supply from Equation (3), we see that this can also be written as a function
of only relative population:


                                                         X
                                            ua − ub =         δ t s (nat − nbt ) .                                   (6)
                                                          t

    Intuitively, people vote with their feet by migrating to the county with higher welfare. This
equation will be useful empirically, as it will allow us to sign the relative welfare effect even without
a direct estimate of how the resource boom affects local prices and amenities.
    Second, we can consider absolute effects: does the resource boom increase cumulative social
welfare in county a relative to counterfactual ? Specifically, we denote with (0) a counterfactual
outcome if Xra = Xrb = 0 always.
   8
     We assume that the social planner focuses on permanent residents both because this may be more realistic and
because it eliminates the need to keep track of migrants’ idiosyncratic taste shocks ic . We ignore producer surplus
because many firms are owned by shareholders outside of the county. In the empirical section, however, we will
estimate effects on manufacturing revenues and housing rents. We note that the social planner maximizes indirect
utility in units of log dollars instead of in units of dollars. Under the usual log approximation to percent differences,
however, both the absolute and relative effects comparisons described below give approximate percent differences in
welfare in units of dollars.




                                                              11
                  X
  ua − ua (0) =       δ t [(wat − wat (0)) − α (plat − plat (0)) − β (phat − phat (0)) + (aat − aat (0))]   (7)
                  t

   Of course, relative and absolute effects are different because ub 6= ua (0) due to general equilib-
rium effects. Relative effects are important from a positive perspective: they describe how resource
producers vs. non-producers fare during a resource boom. Absolute effects are important from a
normative perspective: they answer the question of whether a local policymaker should restrain a
resource boom. In the remainder of the paper, we distinguish between relative and absolute effects
for welfare and for other outcomes.


3.6     Effects of Resource Booms, and the Definition of Dutch Disease
We now consider the predicted effects of a natural resource boom – that is, an increase in county
a’s resource sector revenue productivity Xra in period t = 1. Appendix A solves for the equilibrium
and derives these predictions in absolute as well as relative terms.


3.6.1    Contemporaneous Effects

Predictions 1 and 2 consider the contemporaneous (t = 1) effects of a resource boom.
   Prediction 1: A resource boom increases population and wages in t = 1.
   Prediction 2: A resource boom increases local sector employment and prices, and decreases
tradable sector employment, in t = 1.
   These two predictions would arise in any standard model, and in our model they arise either
with or without productivity spillovers. Prediction 1 is important because the entire Dutch Disease
mechanism begins with an initial wage increase during the resource boom. If migration moderates
the wage increase, then any subsequent Dutch Disease effects will also be moderated. Although
manufactures are often thought of as goods that are traded across counties, Prediction 2 highlights
that the effect of a resource boom on overall manufacturing employment depends on the share of
manufactures that are traded vs. sold locally. If manufacturing is largely traded outside the county,
then it will be crowded out during a resource boom. If more of manufacturing is sold locally, then
it will be “crowded in.” Of course, the decrease in tradable sector employment does not imply any
economic inefficiency.


3.6.2    Long-Term Effects with and without Productivity Spillovers

Predictions 3 and 4 demonstrate the long-term (t = 2) effects.



                                                      12
       Prediction 3: If and only if there are agglomeration spillovers or local sector learning-by-doing
spillovers (i.e. Λ > 0 or θl > 0), a resource boom in t = 1 increases local sector productivity in
t = 2. Furthermore, the sign of relative tradable sector productivity in t = 2 is the same as the
sign of

                                                         αγ + βk + s
                                                Λ − θm               .                                                (8)
                                                          γ(1 − α)
       For the local sector, this prediction follows from applying Predictions 1 and 2 to the productivity
evolution formula in Equation (1). Since both population and local sector employment increase in
county a in t = 1, either learning-by-doing (θl > 0) or agglomeration (Λ > 0) would increase local
sector productivity in t = 2. For the tradable sector, Equation (8) says that relative productivity
ωma,t=2 − ωmb,t=2 decreases if the foregone learning-by-doing θm αγ+βk+s
                                                                  γ(1−α) outweighs the agglomer-
ation effect Λ. Alternatively, tradable sector relative productivity could increase if Λ is sufficiently
large, or stay the same if learning-by-doing and agglomeration are zero or exactly offset.
       Prediction 4 then illustrates the possibility that foregone learning-by-doing spillovers could
generate a perverse result in which the initial increase in resource sector revenue productivity
actually reduces cumulative welfare.
       Prediction 4: A resource boom increases cumulative relative welfare ua − ub if and
only if

                                    γ + βk + s                αγ + βk + s
                                               + Λ + αθl > θm             .                                           (9)
                                        δ                          γ
       This prediction shows that relative welfare is more likely to increase under several conditions.
First, if the social planner is less patient (δ is small), then growth during the boom in t = 1 can
outweigh any losses in t = 2. Second, if agglomeration spillovers Λ are large, then county a benefits
more from the population increase during the boom. Third, if local sector learning-by-doing θl is
strong, and/or the local good expenditure share α is large, then county a benefits more from an
increase in local sector learning-by-doing in t = 2. Fourth, if tradable sector learning-by-doing θm
is weak, the sector’s contraction in t = 1 has smaller negative consequences in t = 2. Fifth, if
housing supply is more elastic (i.e. k is lower), the housing expenditure share β is lower, locational
preferences are weaker (i.e. s is smaller), or production is less labor-intensive (i.e. γ is larger), then
the tradable sector contracts less in t = 1.
       Predictions 3 and 4 allow us to contrast the cases with vs. without productivity spillovers.
If there are no productivity spillovers (i.e. Λ = θm = θl = 0), then the two counties have equal
productivity, population, and wages after t = 1, and a resource boom unambiguously increases
relative welfare.9 If there are productivity spillovers, then local sector relative productivity will
   9
    As we show in Appendix A, this is also true for absolute welfare, although the formulas differ because the absolute
welfare effect equals the relative effect plus an adjustment to account for the fact that the resource boom also increases



                                                           13
increase, and the signs of both tradable sector relative productivity and relative welfare will depend
on the relative strengths of the learning-by-doing vs. agglomeration spillovers.
    Of course, one could easily imagine extending our stylized model beyond three periods, and our
empirical work spans many years. In that case, any productivity differences in t = 2 could grow
over time if the spillovers θj and Λ and/or the persistence of past productivity differences ρ are
sufficiently large.10 In the theoretical extreme, this could cause all population to concentrate in
one of the two counties. On the other hand, if spillovers and/or productivity persistence are small,
then the differences between counties in t = 2 will disappear as the counties converge back to parity
in long-run steady state.
    We can formalize what we mean by a “Resource Curse” and “Dutch Disease” in the context of
these four predictions. A “Resource Curse” is when “natural resource abundance reduces cumulative
welfare.” We think of the within-country analogue of Dutch Disease as the possible chain of events
through which an increase in resource sector revenue productivity increases local wages (Prediction
1), leading to decreased tradable sector employment (Prediction 2), leading to decreased tradable
sector productivity (i.e. the sign of Equation (8) is negative in Prediction 3), which could be large
enough to cause a decrease in cumulative welfare (Prediction 4).
    The model generates a set of five specific empirical tests that both quantify the local economic
effects of natural resource booms and test the chain of events that would arise under a within-
country analogue of Dutch Disease. First, do local wages rise substantially during a boom, or is
this dampened by migration? Higher local wages increase local welfare during the boom but also
could crowd out the tradable sector. Second, even if wages rise, is manufacturing actually crowded
out during a boom, or might the sector instead grow as local demand increases? Third, how
does manufacturing productivity evolve over time? Some productivity decline, either transitory or
permanent, is a necessary condition for Dutch Disease. Fourth, what are the long-term effects after
the boom and bust are over? In other words, are any economic effects permanent or transitory?
Fifth, what are the cumulative welfare effects over the boom and bust cycle? Depending on the
discount rate, a boom and bust could still generate positive cumulative welfare gains even if the
effects in t = 2 are negative. Before answering these questions, we detail the data and estimating
equations.



4     Data
4.1    Resource Data
    In the model, there are two counties, one with natural resources and one without. In reality,
welfare in county b.
  10
     The condition for county productivity in sector j to diverge from period to period is just ωja,t+1 − ωjb,t+1 >
ωjat − ωjbt . Substituting this into Equation (1) gives (ρj − 1)(ωjat − ωjbt ) + θj (njat − njbt ) + Λ(nat − nbt ) > 0.


                                                          14
there is continuous variation in resource endowments across many counties. To match the model, we
would like a measure of each county’s oil and gas revenue productivity, or perhaps more generally,
the oil and gas supply curve given the technology available in each year. We proxy for this with
the density of “economically recoverable” oil and gas that was in the ground before our analysis
begins. We want this endowment measure to be determined only by geological factors that are
exogenous to economic outcomes. There are no nationally-comprehensive 1960s-era estimates of
economically recoverable oil and gas reserves, although such data are available more recently. We
thus construct 1960 endowments by adding production from year 1960 to year T plus remaining
reserves at time T . There are two types of reserves, “proven” and “undiscovered,” so our measure
of county c’s endowment density is
                    PT
                      t=1960 P roductionct   + P roven ReservescT + U ndiscovered ReservescT
             Rc =                                                                                             (10)
                                                Area (Square M iles)c
      We divide by county area (including both land and water area) to account for variation in
county size.
      Because “economically recoverable” depends on the extraction technology, we construct different
endowment variables for pre- vs. post-fracking periods. The variable Rcearly measures endowment
in the first boom, with T = 1995, using reserves estimates from the late 1990s. Rctotal measures
total endowments including unconventional resources requiring fracking, with T = 2011, using the
latest estimates of proven and undiscovered reserves. For our primary empirical specifications, we
define an endowment variable Rct , which takes value Rcearly until 2000, and Rctotal beginning in
2001. The precise year in which Rcearly ends does not make much difference, and we show that the
conclusions are not sensitive to using either Rcearly or Rctotal for the entire period.
      We now detail the data sources for production, proven reserves, and undiscovered reserves. Oil
and gas production data are from a new county-by-year panel dataset from 1960 to 2011, the first
such comprehensive county-level dataset. Much of this data is drawn from a well-level database of
oil and gas production provided by DrillingInfo, a market research company, which we collapse to
the county-by-year level. The DrillingInfo data do not include several states and are incomplete in
early years for some other states, so we have also gathered county-level oil and gas production data
from local authorities in 14 additional states; see Appendix Table A1 for details. In several states
with relatively low production, county-level production data do not exist for some early years, so we
impute production by multiplying state-level production by the county’s share of state production
in the earliest year when it is observed.
      Proven reserves data are from the EIA’s survey 23L, which collects proven reserves and pro-
duction by each firm in each oil field (U.S. EIA 2014). The EIA granted us confidential access to
county-by-year totals.11 This is an improvement over publicly-available proven reserves data used
 11
      We were required to use these EIA data inside a Census Research Data Center, which is cumbersome for analyses



                                                         15
in previous work, which include only the largest fields.
    Undiscovered reserves are estimated by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) on the basis of the
expected oil, gas, and natural gas liquid yield using current technology, including estimated future
discoveries over the next 30 years. We map these data to counties by intersecting the most detailed
available USGS geological maps with county outlines. The USGS defines undiscovered reserves as
“undiscovered petroleum is that which is postulated from geologic knowledge and theory to exist
outside of known accumulations” [emphasis added].12 These resources are unaffected by proven
reserves or past production except insofar as greater prospecting in an area might transfer resources
from the “undiscovered” to the “proven” category. Thus, while both production and proven reserves
could be endogenous to economic activity, our measure of Rc including undiscovered reserves is in
principle determined only by geological factors. This is an improvement over previous papers that
measure endowments from production, exports, or proven reserves.
    We transform physical units of oil and gas to dollar values using their average prices (as always,
in real 2010 dollars) over 1960-2011: $34.92 per barrel of oil and $3.20 per mmBtu of gas. To make
regression results more easily interpretable, we normalize Rcearly and Rctotal into standard deviation
units. Across U.S. counties, Rcearly and Rctotal have standard deviations of 6.3 and 9.1 million dollars
per square mile, respectively.
    Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the resource data, focusing on total endowment Rctotal .
There are several basic facts to highlight. First, there are 715 more counties with undiscovered oil
than counties that produce oil, and 1165 more counties with undiscovered gas than counties that
produce gas. This highlights the exogeneity of our measure of resource endowments: Rctotal does not
just include counties that produce in equilibrium. Second, multiplying total endowments by average
prices shows that oil and gas are roughly equal constituents in total endowments, representing 42
and 58 percent of Rctotal , respectively. Third, there is substantial variation in Rctotal across counties:
the standard deviation across all counties (including those with zero endowments) is about three
times the mean. This variation is also highlighted in Figures 3 and 4, which show Rctotal and
Rctotal − Rcearly , respectively.
    Fourth, the primary constituent of oil endowment is the actual production over 1960-2011 –
proven and undiscovered reserves are relatively small. For natural gas, by contrast, reserves are a
much larger share of endowment. Combining oil and gas, 58 percent of Rctotal is from production,
while the remaining 42 percent is from reserves. For Rcearly , which is not reported in the table,
reserves are smaller, so production is 82 percent of endowment. This difference in composition be-
tween Rcearly and Rctotal highlights that one effect of the recent unconventional oil and gas boom has
been to dramatically increase economically recoverable reserves, which have not yet been exploited.
that do not involve the Census of Manufactures data. For estimates that do not use Census of Manufactures data,
we approximate early period proven reserves with data from the 1999 Oil and Gas Journal Data Book and current
proven reserves using the EIA list of top 100 oil fields in 2009 (U.S. EIA 2009).
  12
     See U.S. Geological Survey (2013) for more details on assessment methodology.



                                                      16
4.2      County-Level Economic Outcomes
       Our primary source of data on employment, earnings, and population is the Regional Economic
Information System (REIS), which at the time of this writing has county-level data data available
from 1969 to 2014. We use the REIS for national-level coal employment and oil and gas employment,
as well as county-level population, total employment, total earnings, manufacturing employment,
and manufacturing earnings. We construct earnings per worker by dividing total earnings by total
employment. Due to REIS confidentiality restrictions, manufacturing earnings and manufacturing
employment are not disclosed for some smaller counties, so the sample sizes in those regressions will
be smaller. See Appendix B.2 for additional details on the REIS. Because earnings per worker is
an imperfect proxy for labor input costs, we study hourly wage data from the Current Population
Survey in Appendix A5.
       Nationwide historical housing rent data are not available on an annual basis. We use Decennial
Census data on mean rents until the year 2000 and add the American Community Survey five-year
estimates for 2009 and 2014. We use rents instead of housing prices because this better reflects
the current cost of living in our model, whereas house prices presumably capitalize expectations of
future market conditions, including the future duration of a natural resource boom or bust.
       Table 2 describes the data on county-level economic outcomes. A few counties merge or split
during our sample period. In these cases, we define counties at the most disaggregated level at
which data are observed for a consistent geographic area. This gives a population of 3075 counties
in the lower 48 states.

4.3      Manufacturing Census Microdata
       The Census of Manufactures (CM) includes microdata for all manufacturing plants in the United
States. The data include the county where the plant is located, its four-digit SIC code, as well
as number of employees, total wage bill, value of materials inputs, and total revenues.13 The CM
microdata are available for 1963 and every five years beginning in 1967, i.e. 1972, 1977, ..., 2007.
We convert all industry codes to four-digit year-1987 SIC codes.
       We use plant-level revenue productivity (TFP-R) estimates made available by Foster, Grim, and
Haltiwanger (2014) for years 1972-2007. These are standard Cobb-Douglas log-TFP-Rs estimated
in OLS, with separate production function coefficients for each industry.
       For about 6000 relatively-homogeneous products defined at the 7-digit SIC level, the CM records
both physical production quantities and sales revenues.14 We divide revenues by physical output
to arrive at a plant-by-product-by-year dataset of manufacturing output prices. We drop imputed
  13
      Employment and earnings data for non-responders and small plants with fewer than five employees is imputed
and/or marked as an “administrative record.” For these plants, we use the employment and earnings data drawn
from tax records, but we do not use any imputed variables.
   14
      These are the data used by Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) to study the distinction between physical
productivity and revenue productivity.


                                                        17
data, as well as any reported prices that differ from the 7-digit median by a factor of more than
five.
       We also construct a “county-level Manufacturing Census dataset” by collapsing across plants
to the county-by-year level.

4.3.1      Industry Classifications

       When using the CM, we also examine subsets of manufacturers that may be differentially
affected by resource booms. We distinguish subsectors along two dimensions: tradability and
linkage to oil and gas.
       Using the Commodity Flow Survey, Holmes and Stevens (2014) calculate a measure of trans-
portation costs for each four-digit SIC industry that is closely correlated with average product
shipment distance. Ready-mixed concrete, ice, and newspapers have the highest η, while watches,
x-ray equipment, space propulsion units, and aircraft parts have the lowest. We define a four-digit
SIC industry as “tradable” if the Holmes and Stevens η loglog is less than 0.8, which corresponds
to an average shipment distance of approximately 500 miles. By this definition, 69 percent of
four-digit manufacturing industries are tradable.
       We classify four-digit SIC industries as upstream or downstream of the oil and gas sector using
the Bureau of Economic Analysis Input-Output tables for 1987 (U.S. BEA 2014). For each industry,
we calculate the direct oil and gas output share (the share of output purchased by the oil and gas
sector) and the indirect oil and gas output share (the share of output purchased by the oil and
gas sector through an intermediate industry), and we define the “upstream linkage share” as the
sum of these two quantities. We define an industry as “upstream” of oil and gas if this upstream
linkage share is larger than 0.1 percent. An industry is “downstream” if the oil and gas input
cost share is larger than 0.1 percent.15 We refer to an industry as “non-linked” if it is neither
upstream nor downstream. Using such small cutoff values in defining upstream and downstream
is conservative in the sense that “non-linked” industries have very limited linkage to oil and gas
and thus should not be directly affected by that sector. 27 percent of industries are upstream, 2.5
percent are downstream, 73 percent are non-linked, and 2.1 percent (largely chemical plants) are
both upstream and downstream. Appendix Table A2 presents the most-linked upstream industries
(such as oil and gas field machinery and equipment, cement, lubricants, chemicals, and pipes) and
downstream industries (such as petroleum refining, fertilizers, chemicals, and plastics).

  15
     We do not add the analogous “indirect input share” because this is primarily a measure of electricity intensity,
given that the electricity generation sector uses substantial amounts of natural gas.




                                                         18
5         Empirical Strategy
5.1        County-Level Data
         As suggested by the model, our initial regressions use county-level panel data, measuring differ-
ences in economic outcomes for higher- vs. lower-endowment counties through the boom and bust
cycles between 1969 and 2014. We use separate strategies to estimate relative effects vs. absolute
effects, which we denote by τ r and τ a , respectively. In Appendix A.3, we use the Rubin Causal
Model to show formally how τ r and τ a translate from the two-county model to the many-county
empirical setting. Intuitively, τ r is the effect of a resource boom on the average difference in out-
comes between higher- vs. lower-endowment counties. General equilibrium effects and other types
of geographic spillovers are (by definition) part of the relative effect. By contrast, τ a is the average
treatment effect on the treated: the average across counties of each county’s difference in potential
outcomes if it had higher vs. lower endowments. We must control for geographic spillovers when
estimating the absolute effect.
         Define Yct as an outcome in county c in year t, and define Y0c as a vector of two baseline
values of the outcome from two different years at the beginning and end of the 1960s, with separate
coefficients µt for each year of the sample.16 Also define φdt as a vector of Census division-by-year
indicator variables. To illustrate the relative effects of resource booms, we begin by graphing the
estimates of τtr from the following equation, where the subscript t on τtr indicates that separate
coefficients are estimated for each year of the sample:


                                 ln Yct = τtr Rct + λRct + µt ln Y0c + φdt + εct ,                                (11)

with 1969 as the omitted year in τtr . The estimated τtr show how outcomes such as population
and wages covary with oil and gas endowments Rct in each year. For example, with population or
wages as the outcome, Prediction 1 is that τ̂tr should be relatively large during the boom of the late
1970s, as wages rise in counties with higher Rct and population migrates to those counties. More
generally, the τ̂tr for population and wages should covary with national oil and gas employment,
both rising during booms and falling during busts. We omit the τtr for 1969, so λ measures the
association between endowments and the outcome in 1969, while the τtr measure the difference
between the associations in year t and in 1969.
    16
    When the outcome Yct is population, Y0c is county c’s population in 1966 and 1960, from the U.S. Census Bureau.
When the outcome is employment or earnings per worker, Y0c is county c’s values of that variable for 1968 and 1964,
from County Data Books. There are no housing price or rent data available for 1950 or 1960, so when the outcome
is housing rents, Y0c is 1940 mean rents and county c’s earnings per worker in 1968 and 1964. In regressions using
the county-level Manufacturing Census dataset, Y0c is the 1967 and 1963 values of Yc . Including two logged baseline
values and allowing their coefficients to vary by year means that we control for how baseline levels and trends in ln Y
are associated with ln Y in any later year. We add one to each variable before logging so that zero values do not
become missing. The decision of how to address zeros makes little difference because there are very few zeros in the
data.



                                                          19
   This intuition suggests a “shift-share” regression in the spirit of Bartik (1991), in which our key
independent variable is the interaction of county-level oil and gas endowment Rct with time-series
variation in national oil and gas employment, denoted Et . For our primary estimates, we use a
differencing approach instead of fixed effects, because errors εct are sufficiently serially correlated
that differences are more efficient. Our specification to estimate relative effects is:


                        ∆ ln Yct = τ r Rct ∆ ln Et + λRct + µt ln Y0c + φdt + εct .                       (12)

   This and all other regressions use robust standard errors, clustered by state. Because Y and
E are logged, τ is the differential elasticity of outcomes with respect to Et for counties with one
standard deviation additional endowment per square mile.
   Equation (12) provides an unbiased estimate of the relative effect τ r if Rct ∆ ln Et ⊥ εct |
{Rct , ln Y0c , φdt }, i.e. as long as resource booms are uncorrelated with unobserved economic trends,
conditional on baseline outcomes and other controls. The fact that our sample covers multiple
booms and a bust means that ∆ ln Et increases, then decreases, then increases again in partic-
ular years. It is difficult to imagine a confounder that has this same particular time trend and
differentially affects resource-abundant counties.
   The absolute effect τ a can be identified only under some additional assumption about the
structure of spillovers; see Manski (2013). In our context, most geographic spillovers are local: for
example, people are more likely to move across the state for a job than across the country. We
thus assume that geographic spillovers from other counties scale with the distance from county c,
and that counties outside a maximum radius of 400 miles are unaffected. Specifically, we calculate
total oil and gas endowment (in units of dollars) for all other counties with centroids within eight
different doughnuts around county c: 0-50, 50-100, ... , and 350-400 miles. We denote this total
endowment in doughnut d around county c as Rctd , where the t subscript again reflects the fact
that we use early endowment until the year 2000 and total endowment thereafter. The following
specification estimates the absolute effect:


                                    8
                                    X
     ∆ ln Yct = τ a Rct ∆ ln Et +         [νd Rctd ∆ ln Et + ϑd Rctd ] + λRct + µt ln Y0c + φdt + εct .   (13)
                                    d=1

   In this equation, νd represents the effect of additional endowment in doughnut d on a county’s
economic outcomes. This specification is analogous to the Miguel and Kremer (2004) approach to
estimating geographic spillovers. Clarke (2015) shows that this provides an unbiased estimate of τ a
if there are no spillover effects outside the maximum radius. This assumption would be violated if,
for example, cities such as Denver and Houston grow during the boom as they provide management
and financing for business operations in far-away counties. We consider this particular concern in


                                                        20
Section 6.7, and in general we present the absolute effects estimates with additional caution.

5.2   Census of Manufactures Microdata
    We also use plant-level Census of Manufactures microdata to estimate how changes in resource
booms affect continuing plants. We focus on relative effects so as to not need to impose assumptions
about the nature of geographic spillovers. In the estimating equation below, f indexes plants,
c indexes counties, λnt denotes the full interactions of four-digit SIC codes and years, and the
difference operator ∆ now reflects a 5-year difference between rounds of the Census of Manufactures.
The regression is:


                         ∆ ln Yf ct = τ r Rct ∆ ln Et + βRct + φdt + λnt + εf ct .                (14)

5.3   Long Differences
Finally, we also use a long difference specification to test for pre-1973 trends and measure long-term
effects of the boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s. To do this, we construct a county-level (not
county-by-year) dataset of long differences ∆ ln Yc and regress this on endowment Rcearly , controlling
for two baseline outcomes ln Y0c and for census division fixed effects φd :


                               ∆ ln Yc = τ r Rcearly + µ ln Y0c + φd + εc .                       (15)



6     Results
In this section, we present the results of the five empirical tests suggested at the end of Section 3,
illustrating the possible Dutch Disease chain of events. We first present relative effects in Sections
6.1 through 6.6, including initial conditions and pre-1973 trends, effects on county-level aggregates,
effects on the manufacturing sector, and long-term effects. In Section 6.7, we estimate geographic
spillovers and absolute effects, and in Section 6.8 we estimate the welfare effects of resource booms.


6.1   Initial Conditions and Pre-1973 Trends
Table 3 describes initial conditions before the 1970s oil boom. Of course, these are “initial con-
ditions” only in the sense that our main sample begins at the end of the 1960s. Most counties
and states that produced oil and gas during the 1970s boom had already been producing for many
years, so their local economies may have already been shaped by oil and gas abundance. The first
two rows present population and total employment data from the 1969 REIS, while the remaining
five rows show manufacturing employment from the 1967 Census of Manufactures. Column 1 shows
the mean across all 3075 counties in the data. Manufacturing was about one-fifth of employment

                                                    21
at the time. Within manufacturing, 73 percent is “non-linked” by our conservative definition. Of
non-linked employment, 73 percent is tradable by our definition, while the remainder is local.
       Column 2 shows coefficients and standard errors from regressions of natural logs of each vari-
able on oil and gas endowment per square mile Rcearly , controlling for census division fixed ef-
fects. Endowments are positively and significantly correlated with population and employment,
and positively but not significantly correlated with manufacturing employment. Consistent with
the Michaels (2010) results for several southern states, this implies that resource-abundant coun-
ties had grown faster over the decades since they began producing oil and gas. The confidential
Census data show that the manufacturing sector correlation depends heavily on the type of man-
ufacturing. A one standard deviation increase in oil and gas endowment is associated with an 8.9
percent increase in linked manufacturing employment. By contrast, the relationships between en-
dowments and employment in other manufacturing subsectors are insignificant, and point estimates
are negative.17
       As Figures 1 and 2 in Section 2 showed, oil and gas prices and employment were relatively
steady between 1969, when our main sample begins, and the 1973 oil price shock. The 1969-1972
period is thus an opportunity for “placebo tests”: given that national oil and gas activity was rela-
tively stable, changes in economic outcomes should be uncorrelated with oil and gas endowments,
conditional on our standard control variables. Table 4 provides such tests: each column presents
a regression of the 1972-1969 difference in a logged outcome from the REIS on early endowment
Rcearly , controlling for census division indicators and controls for baseline levels ln Y0c , as formal-
ized in Equation (15). The absence of pre-1973 trends supports our causal interpretation of the
association of resource abundance with changes in outcomes during resource booms.18 Of course,
even if there were monotonic trends associated with resource abundance, our identification would
still be credible because it exploits non-monotonic changes in the oil and gas sector: a boom, a
bust, and a boom over a 46-year period.


6.2      Relative Effects on County-Level Aggregates
       Prediction 1 of the model is that natural resource booms increase local population and wages,
and this prediction is important because the wage increase is the first step in the potential Dutch
Disease mechanism. How do oil and gas booms differentially affect these county-level aggregate
economic outcomes for counties with higher vs. lower endowments? Figure 5 presents the estimates
  17
     Including division fixed effects does affect the magnitudes and even the signs of these correlations. This is partially
because as the map in Figure 3 shows, a large amount of oil and gas is in sparsely-populated Rocky mountain states.
The sensitivity of the cross sectional correlations to the inclusion of such controls emphasizes the importance of
exploiting time series variation in oil and gas booms.
  18
     The table includes five of the six county-level outcomes that we consider in Tables 5, 8, and 10. The sixth is
housing rents, which we cannot test in this framework because it is not observed annually (and furthermore is not
available for 1950 or 1960).



                                                            22
of τtr from Equation (11) for employment, population, and earnings per worker using the REIS data.
Our key time-series variable Et (national oil and gas employment) is plotted in gray against the right
axis. Each of the outcomes is highly procyclical with the resource boom. The figure also illustrates
the dynamic adjustment to a local economic shock highlighted by Blanchard and Katz (1992). As
the resource sector expands, total employment and wages rise immediately. Population adjusts
more slowly, however, meaning that the short-run effects of a resource boom are to increase wages
and decrease unemployment. Within one to two years, people migrate in search of higher wages,
and this migration moderates wage changes. To account for this delayed population adjustment,
we use the one-year lag of ∆ ln Et in all regressions with population as the outcome. Appendix
Figure A3 plots each outcome separately and includes confidence intervals.
       Table 5 presents formal estimates of τ r , the relative effects of oil and gas booms, using Equation
(12).19 The positive coefficients mean that outcomes in higher-endowment counties are statisti-
cally significantly more procyclical with national oil and gas employment than in lower-endowment
counties. In other words, a boom significantly increases relative growth, and a bust significantly
decreases relative growth. A boom that increases national oil and gas employment by 100 log
points increases relative population, employment, housing rents, and earnings per worker by ap-
proximately 1.19, 2.82, 2.70 and 1.79 percent, respectively, for counties with one standard deviation
additional endowment.
       There are several reasons why an increase in county average earnings per worker during a
resource boom might not translate to an increase in manufacturers’ labor input costs. First, average
labor quality could change during a resource boom. If higher-skill workers enter the labor force
during a resource boom, either by transitioning from unemployment or by migrating from other
counties, this could cause average earnings per worker to increase even as wages are unchanged for
workers of the same skill type. Second, labor input per worker could change: if people work more
hours during resource booms, earnings per worker would increase even if unit labor costs did not.
       In Appendix A5, we use Current Population Survey microdata to address these concerns. The
CPS records hourly wages and worker demographics. Using these data, we find estimates compara-
ble to those in Table 5. Controlling for observable and unobservable worker characteristics does not
statistically significantly change the estimates, and we find no effect of resource booms on average
hours worked.
       A third reason why county average wages or earnings per worker might not affect manufacturers
is that manufacturing workers may be imperfectly substitutable with other workers. In the extreme,
manufacturing wages could even be completely unaffected, even as county average wages rise. Using
the REIS data, Column 5 of Table 5 shows that relative manufacturing earnings per worker are
  19
    The population regression in column 1 has 3075 fewer observations than the employment regression in column 2
because we lose one year of data when we use the one-year lag of ∆ ln Et . The housing rent sample size is smaller
because we observe this variable approximately every ten years instead of every year. Manufacturing earnings per
worker and manufacturing employment have smaller sample sizes due to the REIS non-disclosure protocols.



                                                       23
also procyclical with resource booms. The coefficient is smaller, but not statistically different, than
the coefficient in column 4. In Appendix A5, the point estimates of τ r for manufacturing workers
are actually larger than for the average worker, although this again is not statistically different.
       Appendix D presents further robustness checks. Appendix Table A6 shows that the results are
similar when using Rcearly or Rctotal in all years in place of Rct , measuring resource boom intensity by
national-level oil and gas wage and salary employment or oil and gas prices instead of total oil and
gas employment, or using an analogous fixed effects estimator instead of a difference estimator.20
In Appendix Table A7, we show that for most of the six main outcomes, the overall procyclicality is
driven both by increases during oil and gas booms and decreases during busts, although coefficients
tend to be smaller for the post-2001 period. We have also constructed nationwide county-level coal
endowment data analogous to our oil and gas data, which we use to study the effects of coal booms
and busts in Appendix Table A8. Results in our nationwide data are broadly consistent with the
Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2005a, 2005b) estimates for several eastern states. As shown in
Appendix Figure A4, however, the 1970s coal boom was about an order of magnitude smaller than
the 1970s oil and gas boom in terms of national employment growth. Thus, although the coal boom
occurred in a similar period and in some of the same counties as the oil and gas boom, controlling
for its effects has very little impact on our estimates of τ r from oil and gas booms.
       Per the model’s Prediction 2, the magnitude of a resource boom’s effects on tradable goods
producers depends on the magnitude of the wage increase. The coefficients for Figure 5 show that
during the second oil and gas boom in our sample (2007-2014), earnings per worker average 2.3
percent higher than their 1969 or 2002-2003 levels in counties with one standard deviation additional
endowment. Should we think of this relative increase as large or small? We can benchmark these
magnitudes in three ways.
       First, given that the average labor input revenue share in manufacturing is on the order of 0.25,
total costs increased by 0.6 percent of revenues over the 2007-2014 period. While this is small, it
represents a much larger share of variable profits, and it may be exacerbated by increases in costs of
any locally sourced materials inputs. Second, for 2011, the coefficient of variation across counties
in earnings per worker is 21.7 percent. Thus, an increase in earnings per worker of 2.3 percent
represents 0.11 of a standard deviation.
       Third, we can compare the cross-county wage increase to estimates from the cross-country Dutch
Disease literature. Sachs and Warner (2001, page 834) show that natural resource exports are
strongly negatively correlated with GDP growth and argue that Dutch Disease (through currency
appreciation) is the primary mechanism. They estimate that near the peak of the boom in 1979, a
10 percentage point increase in a country’s share of natural resource exports in GDP was associated
with a 6.9 percent increase in price level. For context, Nigeria’s natural resource exports equaled
  20
    When using oil and gas prices to measure booms, coefficients have comparable t-statistics but are mechanically
smaller, because oil and gas booms historically have entailed larger proportional increases in oil and gas prices than
in national oil and gas employment. This can be seen by comparing Figure 1 to Figure 2.


                                                         24
10 percent of GDP, and one standard deviation across countries is about eight percent. Thus, a one
standard deviation increase in natural resources leads to about a 5.5 percent increase in exporters’
local costs. This is about 2.4 times larger than the 2.3 percent cross-county increase we estimate
for 2007-2014.

6.3   Relative Effects on County-Level Manufacturing Employment
   After wages rise, that the next step of the Dutch Disease mechanism is that the tradable sector
is crowded out, per the model’s Prediction 2. Is that what happens in U.S. counties?
   Figure 6 presents estimates of Equation (11) for manufacturing employment. There is no evi-
dence of crowding out. To the contrary, relative manufacturing employment in resource-abundant
counties is clearly procyclical with oil and gas booms. Manufacturing employment grows during
the boom of the 1970s, drops off during the bust in the late 1980s, and grows again during the
boom of the 2000s. In counties with one standard deviation additional endowment, manufacturing
employment was two to three percent larger at the peaks of the two booms in our sample, compared
to the 1969-1972 pre-boom period.
   Returning to Table 5, Column 6 presents presents formal estimates of τ r for manufacturing
employment. A boom that increases national oil and gas employment by 100 log points increases
relative manufacturing employment by approximately 2.93 percent in counties with one standard
deviation larger endowment. Remarkably, this point estimate is slightly larger than the estimate
for total employment across all sectors presented in column 2.

6.4   County-Level Manufacturing Census Dataset: Subsectors and Alternative
      Outcomes
   In the context of Prediction 2, manufacturing’s procyclicality with resource booms suggests that
a significant share manufacturing is locally-traded, and that growth in locally-traded manufacturing
subsectors outweighs any contraction in traded subsectors. Do the data bear this out? Table 6
presents estimates of Equation (12) using the county-level Manufacturing Census dataset, which
we constructed by collapsing the CM microdata across plants to the county-by-year level. Each
panel presents a different outcome, while each column presents estimates with outcomes collapsed
from different manufacturing sub-sectors.
   Column 1 presents estimates for all manufacturing plants. The first panel examines employment,
confirming the result from Table 5 that the sector is procyclical with oil and gas. The point
estimates are slightly larger in the CM data but not statistically different. The second and third
panels consider revenues (“total value of shipments”) and investment. Revenues are even more
procyclical than employment, and investment is even more procyclical than revenues.
   Column 2 presents analogous results for plants that are upstream or downstream of oil and
gas. Columns 3 considers non-linked plants, and columns 4 and 5 divide the non-linked plants into
subsamples that produce more vs. less tradable goods. Results are generally consistent with the

                                                25
model’s Prediction 2. Non-linked and local industries are clearly procyclical with resource booms.
In contrast, column 5 suggests that tradable subsectors are countercyclical. Point estimates for all
variables other than investment have similar magnitude but opposite signs as the point estimates
for local non-tradables, although revenue results are more noisy. Crucially, these results arise for
well-defined subsets of manufacturing plants that would not be possible to isolate in aggregate data.
   Do firms adjust to resource booms on the “intensive margin,” by hiring more workers within
the same plant, or on the “extensive margin,” by opening and keeping open more plants? Because
opening physical plants may involve larger sunk costs than hiring workers into existing plants, this
could affect the persistence of a resource boom’s effects. In the bottom two panels, we see that
different sub-sectors adjust differently on the intensive vs. extensive margins. In column 2, the
linked sector adjusts largely on the extensive margin, with a much larger coefficient on number of
plants than on employees per plant. In contrast, the non-linked sectors adjust more on the intensive
margin, with the non-linked local sector significantly increasing the number of employees per plant,
and the non-linked tradable sector significantly contracting on that margin.

6.5   Effects of Resource Booms on Manufacturing Revenue Productivity
   In this section, we first study the contemporaneous effects of resource booms on manufacturing
productivity. These effects could be an important part of the mechanism making aggregate manu-
facturing wages and employment procyclical with resource booms. We then study the evolution of
productivity in the highly tradable manufacturing subsectors.
   Table 7 presents estimates of the contemporaneous effects of oil and gas booms on manufacturing
revenue productivity, using Equation (14) with plant-level data from the Census of Manufactures.
The dependent variable is first differences of the natural log of outcomes within surviving plants over
the five year periods between each CM. As in the previous table, each panel examines a different
outcome, and the columns include the same subsets of plants. For each outcome, we present two
sets of estimates: sub-table (a) has only census division-by-year fixed effects, while sub-table (b)
also includes four-digit industry-by-year effects.
   The first and second panels analyze two different measures of revenue productivity: value added
per worker and revenue total factor productivity. Both tell qualitatively similar stories. For the
manufacturing sector overall, revenue productivity is positively associated with oil and gas booms.
These effects are smaller for TFP-R than value added per worker, although the value added effects
are substantially attenuated by including industry-year controls. Effects appear to be stronger
for local industries and those linked to the oil and gas sector. By contrast, in non-linked and
tradable industries, neither measure of revenue productivity covaries with resource booms, with
point estimates close to zero.
   One concern might be that even though these are within-plant estimates, the apparent pro-
ductivity increase for linked and local sectors could be driven by selection. Specifically, if resource


                                                     26
booms allow lower-productivity firms to operate during booms, a boom would allow more firms
to remain in operation even if they receive a negative productivity shock. However, this potential
selection effect would bias against our results, which show that the average continuing plant in
linked and non-linked local industries experiences a productivity increase during a boom.
   As Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) highlight, the revenue productivity effects in Table
7 could reflect either higher markups or higher physical productivity. Indeed, our model predicts
higher prices for locally traded goods during resource booms. Given that the CM does not have
physical output data for most plants, this cannot be tested conclusively. In Appendix Table A9, we
show that resource booms do not statistically significantly affect prices in the subset of plants that
report physical output. Because prices can only be calculated for relatively homogeneous goods,
however, this subset of plants is both relatively unusual and relatively small. Thus, the results only
tentatively suggest that the TFP-R effects may reflect physical productivity.
   If the results in Table 7 do reflect physical productivity, what might be the mechanism? A
natural starting point is reductions in Marshall’s (1890) three types of transport costs: goods,
people, and ideas. “Goods” linkages could increase productivity if local economic growth allows
goods to be procured from and delivered to more nearby suppliers and buyers, either in the resource
sector or in other procyclical local sectors. This is consistent with Table 7 results, which show TFP-
R growth in linked and local sectors, but not in tradables.
   Worker flows seem to be less important than in Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010) or
Serafinelli (2012). For the entire CPS-MORG panel, which includes 281,301 manufacturing workers,
there are only 220 that transition from oil and gas to manufacturing. Of these, 130 go to refining,
and in every other two-digit industry, only around 0.001 percent of incoming workers come from oil
and gas. The “ideas” channel seems even less likely: much of the oil and gas sector’s innovation does
not occur at the drilling site, and much of it seems unlikely to translate to non-resource industries.
   Beyond the three classical transport costs, several other channels might contribute to the pro-
ductivity effects. For example, plant-level economies of scale could be relevant, perhaps due to
higher capacity utilization, although the CM microdata do not suggest strong scale economies.
Furthermore, local government actions, from tax cuts to the infrastructure improvements studied
by Michaels (2010), might improve measured productivity. However, this channel does not seem
particularly important given the near-zero effects on tradable sector plants that would presumably
also benefit. Tax cuts and infrastructure take time to implement, so they might be more relevant
in a long-term cross-sectional analysis like Michaels (2010) than in these relatively short-term dif-
ference estimates. In summary, the contemporaneous TFP-R gains from natural resource booms
are likely driven by some combination of higher output prices and lower transport costs for inputs
and outputs.
   Table 6 showed that only the highly tradable manufacturing subsectors appear to contract
during natural resource booms. Thus, if we are to see any evidence of Dutch Disease, it will be in


                                                 27
these subsectors. Per the model’s Prediction 3, the next step in the Dutch Disease chain of events
would be that the tradable sector contraction leads to reduced productivity. Is this what we see in
the data, or is productivity unaffected?
   Figure 7 shows the evolution of employment and TFP-R for the tradable manufacturing sub-
sectors, presenting the τtr coefficients from estimates of Equation (11) in county-by-year data. (We
calculate county-level TFP-R by taking the mean across all plants in the county-year cell.) Em-
ployment is generally countercyclical, as suggested by the negative coefficient in Table 6: relative
employment in resource-abundant counties contracted during the boom of the 1970s and 1980s
before recovering through the 1990s. Thus, if there were foregone learning-by-doing effects, relative
productivity would also eventually become negative. In reality, however, we see that relative TFP-
R is never negative, implying no significant loss of learning-by-doing spillovers. With 90 percent
confidence, we can rule out the TFP-R dropped more than 0.39 percent in any census year in coun-
ties with one standard deviation additional endowment. Connecting to Prediction 3, this shows
that any effects of resource booms on tradable sector productivity are economically and statistically
insignificant. Thus, this key link in the possible Dutch Disease chain of events is broken.

6.6   Long-Term Effects
Predictions 3 and 4 highlight the importance of measuring the long-term effects of resource booms.
Prediction 3 states that if either local sector learning-by-doing θl or agglomeration Λ is positive,
local sector productivity will be higher in higher-endowment counties after the boom is over. For the
tradable sector, post-boom relative productivity effects depend on whether foregone learning-by-
doing outweighs the agglomeration effect; Figure 7 showed that the overall effects are insignificant.
Of course, in a more general context outside of our model, a resource boom could have long-term
effects through other mechanisms, such as adjustment costs, labor market search frictions, or other
frictions that can deepen recessions following booms, as well as persistent changes in environmental
quality or development of local infrastructure and public goods. These issues motivate empirical
tests of the long-term impacts of oil and gas booms on productivity and other outcomes.
   The most recent boom and bust cycle is not complete as of the end of our sample in 2014.
However, we can measure the relative effects of the 1970s and 1980s boom and bust, as of the end
of the 1990s—safely before the more recent boom began. To do this, we use the long differences
regression in Equation (15), regressing the change in log outcomes between 1972 and 1997 on Rcearly ,
controlling for baseline outcomes ln Y0c and census division fixed effects φd .
   Table 8 examines the long-term effects of the boom and bust on log TFP-R. For the top
panel, we collapse plant-level log TFP-R to county means and difference between 1972 and 1997 to
generate the long difference, then estimate Equation (15). The bottom panel of Table 8 instead uses
plant-level data for 1972 and 1997, where we run a difference-in-differences estimator, controlling
for county fixed effects and 4-digit SIC-by-year effects and reporting the interaction of the 1997


                                                 28
year indicator with resource endowment Rcearly . Both specifications find no significant differences
in productivity in any sector. Thus, the TFP-R effects measured in Table 7, plus any potential
longer-term effects, cancel out over the boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s.
      Table 9 presents estimates of Equation (15) for each of the six main county-level outcomes from
Table 5. To match the CM years, we also use 1997-1972 long differences, except for housing rents,
where we use 2000-1970. The results here are foreshadowed by Figure 5, as well as Appendix Figure
A3: these figures show that the coefficients in the late 1990s are very close to zero, implying that
the bust has unwound the effects of the boom. Indeed, for all six outcomes, the long difference
results confirm zero long-term effects of the 1970s and 1980s boom and bust.
      In the context of our model, these results also provide insight as to whether resource booms
have lasting impacts on amenities such as environmental quality. If there are no productivity
differences, then the model predicts that population and wages differ if and only if there are amenity
differences.21 The fact that there are no statistically significant long-term effects on productivity,
population, or wages therefore suggests that people perceive equal amenities in resource-abundant
counties. Thus, the oil and gas boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s had no detectable negative
long-term effects on average amenities. This counters concerns about potential harm from oil and
gas extraction using conventional technologies. However, we emphasize that our estimates from the
conventional boom of the 1970s and 1980s do not generalize to some current questions about the
environmental effects of fracking.


6.7      Geographic Spillovers and Absolute Effects
So far, we have studied the relative effects τ r of natural resource booms on higher- vs. lower-
endowment counties. We now estimate geographic spillovers and absolute effects τ a , using Equation
(13). While the model focuses on general equilibrium effects induced by migration, geographic
spillovers could also occur through other channels. For example, producer states may redistribute
tax revenues to their non-producer counties, and there may be business demand spillovers as firms
in non-producer counties expand to serve higher demand in nearby producer counties.
      The expected sign of the spillovers depends on the outcome and the channel. Migration and
business demand spillovers both suggest positive wage spillovers to nearby counties. By contrast,
direct migration predicts negative population spillovers, but business demand spillovers increase
labor demand in nearby counties, which would draw migrants from other more distant counties.
      Even if the sign of the geographic spillover is known, the sign of the difference between τ r and τ a
is ambiguous, depending on the geographic arrangement of treatment units in the sample, i.e. the
geographic clustering of oil and gas endowments across the United States. Imagine momentarily
that the average treatment effect on the treated τ a is positive. In one extreme, if treatment counties
 21
      See Equations (29) and (30) in Appendix A.



                                                     29
are uniformly geographically dispersed, τ r < τ a with positive geographic spillovers, and τ r > τ a
with negative geographic spillovers. Intuitively, positive spillovers increase outcomes for many
control units, attenuating the difference between treatment and control, and negative spillovers
reduce outcomes for many control units, increasing the difference between treatment and control.
   In another extreme, however, treatment counties could be clustered together such that all ge-
ographic spillovers impact other treatment counties, with no impact on control. In this case, we
have the opposite result: τ r > τ a with positive spillovers, and τ r < τ a with negative spillovers.
Intuitively, positive spillovers increase outcomes for treatment units only, magnifying the difference
between treatment and control, while negative spillovers reduce outcomes for treatment units only,
reducing the difference between treatment and control. Reality is somewhere between these two ex-
tremes: figures 3 and 4 show that oil and gas endowments are moderately geographically clustered.
Thus, τ a could be larger or smaller than τ r .
   Table 10 presents estimates of τ a from Equation (13) for the six main county-level outcome
variables. In each case, τ̂ a is smaller than the corresponding τ̂ r from Table 5. Figure 8 presents the
estimates of νr for each of the eight different distance doughnuts. Spillovers from nearby counties
are statistically significantly positive for all outcomes.
   Population is close to a zero-sum game, as resource booms will have limited effect on total
nationwide population. This explains why population spillovers in the top left panel of Figure 8 tend
negative from counties with centroids between 300 and 400 miles from county c: the migration into
producer counties and other nearby counties has to come from more distant counties. Consistent
with reduced population (and thus reduced housing demand), housing rents also tend negative in the
300-400 mile doughnuts. For earnings per worker and manufacturing earnings per worker, spillovers
are statistically zero after about 150 miles. This is roughly consistent with Feyrer, Mansur, and
Sacerdote (2015), who find that drilling during the recent fracking boom only impacted wages and
employment in other counties within about a 100-mile radius.
   As discussed in Section 5, in order for the τ a from Equation (13) to be an unbiased estimate of
the absolute effect, there must be no spillover effects not captured in the empirical model – i.e. no
spillovers from counties more than 400 miles away. This is particularly important for earnings per
worker and housing rents, given that these variables enter our welfare analysis in the next section.
The statistically zero effects for these outcomes from endowments more than 150 miles from county
c supports the identifying assumption. One additional factor that could violate this assumption is
if large cities such as Denver or Houston benefit from resource booms by providing management,
financial services, or inputs to firms in distant counties. To test this, Appendix Table repeats the
estimates in Table 10, after excluding counties whose populations were larger than 250,000 people
in 1960. The estimates are almost exactly the same.




                                                   30
6.8     Social Welfare Effects
In our final set of empirical results, we present the social welfare effects of oil and gas booms over
our sample. In our model, the zero long-term impacts on productivity documented in Section
6.6 already imply that resource booms increase welfare in both relative and absolute terms. Two
questions remain. First, could there be mechanisms not considered in the model that cause resource
booms to reduce welfare? Second, quantitatively how large are the welfare effects?
     We first quantify effects on “real earnings,” i.e. earnings net of the increase in local prices.
These equal welfare effects under the assumption that resource booms do not affect amenities. To
quantify real earnings effects, we combine the formal estimates of τ r and τ a from Equations (12)
and (13) into an empirical analogue of the welfare formulas in Equations (5) and (7).22 Specifically,
beginning with Equations (5) and (7), we substitute empirical estimates τ̂ r for (wat −wbt ) and other
relative effects, and τ̂ a for (wat − wat (0)) and other absolute effects. We must also incorporate the
actual length and magnitude of booms and busts over our 1969-2014 sample. To do this, we
multiply the treatment effects by the sum of annual changes in national oil and gas employment
∆Et , where each annual change is weighted by (T − t + 1), the number of remaining years in the
sample. Dividing by 45 then gives the annual average effect. Thus, from the perspective of the 1969
policymaker, the average real earnings effect of natural resource booms and busts over 1969-2014
is

                      T =2014
                   1 X  t−1969                                                            
              Ŵ =            δ ∆ ln Et · (T − t + 1) · (τ̂earnings − ατ̂rent − β τ̂local ) ,                     (16)
                   45
                         t=1970

     where τ̂ can be either τ̂ r or τ̂ a . Because τ̂ is in log units, this formula approximates the percent
change in real earnings. We use δ = 1. Following Hornbeck and Moretti (2015), we assume that
the prices of all locally-traded goods move proportionally with housing prices, and we assume that
the expenditure share on local goods plus housing is α + β = 0.3.
     Table 11 presents results, with standard errors in parentheses. Column 1 presents relative
effects using τ̂ r , while column 2 presents absolute effects using τ̂ a . The first two rows present
regression coefficients for earnings per worker and housing rents from Equations (12) and (13). For
housing rents, these are the same as the estimates in Tables 5 and 10. For consistency, we use
the same estimation sample (with data from 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2009, and 2014) to estimate
both τ̂earnings and τ̂rent , so the coefficients for earnings per worker are slightly different than in the
previous tables. Row 3 shows that the relative and absolute real earnings gains from a boom causing
a 100 log point increase in national oil and gas employment are 1.6 and 0.7 percent, respectively.
  22
     To see the intuition, notice that the relative earnings gains over our sample are the integral under the 1969-2014
earnings effects illustrated in Figure 5. To calculate the real relative earnings gains, we would then subtract off
the local good and housing expenditure shares times the integral under the equivalent figures for those goods. This
would then reflect the relative real earnings effect of one additional standard deviation oil and gas endowment over
the 1969-2014 period.


                                                          31
Row 4 presents calibrations of Equation (16). The annual average real earnings gain from one
standard deviation additional oil and gas endowment is approximately 1.0 percent relative to other
counties during the boom, and approximately 0.4 percent relative to a county’s own counterfactual.
    These real earnings gains equal social welfare gains only if resource booms do not affect ameni-
ties. As Muehlenbachs, Spiller and Timmins (2015) and others have shown, however, oil and gas
production may affect environmental quality. Equation (6) from the model shows that the sign of
the relative welfare effect is the same as the average population change. Intuitively, people migrate
to producer counties if and only if their utility is higher there. Row 5 of Table 11 presents estimates
of τ r and τ a for population using the same sample of years as rows 1 and 2, and row 6 presents
calibrations of Equation (16) after substituting τ̂population for τ̂earnings − ατ̂rent − β τ̂local . That final
row shows that population averages approximately 0.8 percent higher in counties with one standard
deviation additional endowment over the full 1969-2014 period. Thus by this metric as well, oil
and gas endowments have increased relative welfare.



7    Conclusion
    The dramatic oil and gas price changes and improvements in drilling technology over the past
15 years raise the important question of how resource booms and busts shape the economic ge-
ography of the United States. The agglomeration literature suggests that booms might bring
both short-term benefits and, due to persistent productivity spillovers, cause long-term economic
transformations in resource rich areas. Alternatively, there might instead be a “Natural Resource
Curse,” perhaps due to a version of the Dutch Disease mechanism in which wage increases crowd
out externality-generating manufacturing establishments. To test between these alternative mecha-
nisms, we combine a new panel dataset of oil and gas production and reserves with restricted-access
microdata from the Census of Manufactures to estimate how oil and gas booms have differentially
affected U.S. counties since the 1960s.
    Our empirical results document that oil and gas booms significantly increase wages, even as
people migrate to producer counties. Notwithstanding, overall manufacturing employment, output,
and revenue productivity are actually procyclical with resource booms. Although resource booms
do seem to crowd out more highly-tradable manufacturing, there are no temporary or permanent
reductions in tradable subsectors’ revenue productivity. This implies that a key link in the Dutch
Disease chain of events is not active. Across outcomes, we see no “long-run” effects: by the end of
the 1990s, the boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s had zero significant effects on TFP-R and other
key outcomes. Over the full 1969-2014 sample, a county with one standard deviation additional oil
and gas endowment averaged 1.0 percent higher wages when compared to less resource-abundant
counties, and 0.4 percent higher real wages compared to its own counterfactual.
    What might be the relationship between these results and the cross-country estimates? Might


                                                      32
a comparable strategy in country-level data “generalize down” to the U.S., and might our results
“generalize up” to the cross-country setting? As discussed in Section 6, the currency appreciation
caused by country-level natural resource exports appears to be larger than the wage appreciation
caused by county-level oil and gas production. Furthermore, our estimates do not capture any
learning-by-doing spillovers that happen at the country level but not at the county level. Thus,
it is possible that the mechanism of crowding out plus foregone positive productivity spillovers is
more relevant for countries than for counties. On the other hand, while manufacturers are often
thought of as producing nationally- or internationally-traded goods, this paper echoes Holmes
and Stevens (2014) in highlighting how a meaningful share of manufacturers benefit from highly
localized demand growth. Since we find that natural resource booms exert positive spillovers to
manufacturers in the same county, they surely do so for manufacturers in the same country.
   In summary, while post-1960 resource booms did not produce strong agglomerative forces, we
also find no evidence for a Dutch Disease mechanism in the United States. On net, our estimates
suggest that oil and gas abundance has increased welfare in producer areas in modern American
history.




                                                33
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Amy Finkelstein, and Matthew Notowidigdo (2013). “Income and Health Spending:
     Evidence from Oil Price Shocks.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95, No. 4 (October), pages
     1079-1095.
 [2] Aragon, Fernando, and Juan Pablo Rud (2011). “Natural Resources and Local Communities: Evidence
     from a Peruvian Gold Mine.” Working Paper, Simon Fraser University (April).
 [3] Asher, Sam, and Paul Novosad (2014a). “Dirty Politics: Natural Resource Wealth and Politics in India.”
     Working Paper, Oxford University (March).
 [4] Asher, Sam, and Paul Novosad (2014b). “Digging for Development: Mining Booms and Local Economic
     Development in India.” Working Paper, Oxford University (April).
 [5] Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2013). “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
     Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review , Vol. 103, No. 6
     (October), pages 2121-2168.
 [6] Auty, Richard, and Raymond Mikesell (1998). Sustainable Development in Mineral Economies. Oxford,
     UK: Oxford University Press.
 [7] Bartik, Alexander, Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Chris Knittel (2016). “The Local Eco-
     nomic and Welfare Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing.” Work in progress. Abstract available from
     http://economics.mit.edu/grad/abartik/research.
 [8] Bartik, Timothy (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Kalama-
     zoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
 [9] Benkard, Lanier (2000). “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production.” American
     Economic Review , Vol. 90, No. 4 (September), pages 1034-1054.
[10] Black, Dan, Terra McKinnish, and Seth Sanders (2005a). “The Economic Impact of the Coal Boom and
     Bust.” The Economic Journal , Vol. 115, No. 503 (April), pages 449-476.
[11] Black, Dan, Terra McKinnish, and Seth Sanders (2005b). “Tight Labor Markets and the Demand for
     Education: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review , Vol. 59,
     No. 1 (October), pages 3-16.
[12] Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Katz (1992). “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, Vol. 1992, No. 1, pages 1-75.
[13] Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin (2012). “Portage and Path Dependence.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 127, No. 2, pages 587-644.
[14] Brown, Chip (2013). “North Dakota Went Boom.” The New York Times Magazine, January 31, 2013.
[15] Brown, Eliot (2015). “Oil Boom Swells North Dakota Town; What Now?” The Wall Street Journal
     March 17, 2015.
[16] Brunnschweiler, Christa, and Erwin Bulte (2008). “The Resource Curse Revisited and Revised: A Tale
     of Paradoxes and Red Herrings.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 55, No.
     3, pages 248-264.
[17] Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline (2013). “Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a
     Prominent Place-Based Policy.” American Economic Review , Vol. 103, No.2 (April), pages 897-947.
[18] Carrington, William (1996). “The Alaskan Labor Market during the Pipeline Era.” Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 104, No. 1 (February), pages 186-218.



                                                    34
[19] Caselli, Francesco, and Guy Michaels (2013). “Do Oil Windfalls Improve Living Standards? Evidence
     from Brazil.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 5, No. 1 (January), pages 208-238.
[20] Clarke, Damian (2015). “Estimating Difference-in-Differences in the Presence of Spillovers: Theory and
     Application to Contraceptive Reforms in Latin America.” Working Paper, Catholic University of Chile
     (August). Available from http://economia.uc.cl/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Clarke Spillovers.pdf
[21] Collier, Paul, and Benedikt Goderis (2009). “Commodity Prices, Growth, and the Natural Resource
     Curse: Reconciling a Conundrum.” Working Paper, Oxford University (December).
[22] Corden, Max, and Peter Neary (1982). “Booming Sector and De-Industrialisation in a Small Open
     Economy.” The Economic Journal , Vol. 92, No. 368 (December), pages 825-848.
[23] Domenech, Jordi (2008). “Mineral Resource Abundance and Regional Growth in Spain, 1860-2000.
     Journal of International Development, Vol. 20, pages 1122-1135.
[24] Dube, Oeindrila, and Juan Vargas (2013). “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from
     Colombia.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 80, pages 1384-1421.
[25] Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser (1997). “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Indus-
     tries: A Dartboard Approach.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No 5, pages 889-927.
[26] Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr (2010). “What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
     Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review , Vol. 100, No. 3 (June), pages
     1195-1213.
[27] Feyrer, James, Erin T. Mansur, and Bruce Sacerdote (2015). “Geographic Dispersion of Economic
     Shocks: Evidence from the Fracking Revolution.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper No. 21624 (October).
[28] Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger (2014). “Reallocation in the Great Recession: Cleans-
     ing or Not?” NBER Working Paper No. 20427 (August).
[29] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson (2008). “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Effi-
     ciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review , Vol. 98, No. 1 (March),
     pages 394-425.
[30] Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb (2008). “The Economics of Place-Making Policies.” Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pages 155–239.
[31] Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb (2009). “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies and
     Spatial Equilibrium in the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 47, No. 4, pages 983-
     1028.
[32] Glaeser, Edward, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William Kerr (2015). “Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth:
     An Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 97, No. 2
     (May), pages 498-520.
[33] Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti (2010). “Identifying Agglomeration
     Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings.” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, Vol. 118, No. 3, pages 536-598.
[34] Gylfason, Thorvaldur, Tryggvi Herbertsson, and Gylfi Zoega (1999). “A Mixed Blessing: Natural Re-
     sources and Economic Growth.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, Vol. 3, pages 204-225.
[35] Haggerty, Julia, Patricia Gude, Mark Delorey, and Ray Rasker (2014). “Long-Term Effects of Income
     Specialization in Oil and Gas Extraction: The U.S. West, 1980–2011.” Energy Economics, Vol. 45, No.
     C, pages 186-195.



                                                    35
[36] Harding, Torfinn, and Anthony Venables (2013). “The Implications of Natural Resource Exports for
     Non-Resource Trade.” OxCarre Research Paper 103 (January).
[37] Holmes, Thomas, and John Stevens (2014). “An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size Distribution, with
     Geography and Intra- and International Trade.” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
[38] Hooker, Mark, and Michael Knetter (2001). “Measuring the Economic Effects of Military Base Closures.”
     Economic Inquiry, Vol. 39, No. 4 (October) pages 583-598.
[39] Hornbeck, Richard, and Enrico Moretti (2015). “Who Benefits From Productivity Growth? The Lo-
     cal and Aggregate Impacts of Local TFP Shocks on Wages, Rents, and Inequality.” Working Paper,
     University of Chicago (May).
[40] Ismail, Kareem (2010). “The Structural Manifestation of the ’Dutch Disease’: The Case of Oil Exporting
     Countries.” IMF Working Paper 10/103 (April).
[41] Jacobsen, Grant (2015). “Who Wins in an Energy Boom? Evidence from Wage Rates and Housing.”
     Working Paper, University of Oregon (October).
[42] Jacobsen, Grant, and Dominic Parker (2014). “The Economic Aftermath of Resource Booms: Evidence
     from Boomtowns in the American West.” Economic Journal , forthcoming.
[43] James, Alexander, and David Aadland (2011). “The Curse of Natural Resources: An Empirical Inves-
     tigation of U.S. Counties.” Resource and Energy Economics, Vol. 33, pages 440-453.
[44] James, Alexander, and Robert James (2011). “Do Resource Dependent Regions Grow Slower than they
     Should?” Economics Letters, Vol. 111, pages 194-196.
[45] Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti (2014). “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
     and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, Vol. 129, No. 1 (February), pages 275-331.
[46] Krugman, Paul (1987). “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive Conse-
     quences of Mrs. Thatcher.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 27, pages 41-55.
[47] Lederman, Daniel, and William Maloney, Eds. (2007a). Natural Resources: Neither Curse Nor Destiny.
     Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
[48] Lederman, Daniel, and William Maloney (2007b). “Trade Structure and Growth.” In Lederman, Daniel,
     and William Maloney, Eds., Natural Resources: Neither Curse Nor Destiny. Stanford, CA: Stanford
     University Press.
[49] Madrian, Brigitte, and Lars Lefgren (1999). “A Note on Longitudinally Matching Current Population
     Survey (CPS) Respondents.” NBER Technical Working Paper 247 (November).
[50] Manski, Charles (2013). “Identification of Treatment Response with Social Interactions.” Econometrics
     Journal , Vol. 16, pages S1-S23.
[51] Manzano, Osmel, and Roberto Rigobon (2001). “Resource Curse or Debt Overhang?” NBER Working
     Paper 8390 (July).
[52] Marshall, Alfred (1890). Principles of Economics. New York, NY: MacMillan.
[53] Matsuyama, Kiminori (1992). “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic
     Growth.” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 58, pages 317-334.
[54] Mehlum, Halvor, Karl Moene, and Ragnar Torvik (2006). “Cursed by Resources or Institutions?” The
     World Economy, pages 1117-1131.
[55] Melitz, Marc (2003). “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
     Productivity.” Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 6, pages 1695-1725.

                                                    36
[56] Michaels, Guy (2010). “The Long Term Consequences of Resource-Based Specialisation.” The Economic
     Journal , Vol. 121 (March), pages 31-57.
[57] Miguel, Ted, and Michael Kremer (2004). “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in
     the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, Vol. 72, No 1 (January), pages 159-217.
[58] Monteiro, Joana, and Claudio Ferraz (2012). “Does Oil Make Leaders Unaccountable? Evidence from
     Brazil’s Offshore Oil Boom.” Working Paper, Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Rio de Janeiro (May).
[59] Moretti, Enrico (2010). “Local Multipliers.” American Economic Review , Vol 100, No. 2 (May), pages
     1-7.
[60] Moretti, Enrico (2010). “Local Labor Markets.” Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b, pages 1237-
     1313.
[61] Moretti, Enrico (2013). “Where the Good Jobs Are - and Why.” Wall Street Journal , September 17th.
     http://eml.berkeley.edu/˜moretti/wsj.pdf
[62] Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins (2015). “The Housing Market Impacts
     of Shale Gas Development.” American Economic Review , Vol. 105, No. 12 (December), pages 3633-3359.
[63] Munasib, Abdul, and Dan Rickman (2015). “Regional Economic Impacts of the Shale Gas and Tight
     Oil Boom: A Synthetic Control Analysis.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 50 (January),
     pages 1-17.
[64] Notowidigdo, Matthew (2013). “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks.” Working Paper, North-
     western University (March).
[65] Papyrakis, Elissaios, and Reyer Gerlagh (2007). “Resource Abundance and Economic Growth in the
     United States.” European Economic Review , Vol. 51, pages 1011-1039.
[66] Paredes, Dusan, Timothy Komarek, and Scott Loveridge (2015). “Assessing the Income and Employ-
     ment Effects of Shale Gas Extraction Windfalls: Evidence from the Marcellus Region.” Energy Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 47 (January), pages 112-120.
[67] Rosenbaum, Liz (2016). “List of Bans Worldwide.” https://keeptapwatersafe.org/global-bans-on-
     fracking/.
[68] Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner (1995). “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth.”
     NBER Working Paper 5398 (December).
[69] Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner (1999). “The Big Push, Natural Resource Booms, and Growth.”
     Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 59, pages 43-76.
[70] Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner (2001). “The Curse of Natural Resources.” European Economic
     Review , Vol. 45, pages 827-838.
[71] Serafinelli, Michel (2012). “’Good’ Firms, Worker Flows, and Local Productivity.” Working Paper, UC
     Berkeley (November).
[72] Smith, Adam (1776 [1976]). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Oxford:
     Clarendon Press.
[73] U.S. BEA (Bureau of Economic Analysis) (2014). “Gross-Domestic-Product-(GDP)-by-Industry Data.”
     http://www.bea.gov/industry/gdpbyind data.htm
[74] U.S. EIA (Energy Information Administration) (2009). “Top 100 Oil and Gas Fields of 2009.”
     www.eia.gov/naturalgas/crudeoilreserves/archive/2009/pdf/top100fields.pdf
[75] U.S. EIA (Energy Information Administration) (2014). “EIA-23L Reserves Information Gathering Sys-
     tem.” http://www.eia.gov/survey/form/eia 23l/rigs.cfm

                                                   37
[76] U.S.     Geological     Survey     (2013).   “National    Oil     and    Gas     Assessment.”
     http://energy.usgs.gov/OilGas/AssessmentsData/NationalOilGasAssessment/Methodology.aspx.
[77] van der Ploeg, Frederick (2011). “Natural Resources: Curse or Blessing?” Journal of Economic Litera-
     ture, Vol. 49, No. 2, pages 366-420.
[78] van Wijnbergen, Sweder (1984). “The ’Dutch Disease’: A Disease After All?” The Economic Journal ,
     Vol. 94, No. 373 (March), pages 41-55.
[79] Weber, Jeremy (2012). “The Effects of a Natural Gas Boom on Employment and Income in Colorado,
     Texas, and Wyoming.” Energy Economics, Vol. 34, No. 5 (September), pages 1580-1588.
[80] Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta (2007). “Resource-Based Growth Past and Present.” In Lederman,
     Daniel, and William Maloney, Eds., Natural Resources: Neither Curse Nor Destiny. Stanford, CA:
     Stanford University Press.




                                                   38
Tables

                    Table 1: Oil and Gas Endowments: Descriptive Statistics

                                                            Mean          SD           Max           N>0
Oil (million barrels)
Production 1960-2011                                         33.4         229          8993          1141
Current proven reserves                                     2.58          43.5         2152           109
Current undiscovered reserves                               7.11          41.0         878           1856
1960-2011 average price ($/barrel)                          34.92

Natural Gas (billion cubic feet)
Production 1960-2011                                        273           1238        23183          1117
Current proven reserves                                     50.2           457        19676           239
Current undiscovered reserves                               314           1471        51014          2282
1960-2011 average price ($/mcf)                             3.20

1960 oil and gas endowment ($million/square mile)            3.1          9.1          209           2292

Notes: This table presents the components of total 1960 oil and gas endowment for the 3075 counties in
our sample. The 1960 oil and gas endowment is the product of physical quantities of oil and gas production
and reserves with their average prices over 1960-2011, divided by county land area. Prices are in real 2010
dollars.


                     Table 2: County-Level Outcomes: Descriptive Statistics

                                                     N             Mean      SD         Min         Max
Population (000s)                                 141,424          83.1      274        0.06       10,117
Employment (000s)                                 141,424          44.7      164        0.06        6088
Housing rent ($/month)                             18,446           576      180          0         1795
Earnings per worker ($000s)                       141,424          30.7       6.9       11.4         105
Manufacturing earnings per worker ($000s)         114,192          46.6      16.6       2.47         600
Manufacturing employment (000s)                   114,238           7.0      24.7        0          950

Notes: Housing rent is from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Decennial Censes and the 2009 and 2014 American
Community Survey five-year estimates. All other variables are from the Regional Economic Information
System, for years 1969-2014. Prices are in real 2010 dollars.




                                                    39
Table 3: Baseline Employment Characteristics and Correlation with Oil and Gas Endowments

                                                                    (1)                            (2)
                                                                  Mean                      Association with
                                                                  (000s)                   endowment Rcearly
Population                                                         63.1                         0.073**
                                                                                                (0.023)
Total employment                                                   29.2                         0.080**
                                                                                                (0.022)
Manufacturing employment                                           5.99                          0.028
                                                                                                (0.046)
Up/downstream manufacturing employment                             1.65                          0.089*
                                                                                                (0.052)
Non-linked manufacturing employment                                4.35                          -0.020
                                                                                                (0.049)
Non-linked local manufacturing employment                          1.16                          -0.017
                                                                                                (0.045)
Non-linked tradable manufacturing employment                       3.19                          -0.034
                                                                                                (0.062)

Notes: Population and total employment are from the 1969 REIS. Manufacturing employment is from the
1967 Census of Manufactures. Column 2 presents the coefficient of a regression of natural log of the listed
variable on early period oil and gas endowment Rcearly , controlling for Census division fixed effects. Sample
size is 3075 counties. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.


                         Table 4: Economic Trends Before the 1970’s Boom

                                (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)
                             Population    Employment     Earnings/       Mfg. earnings/       Mfg.
       Outcome:                                             worker            worker       employment
       Endowment Rcearly     0.000449        -0.00223      0.000340          -0.00189        -0.00614
                             (0.00110)      (0.00162)     (0.000815)        (0.00219)       (0.00790)
       Observations            3,075           3,075         3,075             2,483           2,484

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (15). The dependent variable is the 1972-1969 change in
the natural log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division indicators and controls for the
natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with
90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.




                                                     40
                 Table 5: Effects of Resource Booms on County-Level Outcomes
                                   (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)              (6)
                                Population    Employment       Housing     Earnings/    Mfg. earnings/        Mfg.
 Outcome:                                                        rent        worker         worker        employment
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)      0.0119***         0.0282***   0.0270***    0.0179***      0.0108***        0.0293***
 ×endowment                     (0.00201)         (0.00607)   (0.00754)    (0.00510)      (0.00376)        (0.00724)
 Observations                    135,274           138,349      15,371      138,349        111,709          111,754

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (12). The dependent variable is the change in the natural
log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-year indicators and controls for year
interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. Population effects in column (1)
use the one year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment). *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with
90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.


            Table 6: Effects on Manufacturing Subsectors and Alternative Outcomes

                                            (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)
                                            All       Upstream /    Non-linked    Non-linked     Non-linked
                                                      downstream                   and local    and tradable

                                                Employment
∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.0351**    0.0463**          .0181        0.0433***       -0.0327*
×endowment                              (0.0133)    (0.0176)         (0.0115)      (0.00584)       (0.0172)

                                                 Revenue
∆ln(National oil&gas employment)       0.0676***    0.0489*          0.0456***      0.0670*         -0.0621
×endowment                              (0.0178)    (0.0257)          (0.0133)      (0.0361)       (0.0509)

                                                 Investment
∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.118***      0.109**        0.0587*       0.0984***        -.00477
×endowment                              (0.0305)      (0.0438)       (0.0315)       (0.0241)       (0.0547)

                                             Number of plants
∆ln(National oil&gas employment)       0.0212***  0.0307***          0.00741**      0.0123*      -0.00955**
×endowment                             (0.00233)   (0.00897)         (0.00300)     (0.00645)      (0.00371)

                                            Employees per plant
∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.00906      0.0106          0.00580       0.0297***       -.0316**
×endowment                              (0.0110)    (0.00971)        (0.0135)      (0.00740)       (0.0154)
Observations                             24,600      24,600           24,600         24,600         24,600

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (12) for different outcomes (in rows) and manufacturing
subsectors (in columns), using county-by-Census year data. The dependent variable is the change in the
natural log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-year indicators and controls
for year interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. *, **, ***: Statistically
different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered by state.


                                                       41
            Table 7: Effects of Resource Booms on Continuing Manufacturing Plants

                                              (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
                                              All           Upstream /   Non-linked   Non-linked    Non-linked
                                                            downstream                 and local       and
                                                                                                     tradable

                                             Value added per worker
  ∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.0131***         0.00996**    0.0134***    0.0201***       0.00156
  ×endowment                              (0.00373)         (0.00429)    (0.00334)    (0.00479)      (0.00428)
  Observations                            1,140,000          388,000      752,000      379,000        372,000

                                              Revenue productivity
  ∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.00240**          0.00226     0.00286***   0.00393**      -0.000565
  ×endowment                              (0.000951)        (0.00149)    (0.000967)   (0.00163)      (0.00129)
  Observations                             756,000           280,000       476,000     251,000        225,000
                                          (a) No Industry Controls


                                             Value added per worker
  ∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.00544***        0.00512*     0.00489***   0.00832***     0.000680
  ×endowment                               (0.00182)        (0.00297)     (0.00152)    (0.00166)     (0.00350)
  Observations                             1,140,000         388,000       752,000      379,000       372,000

                                              Revenue productivity
  ∆ln(National oil&gas employment)        0.00253**         0.00261**     0.00184      0.00377*      -0.000448
  ×endowment                              (0.00115)         (0.00121)    (0.00181)     (0.00197)     (0.00182)
  Observations                             756,000           280,000      476,000       251,000       225,000
                                 (b) With 4-digit Industry-by-Year Controls
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (14), using plant-by-Census year data. The dependent
variable is the change in the natural log of the outcome variable. All regressions include census division-by-
year indicators. Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 1,000 due to Census disclosure rules. *, **, ***:
Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors
in parentheses, clustered by state.




                                                       42
Table 8: Long-Term Revenue Productivity Effects of the Boom and Bust of the 1970s and
1980s

                                           (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)
                                           All      Upstream /      Non-linked    Non-linked     Non-linked
                                                    downstream                     and local    and tradable

                                County-level average log revenue productivity
  Endowment    Rcearly                   0.00145      0.00667        -0.0101        -0.00470       -0.00771
                                        (0.00681)     (0.0103)      (0.00774)      (0.00597)      (0.00673)
  Observations                            2,769         2,033         2,710           2,525          2,260

                     Plant-level revenue productivity with 4-digit SIC-by-year controls
  1(year=1997)×endowment Rcearly         0.00132       -0.00108      0.00319       0.000743        0.00230
                                        (0.00249)     (0.00141)     (0.00270)      (0.00190)      (0.00274)
  Observations                           338,000        116,000      222,000        110,000        112,000
Notes: The top panel presents estimates of Equation (15), using 1997-1972 changes in within-county mean
of log revenue productivity as the dependent variable. The bottom panel presents regressions using 1997 and
1972 data of plant-level log TFP-R on an interaction of a 1997 indicator variable with endowment Rcearly ,
controlling for county fixed effects and 4-digit industry-by-year interactions. All regressions include census
division-by-year indicators. In the plant-level regressions, sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 1,000 due
to Census disclosure rules. *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty,
respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.


   Table 9: Long-Term County-Level Effects of the Boom and Bust of the 1970s and 1980s

                            (1)          (2)               (3)        (4)             (5)              (6)
                         Population   Employment       Housing Earnings/ Mfg. earnings/               Mfg.
  Outcome:                                                rent      worker          worker       employment
                early
  Endowment Rc          -0.0000928      -0.00117       -0.00666    0.000545        -0.00980        -0.00271
                         (0.00475)     (0.00572)      (0.00407) (0.00178)         (0.00660)        (0.0151)
  Observations             3,075          3,075          3,075       3,075           2,483           2,484
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (15), using 1997-1972 changes in log outcomes as the
dependent variable. (Because housing rents are not available in 1997 or 1972, the housing rent regression
uses the 2000-1970 change.) All regressions include census division-by-year indicators and controls for year
interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. *, **, ***: Statistically different
from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered
by state.




                                                      43
           Table 10: Absolute Effects of Resource Booms on County-Level Outcomes

                                      (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)              (6)
                                   Population   Employment    Housing Earnings/ Mfg. earnings/               Mfg.
  Outcome:                                                      rent        worker         worker       employment
  ∆ln(National oil&gas emp) 0.00692***          0.0162***     0.0120*     0.0102***       0.00176          0.0166**
  ×endowment                     (0.00155)      (0.00579)    (0.00702) (0.00304)         (0.00212)         (0.00626)
  Observations                    135,274        138,349       15,371      138,349        111,709           111,754
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (13). The dependent variable is the change in the natural
log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-year indicators and controls for year
interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. Population effects in column (1)
use the one year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment). *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with
90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.


                        Table 11: 1969-2014 Welfare Gains from Resource Booms

                                                                       (1)                (2)
       Row     Parameter                                         Relative effects   Absolute effects
       1       τ̂earnings                                             0.024              0.011
                                                                     (0.007)            (0.003)
       2       τ̂rent                                                 0.027              0.012
                                                                     (0.008)            (0.007)
       3       τ̂earnings − 0.3 · τ̂rent                              0.016              0.007
                                                                     (0.005)            (0.001)
       4       Annual average real earnings gain (log points)         0.010              0.004
                                                                     (0.003)            (0.001)
       5       τ̂population                                           0.012              0.008
                                                                     (0.002)            (0.002)
       6       Annual average population gain (log points)            0.008              0.005
                                                                     (0.001)            (0.001)
Notes: Rows 1, 2, and 5 present estimates of Equation (12) and (13) in columns 1 and 2, respectively, using
data from 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2009, and 2014. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.
Rows 3, 4, and 6 present additional calculations, with standard errors from the Delta method.




                                                     44
Figures

                                                                    Figure 1: Real Oil and Gas Prices



                                        100




                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                  Natural gas price ($/mmBtu)
                                           80




                                                                                                                                                         6
                      Oil Price ($/barrel)
                                60




                                                                                                                                               4
                     40




                                                                                                                                   2
                                        20




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                            1960     1970         1980          1990          2000         2010
                                                                                             year

                                                                               Oil price               Natural gas price


Notes: Oil and gas price data are from the Energy Information Administration. Prices are in real 2010
dollars.


                 Figure 2: National Oil and Gas Employment and Production
                                          1000 1200 1400




                                                                                                                                                                          3.5
                       Oil and gas employment (thousands)




                                                                                                                                  Oil (billion barrels), Gas (10s of TCF)
                                                                                                                                                               3
                                    800




                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                            600




                                                                                                                                   2
                     400




                                                             1970       1980               1990           2000             2010
                                                                                             year

                                                                       Oil and gas employment                    Oil production
                                                                       Natural gas production


Notes: Oil and gas production data are from the Energy Information Administration. Oil and gas employ-
ment data are from the Regional Economic Information System. We switch from the SIC to the NAICS
classification system in 2000 and plot both data points in that year.




                                                                                             45
                                Figure 3: Early Endowment per Square Mile




             1995 oil & gas endowments
             ($million/sqr. mile)
                   <.1              >=10 & <50
                   >=.1 & <1        >=50 & <100
                   >=1 & <5         >100
                   >=5 & <10


Notes: This figure maps each county’s oil and gas endowment as of 1960 that is economically recoverable
during the oil and gas boom of the 1970s and 1980s. See Section 4.1 for details of variable construction.


                         Figure 4: Change in Endowment After Early Period




             Difference between 2011 and
             1995 oil & gas endowments
             ($million/sqr. mile)
                   <.1              >=10 & <50
                   >=.1 & < 1       >=50 & <100
                   >=1 & <5         >100
                   >=5 & <10


Notes: This figure maps each county’s difference between the early period oil and gas endowment graphed
in figure 3 and the total endowment that is economically recoverable using current technologies. It largely
reflects “unconventional” endowments that are economically recoverable only with hydraulic fracturing. See
Section 4.1 for details of variable construction.

                                                    46
        Figure 5: County-Level Aggregates Over Time in Resource-Abundant Counties




                     ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment
                                                              .03




                                                                                                                                                            800 1000 1200 1400
                                                                                                                                              National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                0         .01        .02




                                                                                                                                             400    600
                      -.01




                                                                    1970        1980             1990            2000           2010
                                                                                                   year

                                                                           ln(Employment)                 ln(Wage earnings/worker)
                                                                           ln(Population)                 National oil and gas employment


Notes: This figure presents the τtr regression coefficients from Equation (11) with natural log of county
employment, population, and earnings per worker as dependent variables. 1969 is the omitted year in τtr , so
the regression coefficients are relative to the 1969 associations between resources and outcomes.


      Figure 6: Manufacturing Employment Over Time in Resource-Abundant Counties
                     ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment
                                                             .06




                                                                                                                                                                      1000 1200 1400
                                                                                                                                                 National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                        0      .02     .04




                                                                                                                                                               800
                              -.02




                                                                                                                                                      600
                       -.04




                                                                                                                                               400




                                                                    1970        1980             1990            2000           2010
                                                                                                   year

                                                                           ln(Mfg. employment)             National oil and gas employment


Notes: This figure presents the τtr coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals from Equation (11) with
natural log of county manufacturing employment as the dependent variable. 1969 is the omitted year in
τtr , so the regression coefficients are relative to the 1969 association between resources and manufacturing
employment.



                                                                                                   47
 Figure 7: Employment and Productivity Over Time for Tradable Manufacturing Subsectors




                                                              .1
                     Coefficient on year-resource interaction
                    -.05           0           .05




                                                                   1972   1977   1982       1987      1992   1997     2002    2007
                                                                                                     year

                                                                                        ln(TFP-R)            ln(Employment)


Notes: This figure presents the τtr coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals from Equation (11) with
the natural log of county mean ln(TFP-R) and county manufacturing employment, using data from only the
highly tradable manufacturing subsectors, as the dependent variables. 1972 is the omitted year in τtr , so the
regression coefficients are relative to the 1972 associations between resources and outcomes.




                                                                                                    48
                                                                                        Figure 8: Geographic Spillovers


                                                                          Population                                                                                           Employment




                                                                                                                                                            .6
      ln(Outcome) difference per $trillion endowment




                                                                                                               ln(Outcome) difference per $trillion endowment
                                          .15     .2




                                                                                                                                                   .4
                               .1




                                                                                                                                     .2
                      .05




                                                                                                                         0
    -.05      0




                                                                                                             -.2
                                                        0      100             200             300     400                                                       0    100             200             300     400
                                                              Midpoint of endowment doughnut (miles)                                                                 Midpoint of endowment doughnut (miles)


                                                                        Housing rent                                                                                      Earnings per worker
                                                   1




                                                                                                               ln(Outcome) difference per $trillion endowment
      ln(Outcome) difference per $trillion endowment




                                                                                                                                                 .2       .3
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                    .1
                    0




                                                                                                                        0
    -.5




                                                                                                             -.1




                                                        0      100             200             300     400                                                       0    100             200             300     400
                                                              Midpoint of endowment doughnut (miles)                                                                 Midpoint of endowment doughnut (miles)


                                                            Manufacturing earnings per worker                                                                         Manufacturing employment
                                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                          1
      ln(Outcome) difference per $trillion endowment




                                                                                                             ln(Outcome) difference per $trillion endowment
                                          .4




                                                                                                                                     .5
                0           .2




                                                                                                                 0
    -.2




                                                        0      100             200             300     400                                                       0    100             200             300     400
                                                              Midpoint of endowment doughnut (miles)                                                                 Midpoint of endowment doughnut (miles)




Notes: This figure presents the νd coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals from estimating Equation
(13) with various dependent variables.



                                                                                                        49
                            Appendix: For Online Publication




Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The Local Economic Effects of Natural Resource Booms in Modern
                                           America




                              Hunt Allcott and Daniel Keniston




                                              1
A     Model Appendix
A.1     Solving for Equilibrium
In equilibrium, firms and consumers optimize, and supply equals demand for labor, housing, and
the local good.

A.1.1      Equilibrium in Housing and Local Good Markets

Subtracting the housing supply function in county b from county a gives the relative price of
housing:


                                      pha − phb = k (na − nb ) .                                  (17)

    The equilibrium price of the local good is determined by two conditions. First, local good
supply equals demand:

                                                          αWc
                                        Ωlc Nlc1−γ = Nc        ,                                  (18)
                                                           Plc
where demand is from maximizing the Cobb-Douglas utility function.
    Second, the composite firm for any sector j maximizes profits, giving first-order condition

                                                       −γ
                                      (1 − γ) Pjc Ωjc Njc = Wc .                                  (19)

    Combining these two equations gives the local good price:

                                             αγ Wc Ncγ (1 − γ)γ−1
                                     Plc =                        .
                                                     Ωlc
    Taking logs gives


                         plc = wc + γnc + γ ln α + (γ − 1) ln(1 − γ) − ωlc .                      (20)

    Taking the difference between counties a and b gives the relative price of the local good:


                         pla − plb = (wa − wb ) + γ (na − nb ) − (ωla − ωlb ) .                   (21)



A.1.2      Labor Market Equilibrium

County aggregate labor demand is the sum across sectors j ∈ {m, l, r}:




                                                   2
                                                            1
                             X               Xjc (1 − γ)       γ
                    Nc =           Njc    =                                                                      (22)
                                                 Wc
                              j
                                            "                                                           1/γ #
                             (1 − γ)1/γ                                          αγ Wc Ncγ (1 − γ)γ−1
                                                                             
                                                    1/γ    1/γ         1/γ
                        =          1/γ
                                                   Xmc  + Xrc  + Ωlc                                             (23)
                                  Wc                                                     Ωlc
                              (1 − γ)1/γ    −1 h
                                                 1/γ    1/γ
                                                            i
                        =                 Wc γ Xmc   + Xrc    .                                                  (24)
                             1 − α(1 − γ)

   Taking logs and re-arranging gives inverse labor demand in county c:


                                                      wc = γ x̃c + λγ − γnc ,                                    (25)
               h              i
                   (1−γ)1/γ
where λ ≡ ln       1−α(1−γ)       . Subtracting wa − wb gives relative inverse labor demand:


                                              wa − wb = γ (x̃a − x̃b ) − γ (na − nb ) ,                          (26)
                                         
                       1/γ          1/γ
where x̃c ≡ ln Xmc + Xrc                      measures traded and resource sector productivity. This equation
shows how higher productivity raises relative wages, but this is dampened by migration.
   To solve for the population difference, substitute housing and local good prices into labor supply,
giving



 wa − wb = α ((wa − wb ) + γ (na − nb ) − (ωla − ωlb )) + βk (na − nb ) + s(na − nb ) − (aa − ab ) (27)
              αγ + βk + s               α                  α
          =               (na − nb ) −     (ωla − ωlb ) −     (aa − ab )                                         (28)
                 1−α                   1−α                1−α

   Equating this to relative inverse labor demand from Equation (26) and simplifying gives relative
population: shown in Equation (29):

                                       1
                   n a − nb =                 [γ(1 − α) (x̃a − x̃b ) + α (ωla − ωlb ) + (aa − ab )] ,            (29)
                                   γ + βk + s
   where ωlc is natural log local sector physical productivity. This shows that people will migrate
to the county with higher productivity and amenities. There will be more migration if production
is more labor intensive (i.e. γ is smaller), if housing supply is more elastic (i.e. k is lower), if the
housing expenditure share β is lower, or if locational preferences are weaker (i.e. s is smaller).
   The equilibrium wage difference is derived by substituting the population difference into the
inverse labor demand difference:

                                  γ
            wa − wb =                    [(βk + s + γα) (x̃a − x̃b ) − α (ωla − ωlb ) − (aa − ab )] .            (30)
                              γ + βk + s

                                                                   3
   This shows that higher resource or tradable sector productivity increases nominal wages. Higher
amenities encourage people to accept lower wages, as does higher local sector productivity ωla , as
this reduces the local good price.


A.1.3     Absolute Population and Wages

We can also close the model to solve for absolute population and wages as a function of productivity
and primitives. To do this, fix total population in the two counties at Na + Nb = N . Rearranging
and taking logs gives nb = ln (N − Na ). Substituting this into the population difference from
Equation (29) and simplifying gives population:
                                                          
                                         na = ξ − ln 1 + eξ + n,                                     (31)
                                                   Γa −Γb
where Γc ≡ γ(1 − α)x̃c + αωlc + ac and ξ ≡        γ+βk+s .   Substituting this into Equation (25) gives
wages:
                                      h                         i
                              wa = γ · x̃a + λ − ξ + ln 1 + eξ − n .                                 (32)

   Equations (31) and (32) are symmetric for county b.


A.2      Predictions: Derivations and Additional Details
A.2.1     Contemporaneous Effects on County Aggregates

Prediction 1’s relative population and wage increases are immediate from Equations (29) and
(30). In period t = 1, ωla = ωlb , ωma = ωmb , amenities are unchanged by assumption, and
                                                                    1
(x̃a − x̃b ) > 0 because ωra − ωrb > 0. Thus, na − nb =           γ+βk+s   [γ(1 − α) (x̃a − x̃b )] > 0 and
               γ
wa − wb =    γ+βk+s   [(βk + s + γα) (x̃a − x̃b )] > 0 in t = 1, both of which are positive because
(x̃a − x̃b ), α, (1 − α), β, γ, and s are all positive. Migration is an outward shift in labor supply, so
it reduces equilibrium wages.
   Prediction 1 also holds in absolute terms. The absolute effect on population can be derived
from Equation (31):
                                                          
                              na − na (0) = ξt − ln 1 + eξt + ln 2 > 0.

   It is also true that na − na (0) < x̃a − x̃a (0). Using this and (25), we have wa − wa (0) > 0: the
absolute wage effect is also positive.




                                                    4
A.2.2       Contemporaneous Effects on Manufacturing

For any sector j, differencing the first-order conditions gives relative sectoral labor demand:

                                   1               1              1
                     nja − njb =     (ωja − ωjb ) + (pja − pjb ) − (wa − wb ) .                   (33)
                                   γ               γ              γ
   Substituting local sector relative price from Equation (21) into Equation (33) and simplifying
gives


                                          nla − nlb = na − nb .                                   (34)

   Using Prediction 1, this is positive in t = 1. Of course, this equality is a feature of our Cobb-
Douglas functional forms, but the result that non-tradable sector employment grows with the local
economy is more general.
   For the tradable sector, substituting the wage difference from Equation (30) into Equation (33)
and assuming that ωla = ωlb and aa = ab gives relative employment:

                                                  βk + s + αγ
                               nma − nmb = −                  (x̃a − x̃b ) .                      (35)
                                                   βk + s + γ
   Because (x̃a − x̃b ) > 0 in t = 1, (nma − nmb ) < 0 in t = 1. This proves Prediction 2 in relative
terms.
   Prediction 2 also holds in absolute terms. Logging the first-order condition from Equation (19),
we have

                                      1
                              njc =     [ωjc + pjc + ln(1 − γ) − wc ] > 0.                        (36)
                                      γ
   For the local sector, the absolute price difference in t = 1 is pla − pla (0) = (wa − wa (0)) +
γ (na − na (0)). This means that the local good price rises more than the wage. Substituting this
into Equation (36) and taking absolute effects, we have nla − nla (0) = na − na (0) > 0. For the
tradable sector, substituting wa −wa (0) > 0 into Equation (36) immediately gives nma −nma (0) < 0
in t = 1.


A.2.3       Long-Term Effects

Substituting employment differences from Equations (34) and (35) into the productivity evolution
from Equation (1) gives closed-form solutions for local and tradable sector productivity in period
t = 2. Assuming no amenity change, these are

                                                   γ(1 − α)
                           ωla − ωlb = (θl + Λ)              (x̃a,t=1 − x̃b,t=1 )                 (37)
                                                  βk + s + γ


                                                     5
and

                                       Λγ(1 − α) − θm (βk + s + αγ)
                      ωma − ωmb =                                   (x̃a,t=1 − x̃b,t=1 ) .                         (38)
                                               βk + s + γ
    Since (x̃a,t=1 − x̃b,t=1 ) > 0 and {θl , Λ} ≥ 0 by assumption, Equation (37) shows that ωla − ωlb >
0. Equation (37) simplifies directly to Equation (8). This proves Prediction 3.
    With the exception of Equation (8), Prediction 3 also holds in absolute terms. Substituting the
signs of the absolute effects on total population from Prediction 1 and local sector employment from
Prediction 2 into the productivity evolution from Equation (1) immediately gives ωla − ωla (0) > 0.
For the tradable sector, we have


              ωma,t=2 − ωma,t=1 (0) = θm (nma,t=1 − nma,t=1 (0)) + Λ (na,t=1 − na,t=1 (0)) .                       (39)

    Since nma,t=1 − nma,t=1 (0) < 0 and na,t=1 − na,t=1 (0) > 0 from Predictions 2 and 1, respectively,
we again have that the t = 2 productivity impact trades off agglomeration spillovers with foregone
learning-by-doing.


A.2.4     Overall Welfare Effects

Substituting labor supply from Equation (3) into the relative welfare effect from Equation (5) shows
that relative welfare can be measured by migration:23

                                                       X
                                          ua − ub =         δ t s (nat − nbt ) .                                   (40)
                                                        t

    Substituting the population difference from Equation (29), assuming Xrc = 0 always except
Xra > 0 in t = 1, and simplifying gives

                                                                                         
             sδ(1 − α)                               δ
   ua − ub =            (x̃a,t=1 − x̃b,t=1 ) γ +            (γΛ + αγθl − θm (βk + s + αγ)) .                       (41)
             βk + s + γ                          βk + s + γ

    This is positive if and only if the final term (in brackets) is positive, which is true if Equation
(9) holds.
    The absolute welfare effects depend on the absolute wage and price levels. Substituting the
price levels into the absolute welfare effect from Equation (7) gives
  23
P Note        that this equation does not have an analogue for absolute effects, i.e. it is not true that ua − ua (0) =
       t
   t δ   s (nat − nat (0)). Intuitively, the reason is that county a can have high population, and thus high population
relative to counterfactual, even if social welfare is worse than counterfactual, as long as social welfare is even worse
in county b.




                                                            6
                   X
   ua − ua (0) =       [(1 − α)γ (x̃at − x̃at (0)) + α (ωlat − ωlat (0)) − (γ + βk) (nat − nat (0))] .     (42)
                   t

   This equation states that absolute social welfare effects depend on two factors: the county
productivity increases, which determine wages and local prices, net of the population inflows, which
reduce wages by γ and increase the utility impact of housing costs by βk. Substituting Equation
(31) into Equation (42) gives

                            X         h                                              i
            ua − ua (0) =          δ t (Γat − Γat (0)) − (γ + βk) ξt − ln 1 + eξt + ln 2 .                 (43)
                               t



A.2.5    Special Case: Absolute Welfare with No Productivity Spillovers

We can also consider the special case of absolute welfare with no productivity spillovers, i.e. Equa-
tion (43) with Λ = θl = θm = 0. In that case, absolute and relative welfare effects are both zero in
period t = 2, as county a productivity has returned to equal county b productivity. Furthermore,
Γbt = Γat (0) for t = 1. Substituting this into Equation (43) gives
                                                                                                
                                                                     1 + exp (na,t=1 − nb,t=1 )
          ua − ua (0) = δ s (na,t=1 − nb,t=1 ) + (γ + βk) ln                                           .   (44)
                                                                                 2
   This equation is useful because it shows that the absolute welfare effect is unambiguously
positive: we know from Prediction 1 that (na,t=1 − nb,t=1 ) > 0, and substituting this into Equation
(44) implies ua − ua (0) > 0. Intuitively, this just says that if there are no market failures, an
increase in county a’s productivity increases welfare.
   For comparison, the relative welfare effect when Λ = θl = θm = 0 is


                                       ua − ub = δs (na,t=1 − nb,t=1 ) .                                   (45)

    Comparing Equations (44) and (45), we  see that the absolute  welfare effect equals the relative
                                           1+exp(na,t=1 −nb,t=1 )
effect plus adjustment factor (γ + βk) ln            2             . This factor accounts for the fact
that the resource boom also increases wages in county b in t = 1, so the relative welfare gain is
smaller than the absolute welfare gain.


A.3     Relative and Absolute Effects with Many Counties
While the theoretical model has two counties, the empirical analysis has more than 3000. A
brief discussion using the Rubin Causal Model can help clarify the distinction between relative
and absolute effects in this more general context. Let Dc ∈ {1, 0} denote county c’s treatment

                                                      7
assignment (i.e. whether or not it is endowed with natural resources), and let D−c denote the
vector of treatment assignments for all counties other than c. Let Yc denote an outcome for county
c, such as wages or employment in some time period, and let Yc (dc , d−c ) denote county c’s potential
outcome as a function of any possible treatment assignments dc and d−c . As in Manski (2013),
potential outcomes depend on treatment status both in county c and in all other counties, due to
geographic spillovers.
   In the two-county model, the relative effect is the difference between effect of the boom on
county a and the effect of the boom on county b. In the many-county world, the relative effect τ r
is the expectation over all counties of the effects of the boom on treated counties and the effects
on untreated counties:


             τ r ≡ E [Yc (1, D−c ) − Yc (0, 0) | Dc = 1] − E [Yc (0, D−c ) − Yc (0, 0) | Dc = 0] .   (46)

   If the treatment is randomly assigned, then E [Yc (0, 0) | Dc = 1] = E [Yc (0, 0) | Dc = 0], so this
simplifies to


                         τ r ≡ E [Yc (1, D−c ) | Dc = 1] − E [Yc (0, D−c ) | Dc = 0] .               (47)

   The relative effects estimating equation (Equation (12)) estimates a continuous-treatment ana-
logue to τ r by comparing outcomes in more- vs. less-treated counties.
   In the two-county model, the absolute effect is the difference between county a’s potential
outcomes if it does vs. does not have natural resources. In the many-county world, the absolute
effect τ a is the expectation over all counties of the difference in potential outcomes with vs. without
resources:


                               τ a ≡ E [Yc (1, D−c ) − Yc (0, D−c ) | Dc = 1] .                      (48)

   In other words, this is the average treatment effect on the treated. The absolute effects esti-
mating equation (Equation (13)) estimates a continuous-treatment analogue to τ a by comparing
outcomes in more- vs. less-treated counties while controlling for spillovers from other counties.
   Both τ r and τ a are causal parameters in the sense that they represent effects of natural re-
source endowments; both equal zero if natural resources do not affect outcomes. Furthermore,
both τ r and τ a compare observed outcomes of treated counties E [Yc (1, D−c ) | Dc = 1] to some
other quantity. The difference is that τ r compares this to actual outcomes in untreated counties
E [Yc (0, D−c ) | Dc = 0], whereas τ a compares this to counterfactual outcomes in treated counties
E [Yc (0, D−c ) | Dc = 1].
   Both parameters also are conditional on the actual treatment status of other counties. One
might also be interested in treatment effects conditional on some d−c other than actual treatments
D−c – for example, if fracking were banned throughout the eastern U.S. Our empirical analysis does

                                                      8
not consider those cases because they would require significant additional empirical assumptions.




                                                9
B     Data Appendix
B.1   Oil and Gas Endowments




                               10
                                         Table A1: State-Level Sources of Oil and Gas Production Data

      State Resource        Title                                             Source                                                           Years
      CA     Oil, Gas       Summary of Operations: California Oil Fields ftp://ftp.consrv.ca.gov/pub/oil/Summary of Operations/                1960-1977
      IL     Gas            Natural Gas Production in Illinois                Bryan Huff, Illinois State Geological Survey                     1973-1992
      IL     Oil            Historic County Production in Illinois            Bryan Huff, Illinois State Geological Survey                     1932-2011
      IN     Gas            Petroleum Data Management System                  http://igs.indiana.edu/PDMS/WellSearch.cfm                       1863-2011
      IN     Oil            Petroleum Data Management System                  http://igs.indiana.edu/PDMS/Fields.cfm                           1965-2011
      KS     Oil, Gas       County Production                                 http://www.kgs.ku.edu/PRS/petro/interactive.html                 1960-2011
      KY     Oil            Oil and Gas Production                            http://kgs.uky.edu/kgsmap/OGProdPlot/OGProduction.asp            1883-2011
      KY     Gas            Oil and Gas Production                            http://kgs.uky.edu/kgsmap/OGProdPlot/OGProduction.asp            1986-2011
      LA     Oil, Gas       Crude and Natural Gas Production by Parish Sharron Allement, Louisiana Office of Conservation                      1965-1977
      MI     Oil, Gas       Michigan’s Oil and Gas Fields, 1965-1982          http://www.michigan.gov/deq                                      1965-1982
      MT     Oil, Gas       Annual Reviews for the Years 1965-1985            http://bogc.dnrc.mt.gov/annualreview/                            1965-1985
      NM     Oil, Gas       Annual Report                                     New Mexico Oil & Gas Engineering Committee                       1960-1985
      NV     Oil, Gas       Historical Production                             Lowell Taylor, Nevada Division of Minerals                       1954-2011
      NY     Oil, Gas       New York Natural Gas and Oil Production           http://www.dec.ny.gov/energy/1601.html                           1967-2011
11




      OK     Oil            Report on Oil and Natural Gas Activity            Jason Lawter, Oklahoma Corporation Commission                    1963-2011
      PA     Oil            Oil and Gas Developments in Pennsylvania          http://www.libraries.psu.edu/                                    1960-1991
      UT     Oil, Gas       Pre-1984 Production Download File                 http://oilgas.ogm.utah.gov/                                      1965-1983
     Notes: This details   additional state-level sources of oil and gas production data that are used to augment the DrillingInfo database.
B.2       Regional Economic Information System
The REIS gathers two measures of employment and earnings. Series 7 and 27 measure wage and
salary earnings and employment, based primarily on unemployment insurance payment records.
This corresponds closely to data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. Series 5
and 25 measures total earnings and employment, adding sole proprietors (who file a Schedule C
on their tax returns) and general partners in partnerships (who file a Form 1065). Neither series
includes limited partners, who are likely to be only passive investors in oil and gas businesses. Series
5 and 25 are intended to be a more comprehensive measure of total earnings and employment, so
we use these series in all specifications. Substituting Series 7 and 27 does not meaningfully change
the estimates.
       In general, these measures appear to correctly allocate economic activity to counties. Unem-
ployment insurance payments are assigned to the county where the employing establishment is
located, not the firm headquarters. Sole proprietor and partnership earnings and employment are
assigned to the tax-filing address of the recipient, which is typically the person’s residence. This
will misallocate employment when the filer is not working in his or her county of residence.
       For population, the REIS uses annual mid-year estimates constructed by the U.S. Census Bu-
reau. In recent years, the Census Bureau estimates county c’s population as


                 populationct = populationt−1 + birthsct − deathsct + net migrationct ,

where the population base (populationt−1 ) comes initially from the decennial census, and births
and deaths are measured from vital statistics data provided by the National Center for Health
Statistics. Net domestic migration is primarily measured using Internal Revenue Service income
tax data: individuals are matched across years using their social security numbers, and they are
counted as migrants when their tax address changes. For the elderly, tax data are augmented with
Medicare enrollment data. Net international migration is measured using the American Community
Survey. While the ACS is only a sample survey, international migration is a relatively small share
of a county’s total migration.24
       Earlier in our sample, the Census Bureau used county-level data on school enrollment and
number of occupied housing units, along with county-level population estimates from state agencies,
to arrive at each year’s total population count. Thus, throughout the sample, the Census Bureau
used actual data to count migration, and did not simply interpolate between decennial census
counts.25
       County-level land area are from http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/download data.html.
       There are 3075 counties in the sample through 2001. In 2002, Broomfield County, Colorado,
  24
     See http://www.census.gov/popest/methodology/2015-natstcopr-meth.pdf for full methodology for recent mid-
year population estimates.
  25
     See http://hdl.handle.net/2027/coo.31924000774731 for full methodology for the 1966 population estimates.


                                                     12
was created by breaking off pieces of other counties, primarily Adams and Boulder Counties. We
never include Broomfield County in the sample, and we include Adams and Boulder Counties in
Colorado only in 2001 and before. Thus, in 2002 and later, there are 3073 counties in the sample.

B.3    Industry Linkages

                           Table A2: Linked Manufacturing Industries

                                    Top Ten Upstream Industries
SIC Codes                    Industry                                         Upstream Linkage Share
3533                         Oil and gas field machinery and equipment                 0.23
324                          Hydraulic cement                                          0.12
3295                         Ground or treated minerals                               0.086
2899                         Chemicals and chemical preparations, n.e.c.              0.066
3491, 3492, 3494, 3498       Pipe, valves, and pipe fittings                          0.037
3441                         Fabricated structural metal                              0.034
3312                         Blast furnaces and steel mills                           0.033
2892                         Explosives                                               0.031
2992                         Lubricating oils and greases                             0.031
3313                         Electrometallurgical products, except steel              0.028

                                     All Downstream Industries
SIC Codes                    Industry                                             Input Cost Share
291                          Petroleum refining                                          0.69
2999                         Products of petroleum and coal, n.e.c.                      0.31
2873, 2874                   Nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers                     0.081
2895                         Carbon black                                               0.062
281, 2865, 2869              Industrial inorganic and organic chemicals                 0.021
308                          Miscellaneous plastics products, n.e.c.                    0.001
285                          Paints and allied products                                 0.001

Notes: Linkages are calculated using data from the 1987 Bureau of Economic Analysis input-output tables
(U.S. BEA 2014). Upstream linkage share is the sum of oil and gas output share and the share of output
purchased by the oil and gas sector through an intermediate industry. “n.e.c.” stands for “not elsewhere
classified.”




                                                   13
C        Current Population Survey Data and Regressions
C.1       Current Population Survey Data
In order to directly measure wages instead of earnings per worker, we construct two datasets from
the Current Population Survey (CPS). The first is a repeated cross section formed by combining all
observations from the May CPS for 1977 and 1978 with all observations from the Merged Outgoing
Rotation Group (MORG) files beginning in 1979. Table A3 describes these data for hourly wage and
hours worked. The second dataset is a panel based on the MORG, which includes each individual’s
change in hourly earnings in the 12 months between two “outgoing rotation” interviews.26 We
include only workers employed by the private sector or government and exclude self-employed and
unemployed.
       Except for large counties in recent years, the CPS does not include county identifiers.27 In
regressions with CPS data, we thus use state-level oil and gas endowment Rst , which is constructed
analogously to the county-level measure described earlier and normalized to a standard deviation
of one across states. For context, one standard deviation of state-level total endowments is $4.5
million per square mile.

                     Table A3: Current Population Survey: Descriptive Statistics

                                         N                 Mean              SD               Min               Max
Hourly wage ($/hour)                 5,970,555             18.6              14.0            0.0001             2826
Hours worked per week                6,001,940             38.3              10.8               0                99

Notes: Data are at the individual-by-interview level. Wages are in real 2010 dollars.


C.2       CPS Empirical Strategy
We estimate relative effects using two parallel specifications in the two different datasets, using i
to index individuals. For the CPS repeated cross section, we regress natural log of an outcome
variable on the resource boom variable, using controls Xi for individual i’s age, education, gender,
race, and industry. We index states by s, months by m, and years by t, and include vectors of state
  26
     Since the CPS sampling frame is the household, not the individual, this panel includes only individuals who do
not change residence between the two interviews. The CPS does not include unique individual identifying codes, so
we use the approach of Madrian and Lefgren (1999) to match individuals between interviews.
  27
     It is not possible to construct a panel over our entire study period using any consistently-defined geographical
area less aggregated than the state. Before 1977, the May CPS data do not include a complete set of state identifiers.
From 1977 to June 1985, there are geographic identifiers for state and approximately 45 Standard Metropolitan
Statistical Areas (MSAs). From July-December 1985, only state identifiers are included. In 1986 and again in 1993,
the CPS changes to different and more disaggregated MSA definitions, and beginning in late 2004 there are identifiers
for large counties and for Core Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs). While these geographical areas comprise precisely-
defined sets of counties in any particular year, counties are often moved between areas over time. To avoid potentially
confounding effects of changes in geographic definitions, we use only state identifiers.



                                                          14
indicators υs , month indicators µm , and year indicators νt . With Yismt as an outcome variable
(either wages or hours worked per week), the specification is


                     ln Yist = τ r Rst ln Et + λRst + ρXi + υs + µm + νt + εismt .              (49)

   To illustrate effects, we also plot estimates from another regression in which a separate τtr is
estimated for each year of the sample:


                        ln Yist = τtr Rst + λRst + ρXi + υs + µm + νt + εismt ,                 (50)

   with 2001 as the omitted year in τtr .
   For the MORG panel, we regress individual i’s change in wages in the 12 months between the
interview on the change in the resource boom:


                     ∆ ln Yismt = τ r Rst ∆ ln Et + λRst + υs + µm + νt + εismt .               (51)




C.3    CPS Results
Appendix Table A4 presents the results of the Current Population Survey wage regressions. The
top and bottom panels present estimates for all workers and manufacturing workers, respectively.
Column 1 presents estimates of Equation (49) with natural log of wages as the dependent variable.
The coefficient of 0.00962 implies that an oil and gas boom that increases national oil and gas
employment by 100 log points increases relative wages by 0.962 percent in states with one additional
standard deviation oil and gas endowment.
   Appendix Figure A1 illustrates these results by plotting the τtr coefficients from Equation (50).
The figure shows that states with one standard deviation additional endowment per square mile saw
relative wages rise 1.7 to 3.2 percent higher than their year-2001 equilibrium for the entire eleven-
year period between 1977 and 1987. Figure A2 presents analogous results, limiting to manufacturing
workers only. While the estimates for manufacturing workers are noisier, the basic trend is very
similar to the estimates for all workers.
   Column 2 of Table A4 presents estimates of Equation (49), except with natural log of hours
worked as the dependent variable. There are no statistically-significant effects on hours worked,
and the standard errors rule out that a boom that increases national oil and gas employment by
100 log points increases hours worked by more than about one-third of one percent in states with
one standard deviation additional endowment.
   Column 3 presents estimates of Equation (49), but excluding controls Xi for age, education,
race, and industry. The point estimates are statistically indistinguishable from those in column 1.


                                                  15
Because worker-level demographic controls do not affect the estimates and there are no significant
effects on hours worked, this suggests that measures of earnings per worker available in the REIS
provide reasonable approximations to the effects of oil and gas booms on “wages,” i.e. quality-
adjusted per-unit labor input costs.
    Column 4 presents estimates of Equation (51) using the MORG panel data, with the log of each
individual’s 12-month wage change as the dependent variable. The sample size is much smaller
because the MORG panel does not begin until 1979, because it includes only individuals who can
be matched between their first and second outgoing rotations, and because each person is counted
as one observation when calculating differences, while estimates of Equation (49) include both of
an individual person’s observations. The results are almost exactly identical.
    When limiting the sample to manufacturing workers only, the standard errors widen, but es-
timates are statistically indistinguishable from the effects on all workers, and the point estimates
are actually larger. Columns 1-4 of Appendix Table A5 confirm that these results are robust to
the same set of robustness checks that we carry out for the county-level data in Appendix Table
A6; we omit the fixed effects robustness check from column 5 of Appendix Table A6 because the
primary CPS specification already includes state indicators. Instead, column 5 of Appendix Table
A5 shows that the estimates are robust to dropping outlying wages.

         Table A4: Effects of Resource Booms on Wages in Current Population Survey

                                                   (1 )              (2)              (3)               (4)
Outcome Variable:                                ln(wage)         ln(hours)        ln(wage)         ∆ln(wage)
                                                  All workers
ln(National oil&gas employment)                0.00962***         -0.000411       0.00832**         0.00969***
×endowment                                      (0.00328)         (0.00218)       (0.00402)          (0.00231)
Observations                                    5,696,671         5,723,794       5,696,671          1,587,855

                                            Manufacturing workers
ln(National oil&gas employment)                 0.0162**           -0.00194         0.0102           0.0162
×endowment                                      (0.00630)         (0.00397)        (0.00690)        (0.00982)
Observations                                     980,388            985,243         980,388          288,868

Age, education, gender, race, industry             Yes              Yes               No                No
Notes: Columns 1-3 present estimates of variants of Equation (49), while column 4 presents estimates of
Equation (51). All regressions include year, month, and state indicator variables. *, **, ***: Statistically dif-
ferent from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered by state.




                                                         16
                Table A5: Current Population Survey: Alternative Specifications

                                                                                (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)                                                    (5)
                                                                            Use early           Use total          Measure         Measure                                                  Drop
                                                                             endow-            endowment           intensity       intensity                                               outlying
                                                                              ment               Rctotal           by wage        by oil and                                                wages
                                                                             Rcearly                              emp. only        gas price

                                                                                               All workers
        ln(National intensity)                                              0.00712***         0.00834**          0.0289***       0.00464**                                               0.00936***
        ×endowment                                                           (0.00232)         (0.00315)          (0.00322)       (0.00208)                                                (0.00300)
        Observations                                                         5,696,671         5,696,671          5,696,671       5,696,671                                                5,678,234
                                                                                      Manufacturing workers
        ln(National intensity)                                              0.0148**           0.0145**           0.0289***      0.00970***                                               0.0165***
        ×endowment                                                          (0.00554)          (0.00651)          (0.00595)       (0.00357)                                               (0.00599)
        Observations                                                         980,388            980,388            980,388         980,388                                                 978,752

Notes: This table presents alternative estimates of Equation (49). Columns 1, 2, and 5 measure “National
intensity” with “National oil&gas employment,” as in the main estimates. All regressions include year,
month, and state indicator variables, plus age, education, gender, race, and industry controls. *, **, ***:
Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively. Standard errors are
robust and clustered by state.


               Figure A1: CPS Wages Over Time in Resource Abundant Counties
                                                                                                                                                                                   1500
                                                               .04
                       ln(Wage) difference per std dev endowment




                                                                                                                                            National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                                .02     .03




                                                                                                                                                              1000
                    -.01     0         .01




                                                                                                                                            500




                                                                     1980              1990                2000                2010
                                                                                                   year

                                                                            Wage coefficient              National oil and gas employment


Notes: This figure presents the τtr coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals from Equation (50) with
natural log of hourly wage as the dependent variable. 2001 is the omitted year in τtr , so the regression
coefficients are relative to the 2001 association between endowments and wages.


                                                                                                   17
      Figure A2: CPS Manufacturing Wages Over Time in Resource Abundant Counties




                                                                                                                                                                                1500
                                                                .06
                        ln(Wage) difference per std dev endowment




                                                                                                                                         National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                                       .04




                                                                                                                                                           1000
                     -.02        0          .02




                                                                                                                                         500
                                                                      1980              1990            2000              2010
                                                                                                year

                                                                             Wage coefficient          National oil and gas employment


Notes: This figure presents the τtr coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals from Equation (50) with
natural log of hourly wage as the dependent variable, using only the sample of manufacturing workers in
the CPS. 2001 is the omitted year in τtr , so the regression coefficients are relative to the 2001 association
between endowments and wages.




                                                                                                18
D   Additional Empirical Results




                               19
D.1    Additional Tables and Figures

            Table A6: Effects on County-Level Outcomes: Alternative Specifications

                                      (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
                                   Use early     Use total     Measure      Measure        Fixed
                                    endow-      endowment      intensity    intensity      effects
                                     ment         Rctotal      by wage     by oil and
                                    Rcearly                   emp. only     gas price

                                                Population
       ∆ln(National intensity )   0.0114***     0.0130***     0.0129***    0.00324***     0.00869
       ×endowment                 (0.00194)     (0.00272)     (0.00205)    (0.000521)    (0.00539)
                                               Employment
       ∆ln(National intensity)    0.0273***     0.0308***     0.0316***    0.00648***    0.0174**
       ×endowment                 (0.00622)     (0.00684)     (0.00710)     (0.00138)    (0.00703)
                                               Housing rent
       ∆ln(National intensity)    0.0257***     0.0351***     0.0252***     0.0108**      0.0121
       ×endowment                 (0.00723)      (0.0108)     (0.00761)     (0.00418)    (0.00784)
                                            Earnings per worker
       ∆ln(National intensity)    0.0167***     0.0206***     0.0220***    0.00609***    0.0177***
       ×endowment                 (0.00468)     (0.00636)     (0.00633)     (0.00140)    (0.00640)
                                   Manufacturing earnings per worker
       ∆ln(National intensity)    0.0114***     0.0122***     0.0164***      0.00280      0.00975
       ×endowment                 (0.00405)     (0.00423)     (0.00534)     (0.00177)    (0.00593)
                                       Manufacturing employment
       ∆ln(National intensity)    0.0309***     0.0249***     0.0357***     0.00305*     0.0267**
       ×endowment                 (0.00726)     (0.00737)     (0.00991)     (0.00167)    (0.0103)

Notes: This table presents alternative estimates of Equation (12). Columns 1, 2, and 5 measure “National
intensity” with “National oil&gas employment,” as in the main estimates. The dependent variable is the
change in the natural log of the listed outcome. Sample sizes are 135,274 (138,349) for the population
estimates, with column 5 fixed effects sample size in parenthesis, 138,349 (141,424) for employment and
earnings per worker, 15,371 (18,446) for housing rents, 111,709 (114,192) for manufacturing earnings per
worker, and 111,754 (114,238) for manufacturing employment. All regressions include census division-by-
year indicators and controls for year interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline
years. Population effects in column (1) use the one year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment). *, **,
***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard
errors in parentheses, clustered by state.




                                                    20
Table A7: Effects of Resource Booms on County-Level Outcomes: Separate Effects by Time
Period
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)        (4)             (5)               (6)
                                Population     Employment      Housing     Earnings/    Mfg. earnings/         Mfg.
 Outcome:                                                         rent       worker         worker        employment
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)       0.0151***      0.0368***      0.0503**    0.0117**        -0.00331         0.0437***
 ×endowment×1(boom)               (0.00267)      (0.0106)      (0.0232)    (0.00532)      (0.00482)         (0.00876)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)       0.0145***      0.0372***       -0.0197    0.0215***      0.0309***          0.0327**
 ×endowment×1(bust)               (0.00312)     (0.00838)      (0.0233)    (0.00459)      (0.00792)          (0.0129)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)       -0.0103***     -0.0172**        0.0242     0.00285       -0.000779        -0.0365***
 ×endowment×1(post-2001)          (0.00263)     (0.00686)      (0.0192)    (0.00285)      (0.00754)         (0.00862)
 Observations                      135,274       138,349        15,371      138,349         111,709          111,754

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (12), allowing τ r to differ in three types of years: during
“booms” (when ∆Et > 0) and “busts” (when ∆Et ≤ 0), as well as for 2001 and after. The dependent
variable is the change in the natural log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-
year indicators and controls for year interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline
years. Population effects in column (1) use the one year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment). *, **,
***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard
errors in parentheses, clustered by state.




            Table A8: Effects on County-Level Outcomes: Controlling for Coal Boom
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)               (6)
                                Population     Employment       Housing     Earnings/    Mfg. earnings/         Mfg.
 Outcome:                                                         rent        worker         worker         employment
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)       0.0116***      0.0278***      0.0265***    0.0175***      0.0106***         0.0294***
 ×endowment                      (0.00193)      (0.00585)      (0.00711)    (0.00478)      (0.00362)         (0.00730)
 ∆ln(National coal emp)          0.00554**      0.0142***      0.0184***    0.0189***      0.0127**           -0.00644
 ×coal endowment×1(East)         (0.00215)      (0.00477)      (0.00624)    (0.00450)      (0.00622)         (0.00605)
 ∆ln(National coal emp)          0.0300***      0.0469***        0.0319     0.0456***        0.0104          0.0259***
 ×coal endowment×1(West)         (0.00700)       (0.0136)       (0.0329)     (0.0130)       (0.0213)         (0.00721)
 Observations                     135,274        138,349         15,371      138,349        111,709           111,754

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (12), including effects of coal endowments. The dependent
variable is the change in the natural log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-year
indicators and controls for year interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years.
Population effects in column (1) use the one year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment) and ∆ln(National
coal emp). *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively.
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.




                                                      21
    Table A9: Effects of Resource Booms on Prices for Plants with Physical Output Data

                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                 All        Upstream /             Non-linked      Non-linked      Non-linked
                                                            downstream                              and local         and
                                                                                                                    tradable
 ∆ln(National oil&gas employment)             -0.00310           -0.00739           -0.000847       -0.00173        0.00280
 ×endowment                                  (0.00307)          (0.00904)           (0.00151)      (0.00150)       (0.00316)
 Observations                                  420,000            87,000             333,000        248,000         86,000
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (14), with the sample limited to plants that report physical
output. The dependent variable is the natural log of price, at the product-by-plant-by-year level. All
specifications use differenced outcomes; the time between each Census is five years. All regressions include
Census division-by-year fixed effects. *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent
certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by county.


          Table A10: Absolute Effects of Resource Booms on County-Level Outcomes

                                       (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)
                                   Population      Employment            Housing       Earnings/    Mfg. earnings/          Mfg.
 Outcome:                                                                  rent         worker          worker        employment
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)         0.00692***          0.0162***         0.0120*       0.0102***       0.00176          0.0166**
 ×endowment                         (0.00155)          (0.00579)         (0.00702)     (0.00304)       (0.00212)       (0.00626)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)            0.101             0.281**            0.267       0.203***        0.321***         0.556**
 ×endowment from 0-50 miles          (0.0652)           (0.125)           (0.266)       (0.0726)        (0.106)         (0.240)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)          0.0945***           0.232**          0.436**        0.119**         0.0645          0.136**
 ×endowment from 50-100 miles        (0.0268)           (0.103)           (0.199)       (0.0464)       (0.0665)         (0.0587)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)          0.0269**           0.000801           -0.0587      0.0460**        0.105***         -0.0475
 ×endowment from 100-150 miles       (0.0124)          (0.0338)           (0.166)       (0.0202)       (0.0352)         (0.0496)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)           -0.00152           0.0260            0.0622        0.0122          0.0275          0.00203
 ×endowment from 150-200 miles       (0.0116)          (0.0234)          (0.0925)       (0.0109)       (0.0372)         (0.0313)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)           -0.00322           0.0268*           -0.0854      -0.00521        -0.00392          0.0732
 ×endowment from 200-250 miles       (0.0149)          (0.0144)          (0.0602)       (0.0119)       (0.0435)         (0.0489)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)          -0.000353          -0.00626          -0.00416      -0.00167        0.000436          0.0152
 ×endowment from 250-300 miles      (0.00658)          (0.0146)          (0.0375)       (0.0129)       (0.0225)         (0.0291)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)           -0.0121            -0.0140          -0.0796**      0.00631        -0.00997         0.00589
 ×endowment from 300-350 miles      (0.00965)          (0.0170)          (0.0303)       (0.0178)       (0.0287)         (0.0383)
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp)          -0.0239***         0.000292           -0.0685       -0.0221        -0.00793         0.00645
 ×endowment from 350-400 miles      (0.00870)          (0.0178)          (0.0470)       (0.0152)       (0.0400)         (0.0324)
 Observations                        135,274            138,349           15,371        138,349        111,709          111,754
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (13). The dependent variable is the change in the natural
log of the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-year indicators and controls for year
interacted with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. Population effects in column (1)
use the one year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment). *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with
90, 95, and 99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.



                                                          22
Table A11: Absolute Effects of Resource Booms on County-Level Outcomes: Excluding Large
Counties

                                  (1)           (2)               (3)         (4)             (5)               (6)
                               Population    Employment        Housing Earnings/ Mfg. earnings/               Mfg.
 Outcome:                                                        rent        worker         worker         employment
 ∆ln(National oil&gas emp) 0.00736***           0.0171***       0.0112     0.0104***        0.00195         0.0166**
 ×endowment                      (0.00176)      (0.00627)     (0.00718) (0.00343)         (0.00226)         (0.00664)
 Observations                      129,818       132,769        14,751      132,769         106,264          106,309
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (13). It parallels Table 10, except excluding counties with
population larger than 250,000 people in 1960. The dependent variable is the change in the natural log of
the listed outcome. All regressions include census division-by-year indicators and controls for year interacted
with natural log of the outcome variable in two baseline years. Population effects in column (1) use the one
year lag of ∆ln(National oil&gas employment). *, **, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and
99 percent certainty, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by state.




                                                     23
Figure A3: County Aggregates Over Time in Resource Abundant Counties




                                                   .04
         ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment




                                                                                                                                                       1000 1200 1400
                                                                                                                                  National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                      .02




                                                                                                                                                800
                        0




                                                                                                                                400    600
        -.02




                                                         1970       1980             1990            2000           2010
                                                                                       year

                                                                ln(Population)              National oil and gas employment


                                                                                 (a) Population
                                                  .06
        ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment




                                                                                                                                                        1000 1200 1400
                                                                                                                                   National oil and gas employment (000s)
                               .02        .04




                                                                                                                                                 800
                      0




                                                                                                                                        600
           -.02




                                                                                                                                 400




                                                         1970       1980             1990            2000           2010
                                                                                       year

                                                                ln(Employment)                National oil and gas employment


                                                                            (b) Employment




                                                                                       24
                                                 ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment                                                                                        ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment
                                                 -.02    -.01      0     .01      .02    .03                                                                                        -.01     0       .01     .02      .03    .04




                                          1970
                                                                                                                                                                             1970




                                          1980
                                                                                                                                                                             1980


                                                                                                                                        ln(Earnings/worker)




     ln(Mfg. earnings/worker)
                                       1990
                                                                                                                                                                          1990




25
                                         year
                                                                                                                                                                            year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure A3




                                                                                                                                                                             2000




                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (c) Earnings per Worker




                                                                                                (d) Manufacturing Earnings per Worker
                                                                                                                                                                             2010




                                          2010
                                                                                                                                        National oil and gas employment




     National oil and gas employment
                                                 400    600      800    1000 1200 1400                                                                                               400    600      800    1000 1200 1400
                                                   National oil and gas employment (000s)                                                                                              National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                                                                                                   Figure A3
                                                                                                            (e) Housing Rents




                                                                 .03
                       ln(Outcome) difference per std dev endowment




                                                                                                                                                                                                              1000 1200 1400
                                                                                                                                                                                         National oil and gas employment (000s)
                                                 .01      .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                       800
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                              600
                               -.01




                                                                                                                                                                                       400
                      -.02




                                                                                     1970           1980            1990             2000           2010
                                                                                                                      year

                                                                                                ln(Housing rent)              National oil and gas employment



Notes: These figures present the τtr coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals from Equation (11) with
various dependent variables. 1969 is the omitted year in τtr , so the regression coefficients are relative to the
1969 associations between resources and outcomes. The point estimates for the population, employment,
and earnings per worker graphs are the same as in Figure 5.


            Figure A4: National Manufacturing, Oil and Gas, and Coal Employment
                                                                                  1500




                                                                                                                                                                                                22
                                           Oil and gas or coal employment (thousands)




                                                                                                                                                            Manufacturing employment (millions)
                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                     1000




                                                                                                                                                                        16     18
                                                        500




                                                                                                                                                            12 14
                                           0




                                                                                         1970        1980           1990            2000          2010
                                                                                                                      year

                                                                                                              Oil and gas                  Coal
                                                                                                              Manufacturing


Notes: Employment data are from the Regional Economic Information System. We switch from the SIC to
the NAICS classification system in 2000 and plot both data points in that year.



                                                                                                                      26
