NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CITIES AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Matthew E. Kahn
Randall Walsh
Working Paper 20503
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20503

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We thank Devin Bunten, Brandon Fuller, Todd Sinai and the editors of the Handbook of Urban and
Regional Economics for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Matthew E. Kahn and Randall Walsh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Cities and the Environment
Matthew E. Kahn and Randall Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 20503
September 2014
JEL No. Q4,Q5,R1,R3,R4
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys recent literature examining the relationship between environmental amenities and
urban growth. In this survey, we focus on the role of both exogenous attributes such as climate and
coastal access as well as endogenous attributes such as local air pollution and green space. A city’s
greenness is a function of both its natural beauty and is an emergent property of the types of households
and firms that locate within its borders and the types of local and national regulations enacted by voters.
¸
¸
We explore four main issues related to sustainability and environmental quality in cities. First, we
introduce a household locational choice model to highlight the role that environmental amenities play
in shaping where households locate within a city. We then analyze how ongoing suburbanization
affects the carbon footprint of cities. Third, we explore how the system of cities is affected by urban
environmental amenity dynamics and we explore the causes of these dynamics. Fourth, we review
the recent literature on the private costs and benefits of investing in “green” buildings. Throughout
this survey, we pay careful attention to empirical research approaches and highlight what are open
research questions. While much of the literature focuses on cities in the developed world, we anticipate
that similar issues will be of increased interest in developing nation’s cities.

Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Anderson School of Management
UCLA Law School, Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu
Randall Walsh
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4901 WW Posvar Hall
230 S. Bouquet St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
walshr@pitt.edu

I.

Introduction

Both within cities and across cities, non-market amenities are an important determinant
of where people choose to live and work.

While we now spend more time on line as we shop

on Amazon, socialize on Facebook and Twitter, stream movies from Netflix and telecommute
from home, our physical location continues to define what place based attributes we enjoy and
the environmental conditions to which we are exposed.
Certain locational attributes such as rivers and ocean ports that were once key
determinants of local productivity now play a central role as amenities offering unique views as
well as recreational and climate amenities. Today the Ritz-Carlton in Battery Park on the south
tip of Manhattan is selling apartments for over $1,300 a square foot. This price premium
reflects the desirability of waterfront real estate in modern Manhattan. A majority of the U.S
population and income is clustered in counties within 80 km of a coast or Great Lake (Rappaport
and Sachs 2002). This concentration of economic activity along the coasts and major rivers is a
function of both the historical persistence of early settlement patterns and the key role that
transportation access played in determining the locations of early waves of industrial activity
(Bleakley and Lin 2012).
The persistence of these coastal patterns today is in no small part supported by the
environmental amenities conveyed by proximity to rivers and coasts and the climate amenities
enjoyed by those living on or near the coast. In coastal cities such as Los Angeles, richer people
consistently live close to the beach and thus there has been less suburbanization of income than
in non-coastal metropolitan areas (Lee and Lin 2013).

3

Today, non-market amenities such as clean air, green spaces, temperate climate and safe
streets help fuel the modern consumer city (Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz 2000, Rappaport 2009).
Consumer preferences for these amenities draw wealthier individuals to attractive locations. A
trend that is reinforced by employers (much freer of resource and transportation related
locational constraints than were their predecessors) who choose to locate in high amenity
locations as a way to be more attractive to potential employees. At the same time that cities such
as London and San Francisco are experiencing sharp increases in their home prices, there are
other cities such as Las Vegas and Phoenix whose population levels continue to grow. Even
though these places are not blessed with naturally high levels of amenities, millions of people are
expressing a desire to live in such cities. Home prices and wages adjust in the spatial
equilibrium and the diverse population and firms sorts across space. While some middle class
households will be disappointed that they cannot afford coastal housing, there will be other
households with a taste for large new housing who are quite willing to live in an affordable city
such as Las Vegas.
At any point in time, a geographic area’s environmental attributes are a function of
exogenous geography and determined by the (intended and unintended) choices made by the set
of households, voters and industries that cluster within the city. Households and firms tradeoff
the private benefits of a specific location’s attributes versus what they must pay in rents to locate
there. Given that higher quality neighborhoods and cities will require a rent premium means
that such areas self-select a subset of households and firms to locate there. Expensive high
amenity areas such as Berkeley, California and Portland, Oregon attract highly educated
individuals. The Tiebout sorting of like-minded progressive environmentalists attracts local firms
who cater to such consumers (i.e organic farmers markets). The net effect is that green cities

4

emerge due to both selection and treatment effects. Cities such as San Francisco feature few dirty
heavy industries. Instead, the “golden goose” for these high quality of life cities tends to be high
tech companies who, in turn, employ workers who demand high quality local amenities. Such
worker/voters support local leaders who enact policies that further enhance local quality of life
and this process feeds on itself as a type of social multiplier effect (Sieg et. al. 2004, Bayer,
Ferreira and McMillan 2007).
This causal link between exogenous amenities (i.e San Francisco’s unique coastal beauty)
and endogenous amenities (San Francisco becoming a center of green living) is one of the main
themes of this chapter. These synergies pose a challenge for empirical research seeking to
measure the marginal willingness to pay for individual local public goods such as air quality
improvements. As one local public good improves (perhaps due to local deindustrialization) this
will induce a re-sorting of heterogeneous households and firms such that several aspects of local
quality of life will be affected (Kuminoff, Smith and Timmins 2013). Our survey investigates
different approaches for addressing this issue.
We explore four main issues related to sustainability and environmental quality in cities.
First, we introduce a household locational choice model to highlight the role that environmental
amenities play in shaping where households locate within a city. We discuss how four major
recent changes in U.S cities; improvements in air quality, rising demand for open space,
brownfield remediation and improvements in center city quality of life influence where and how
densely different income groups live within metro areas. Second, we analyze how ongoing
suburbanization affects the carbon footprint of cities. Whether this association between
suburbanization and carbon production, represents a causal effect remains an open question. We
discuss various identification strategies for convincingly answering this question.

5

Third, we explore the causes and consequences of urban environmental amenity
dynamics. A city’s production of pollution depends on its demographics, industrial structure
shifts and the local and national policies that are adopted. As local public goods shift over time
(i.e Pittsburgh’s air quality improves) we seek to understand how such amenity dynamics affect
the cross-city spatial equilibrium. Unlike standard hedonic analyses, we discuss the cross-city
sorting of both households and firms and the role that environmental amenities play in this
locational decision. We explore how new local and federal policies (i.e local zoning and
differential enforcement of the Clean Air Act) affect the spatial equilibrium and we study how
the emerging new risk of climate change and the resulting increase in summer temperature and
sea level rise for coastal cities affects the system of cities. Any change in local public goods
introduces distributional effects. We explore the economic incidence of changes in quality of
life in different cities and their implications for the well-being of rich, middle class and poor
urbanites.
While much of the empirical quality of life literature has focused on the United States, we
argue that these same issues arise in developing countries as economic development increases
the demand for non-market amenities. This section ends by discussing open research questions
set in the developing world.
Finally, we review the recent literature on the private costs and benefits of investing in
“green buildings”. In the developing world today, billions of people are moving to cities. Such
cities are constructing new residential and commercial real estate that will last for decades.
Given that buildings are major consumers of electricity, it is important to understand how urban
real estate developers, investors and real estate tenants demand electricity because these

6

decisions have key implications for greenhouse gas production and thus the severity of future
climate change.

II.

Incorporating Local and Global Environmental Externalities into Locational
Equilibrium Models
In this section, we present an equilibrium locational choice model to study the role that

location specific environmental amenities play in determining who lives in a given area. The
model melds ideas from earlier work including Ellickson (1971), Stull (1974), Epple and Platt
(1998), Epple and Sieg (1999), Sieg et.al. (2004A, 2004B) and Banzhaf and Walsh (2008).
Assume there exists a continuum of households of measure N that are characterized by
their income y, the distribution of which is given by f(y) which has continuous support over the
interval [yl, yh]. In cases where income heterogeneity is of second order concern we will often
assume that [yl, yh] =

such that all households share the same income level. Location choices

are discretized and each household must choose to live in one of J discrete locations within the
metropolitan area1, indexed by j ∈{1,..., J } . Conditional on location choice, households then
choose their optimal level of land to consume.2

1

Note, that in some models, locations are modeled as continuously varying along certain amenity attributes. The
canonical example of this approach being the basic monocentric city model which describes continuously varying
locations in terms of their distance from the Central Business District.
2
Alternatively, one could assume that land is used as one input in the production of housing with, for instance, a
constant returns to scale technology. However, while tractable, this approach adds an extra notational burden
without changing the general intuition that the model provides relative to the role of prices and incomes in
determining population density.
7

Household preferences are represented by the indirect utility function
V(y,Pj,Zj), where

is the price of a unit of housing at location j and

,…,

is a vector of amenities available uniquely to households that choose to live at location
j. This vector consists of local public goods that are and are not related to the
environment. It includes exogenous environmental locational attributes such as
distance to beaches and climate and endogenous environmental amenities such as
pollution and protected open space. The elements of

also include access to

employment opportunities and non-environmental amenities such as crime and school
quality.3 Finally, each location within the metropolitan area is characterized by a
continuous housing supply function Sj(P).4 This is a very general specification which
imbeds the basic monocentric city model, theoretical sorting models such as those
considered by Epple & Platt (1998) and Walsh & Banzhaf (2008), as well as the
empirical framework pioneered by Epple & Sieg (1999).
In equilibrium, the sorting of income types across locations will depend on the
income elasticities for land and locational amenities. Equilibrium in the model is defined
by a vector of allocation functions

which identify the proportion of each income

type living in each location and a vector of J location-specific housing prices which satisfy
the locational equilibrium conditions:
3

The specification of V(.) also implicitly assumes the inclusion of a numeraire whose price is normalized to 1. For
tractability V(.) is assumed to be continuous with bounded first derivatives that satisfy: Vy > 0, VZ > 0, VP < 0. For
simplicity, we assume that indirect utility function is specified such that the associated land demand function is
independent of amenity levels Z and is given by D(P,y) which is also continuous with bounded first derivatives Dy >
0 and Dp < 0. Demand is assumed to be strictly positive and bounded from above.
4
The supply function describes what portion of a location’s available land will be committed to residential
use at a given price. We assume that there exist residual competing demands for land at each location, and
that there is one special competing use (i.e. agricultural production) for which there is completely elastic
demand for land at any price at or below the reservation price . Thus, the supply of land for residential use
at a given location is equal to zero for any price at or below . At prices above residential land supply is
increasing to an upper bound of .
8

, ,
N

,

,

∀ ,

,

∑

∀

0
∀

1∀

i
ii
iii

Condition i requires that in equilibrium no household would be strictly better of choosing a
different location. Condition ii requires that the housing market clear in each location. And,
condition iii requires that each household is assigned to a specific location.5
As specified, the model is still quite general. Further simplicity can be gained by
assuming that the vector of amenities
, ,

, ,

and

can be collapsed into an index such that
0∀ . Under this assumption, locations are

vertically differentiated with all households agreeing on the relative ranking of “quality”
across locations. This assumption when combined with equilibrium condition i requires
that housing prices be strictly increasing in the amenity index .6
As specified, the model is still too general to make predictions regarding income sorting.
In general, sorting will depend on the relationship between income and the marginal (indirect)
utilities of G and P (

and

). To facilitate a characterization of the equilibrium sorting of

5

Note that the discreteness of locations can be easily relaxed by instead indexing location by a continuous variable
, i.e. distance to the CBD and then adjusting conditions ii and iii as follows. First, the functions that are indexed by
becomes
, ). Second , in condition ii,
must be replaced by
j become functions of j (i.e.
where
is the supply of housing per unit land at continuous location j and
is the amount of land per unit of
available at location (if the “city” is a one unit wide strip of land emanating out of the CBD and indexes
distance from the CBD then this collapses to
). Finally, in condition iii the sum is replaced by an integral over
the entire support of , ∈
,
1.
6
To offer stronger predictions about the sorting of individuals by income, the model as presented here, limits
household heterogeneity to the single dimension of income. Epple and Platt (1998) incorporate heterogeneity in
tastes for the overall public good level G into a similar model. They show that under a modified single-crossing
concept which considers both a taste parameter and income that stratification occurs with all individuals of a given
taste level sorting by income and all individuals with a given level of income sorting based on the strength of their
preferences for public goods. Empirical models have generalized this framework to incorporate heterogeneity in
tastes for specific attributes and specific locations by incorporating random coefficients on the elements of the Gindex and adding an idiosyncratic location parameter which is typically assumed to have a logit distribution. These
analyses then build on the canonical Random Utility Framework developed by Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995).
For an overview of this literature, see Kuminoff et. al. (2013).
9

households across communities, we require further restrictions on preferences. A common
assumption made in these models is that preferences satisfy the "single crossing" property. This
condition requires that the slope of an indirect indifference curve in the (G, P) plane,

, be

monotonic in income. Intuitively, this assumption implies that willingness to pay for the amenity
bundle is either increasing

0 or decreasing

0 in income.

Focusing on the increasing case, single crossing guarantees that equilibrium can be
characterized by an ordering of locations that is increasing in both P and G. For each pair of
"neighboring" locations (as sorted by this ranking), there will exist a set of boundary households
(uniquely identified by income level) that are indifferent between the two locations. Households
whose income is below the boundary location will prefer the lower-ordered location, and those
whose income is above the boundary income will prefer the higher-ordered location. This leads
to perfect income stratification of households across locations based on their level of the amenity
index.
The basic model as specified has implications for how spatial heterogeneity in locational
attributes affects the spatial distribution of households and the income distribution across the
city. To illustrate the basic machinery of the model, consider the case where households care
about just two locational amenities, access to employment locations and environmental quality.
Suppose for instance that employment is at a single factory located at the CBD and that the
factory’s pollution mostly lands on residential areas closer to the city center, while areas further
from the city center are exposed to less of the factory’s pollution. This differential pollution
exposure implies that residential locations vary in two dimensions (commute times and
environmental quality) both of which are a function of distance to the CBD and under our index
10

Figure 1: The Distribution of Amenities Within a
City
16
14
12
10
8

Pollution

6

Commute Costs

4

G Index

2
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

Distance From CBD

assumption work through the G function. Prices will now increase with distance to the CBD x if
0

(1)

In a continuous expression of the problem, the actual rent gradient at a given distance from the
CBD is given by:

.

Where

and

(2)

are evaluated at the income of individuals who choose to live distance x from

the CBD.
If we assume that pollution levels drop relatively quickly beyond some specified distance
from the CBD, then the overall amenity index and its two component parts will be as presented
in Figure 1, with the most desirable location being just beyond 5 miles from the CBD.7 Our

7

If the city center is a major employment center then this will create a pollution “hot spot” downtown as pollution
will be created as a byproduct of transportation, industrial activity and individual choices such as litter and smoking.
11

model also predicts that prices will be highest in this location and that the richest individuals in
the community will locate at this point; with incomes dropping as we move either into the CBD
or towards the urban fringe and the lowest income individuals locating at the CBD. Predictions
regarding population density are more nuanced. In equilibrium, prices will be highest at locations
where amenity levels (G-index) are highest. Ceteris paribus, higher prices lead to lower lot
sizes. Thus, at the intensive margin and working through the price channel, higher levels of
environmental quality (and amenities in general) serve to increase the density of development.
However, at the extensive margin, high income households tend to sort into the high amenity
locations. Ceteris paribus, these high income households will demand relatively larger
residential lots. Thus, there is an income channel through which environmental amenities can
effectuate lower housing densities.
This dichotomy between price and income effects is particularly important for
understanding the potential impact of zoning restrictions on density. In high amenity locations,
high potential rents create a strong incentive for developers to build up (generate more square
footage of living space per unit of land input). By magnifying the relative importance of the
price effect, the potential for building up increases the probability that the net effect of amenities
will be to increase density. However, it is precisely these high environmental amenity locations
that tend to experience restrictive zoning regulations designed to prevent dense development.
The shape of the income distribution also plays an important role in determining the
relative density outcomes in high G locations. If there is limited income heterogeneity then the
income sorting channel will be attenuated and price effects will dominate, leading to
densification around high amenity locations. Conversely, in the face of large degrees of income
heterogeneity, if the super-rich have a high willingness to pay for large homes in high amenity
12

areas then we would expect to see large lots and relatively low density development in high
amenity areas - as the income sorting channel dominates the price channel.
A. Emerging Within City Environmental Trends
We now examine several environmental dynamics playing out across urban areas and
explore how these supply side changes affect the spatial distribution of economic activity within
cities. An overarching recent trend in the urban environment is the improvement in central city
quality of life on both environmental and non-environmental dimensions. This trend has
important implications for the long-run suburbanization trend. We first consider the literature on
three specific environmental components of this change (air quality, open space and brownfields
clean-up) before returning to the issue of central city quality of life in general.
i.

Improving Air Quality
The stylized example presented in figure 1 above highlights the potential role that air

pollution could play in shaping the spatial structure of cities. Historically, the combination of
urbanization, industrialization and a heavy reliance on coal in both manufacturing and residential
uses led to extreme pollution problems (Barreca, Clay and Tarr 2014). The “London Fog” made
news in the United States as early as 1879 (Stradling and Thorsheim 1999). Eighty years later,
the Great Smog of 1952 was responsible for the death as many as 12,000 Londoners (Clay and
Troesken 2010). Thus, local air pollution has been a major component of the spatial amenity
landscape. Perhaps nowhere are the tradeoffs between commute time and air pollution better
illustrated than in the East End neighborhoods of late 19th century Pittsburgh. By the late 1800s
the city’s industrial success had led to such severe air pollution problems that it was famously
referred to by James Parton as “hell with the lid taken off” (Tarr 2003). The air pollution created

13

a situation where “society was forced to flee to the freer air of the East End.” (Nevin 1888). This
environmental haven, separated from the mill-laden rivers by surrounding hillsides, became the
location of choice for both the city’s and the nation’s elite. By 1900, residents of this
neighborhood, located five miles from downtown Pittsburgh, controlled as much as 60% of
America’s productive assets (Skrabec 2010).
Over the last few decades there has been a sharp reduction in U.S urban air pollution.
Smith (2012) documents that U.S. air pollution (as measured by ambient PM10) has fallen by
roughly 50% between the early 1960s and 2008. Similar progress in documented in Germany
and Spain. In spite of these improvements, there continues to be strong empirical support for
the role that air pollution variation plays in determining the spatial structure within cities. A
voluminous set of hedonic studies demonstrate that air quality capitalizes into housing prices
suggesting that it belongs in the locational equilibrium model’s amenity vector.8 Further, direct
reduced form evidence regarding the role of air pollution in household location decisions is
provided by Banzhaf and Walsh (2008). These authors first show that the locational equilibrium
model in general predicts increases in both density and income when amenity levels increase at a
single location. They then test these density and income predictions vis-à-vis air pollution by
evaluating the impact of changes in the scale and existence of sources of toxic air pollution that
occurred in California between 1990 and 2000.
Their work broadly supports both the density and income predictions of the model. On
density, they find that removing exposure to polluting facilities increased population density on
the order of 5% while adding new exposure led to a drop in population density of similar
magnitudes. This density result is likely driven by two related factors. First, working through
8

Smith and Huang (1995) summarize 37 studies that used hedonic property analysis to evaluate the housing price
effects of air pollution. Zabel and Kiel (2000) and Kim et.al. (2003) present additional hedonic studies of air
pollution valuation.
14

the price channel, reductions in pollution provide incentives for developers to develop more
intensely and households to consume less square footage. Second, removal of polluting facilities
provides an opportunity to re-develop the land into residential use. This process is re-enforced
by the newly increased land prices. In terms of the spatial distribution of households of various
income levels, new exposure to toxic air pollution was associated with a drop in a
neighborhood’s average annual household income of $1,000 or more. Conversely the loss of
exposure to polluting facilities was estimated to lead to concomitant increases in income.
While this research provides reduced form evidence of the potential importance of air
pollution in the locational equilibrium framework, such studies do not explicitly model how
different households respond to exogenous changes in air pollution. A recent residential sorting
literature has sought to test how the spatial distribution of households within a city is affected by
regulation induced changes in the spatial distribution of pollution. Do richer people now move
to areas that have experienced a quality of life improvement? A handful of studies have
attempted to estimate locational equilibrium models of household location that directly
incorporate spatial heterogeneity in air quality. The first such efforts are reported in Sieg et.al.
(2004a 2004b). These authors estimate a locational equilibrium model for the greater Los
Angeles Metropolitan Area that incorporates spatial heterogeneity in ozone concentrations. They
then use the estimated model to compute a counterfactual equilibrium which describes the
predicted sorting of households of different income levels across 92 different neighborhoods
located in five different southern California counties, under the assumption that ozone levels
were what they would have been (as estimated by the Environmental Protection Agency) if the
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) had never occurred.

15

County
Los Angeles
Ventura
Orange
San Bernardino
Riverside

Table 1: Sieg et.al. (2004A) Results
Initial Location
Pct. Ozone
Pct.
Pct. G‐
(improvement)
Price
Index
9.40%
‐0.20%
2.30%
9.40%
‐2.60%
0.40%
10.60%
‐1.60%
1.10%
14.30%
2.90%
5.40%
18.30%
5.90%
7.60%

Post Sorting
Pct.
Pct. G‐
Price
Index
‐0.60%
2.00%
‐1.20%
1.60%
1.00%
1.50%
2.80%
5.30%
6.30%
8.00%

To highlight the potential importance of accounting for equilibrium sorting when
evaluating non-marginal changes in locational amenities. Table 1 reproduces Sieg et.al.’s
estimates of the county-level impacts of the CAAA. Consider for instance the average
household that would have located in Los Angeles County in a baseline no-CAAA state of the
world. The first 3 columns of the table report the impact of the CAAA on ozone levels, prices
and the G-Index in their baseline county (Los Angeles). On average, implementation of the
CAAA was predicted to provide a 9.40% improvement in Los Angeles County’s ozone pollution
and drop average housing prices by 0.20% (as we discuss below, this price drop arises from the
fact that Los Angeles County saw small improvements in air quality relative to overall regional
improvements). The 9.40% ozone improvement was associated with an overall 2.30% increase
in average G-Index levels. However, in assessing the impact of the CAAA on individual
households, it is necessary to account for the fact that household’s move when the spatial
distribution of amenities changes. The last two columns of the table account for these
movements and report the change in price and G-index predicted to be actually experienced by
households in the post-CAAA locational equilibrium as opposed to the baseline no-CAAA
equilibrium (i.e. accounting for the relocation of those households who choose different locations
under the two different two locational equilibria). In general, under the post-CAAA equilibrium,

16

households tended to sort out of their initial Los Angeles County neighborhoods and into
neighborhoods that saw slightly smaller amenity increases (2.00% vs. 2.30%) and slightly larger
price decreases (-0.60% vs. -0.20%). In some instances, the impact of sorting can be quite large.
For instance, this analysis predicts that, on average, individuals who initially live in Ventura
County will experience a public goods change that is actually four times as large as that
experienced at the average household location in Ventura County.
These differences can be extremely important when considering the distribution of
welfare from a given policy. For instance in this example, the partial equilibrium estimate of the
average Ventura County household’s willingness to pay for these air quality improvements is
only $21 per year, while the general equilibrium estimate, which accounts for relocation, is $539
per year. Table 1 also highlights the importance of relative improvements in evaluating the price
effects of environmental improvements. While all counties experienced overall air quality
improvements, because those that experienced lower levels of improvement became relatively
less attractive, they actually are predicted to experience price decreases in the new equilibrium.9
It is important to note that this research assumed that Los Angeles was a closed economy and
that the improvement in local air quality did not accelerate population growth of the region as a
whole. Future research might examine intra-metropolitan area and inter-metropolitan area
choice within a unified framework. In an open economy, it is likely to be the case that even
those areas with the lowest relative gains in air quality will still experience accelerated economic
growth.

9

While not reported in the Sieg et. al. 2004 paper, these relative changes in amenity level can also expected to be
associated with changes in the distribution of income groups across the counties, with the average income of
households in the counties that experienced the largest improvements increasing.

17

Two additional recent studies have also incorporated air pollution in a locational
equilibrium model. Tra (2010) utilizes a Random Utility Model (RUM) approach which
incorporates horizontal differentiation to analyze the impact of air pollution changes in the LA
metro area. The RUM framework uses a random coefficients framework that allows individual
households to place different weights on the various elements of the amenity index and
incorporates idiosyncratic tastes for specific locations. Tra’s results are generally consistent with
those of Sieg et.al. Bayer et.al. (2011) incorporate ozone pollution along with crime rates and
racial composition into a dynamic version of the Random Utility approach which they estimate
using data from the San Francisco Bay area. They find that on average, households would be
willing to pay $295 for a 10% decrease in the number of days that ozone levels exceeded the
state’s hourly standard.
Applying such a structural approach to studying the valuation of air pollution in cities in
the developing world would be quite valuable. In the developing world, cities in China and India
feature extremely high levels of air pollution and within these cities there is substantial variation
in air pollution. Zheng and Kahn (2008) estimate hedonic real estate price regressions using the
price per square foot of new residential apartments built across Beijing from 2004 to 2006.
Controlling for a large number of attributes of the apartment and the neighborhood, they estimate
that a one microgram per cubic meter increase in PM10 is associated with a .5% reduction in
local home prices.
One potentially fruitful area for future research is on the spatial distribution of air
pollution within cities. Today, regulators are paying greater attention to small particulates such
as PM2.5. Atmospheric chemistry studies have documented that “hot spots” exist close to major
highways in cities such as Los Angeles (see Hu et. al. 2010). If government regulations reduce

18

such pollution, an important economic incidence issue arises. As particulate problems fall near
freeways, will renters in the area benefit or will they be priced out of their previously affordable
neighborhoods. If richer people move in, will the type of gentrification documented by Sieg et.
al. (2004) repeat itself so that the main winner from the local public goods improvement are the
local land owners?
Some cities continue to have rent control and rent stabilization programs. For example,
there are fifteen cities in California who have rent control and these include Los Angeles and San
Francisco.10 Incumbents in such programs are less likely to be priced out of gentrifying
neighborhoods. In addition, developers in major cities are often asked to set aside a given
fraction such as 20% of units in new residential towers to be sold to lower income households.
In this sense, activist local government housing policy interacts with environmental dynamics
such that a subset of lower income households enjoy the gains of local amenity improvements
without facing sharp increases in rents.
ii.

Preservation of Open Space
Throughout the United States, many local governments have introduced publicly

financed efforts to purchase open space development rights. The intent of such legislation is to
preserve land for recreational and aesthetic purposes (Kotchen and Powers 2006, Banzhaf et.al.
2010). Such land set asides affect the spatial patterns of economic development within a
metropolitan area.
Several researchers have considered the role that open space protection can play in
determining urban spatial structure. Most of this work has been theoretical in nature and largely
builds directly on monocentric city formalizations of locational equilibrium. Wu and Plantinga
10

http://www.dca.ca.gov/publications/landlordbook/appendix2.shtml.
19

(2003) incorporate open space into a monocentric city model and find that land protection at the
urban fringe can lead to “leap frog” development as open space amenities increase the
desirability of land on the far side of the newly protected open space from the city center. Turner
(2005) considers open space in a dynamic version of the model that incorporates both urban and
suburban locations. He finds that in the presence of open space amenities more remote areas are
developed before more central areas. Following on arguments made by Bruekner (2000) about
potential market failures in the provision of open space, Bento et. al. (2006) develop a
computational monocentric city model that incorporates the amenity value of open space at the
urban fringe. Under this formulation, the market can lead to inefficiently large urban areas as
private developers fail to account for the decrease in utility experienced by extant city dwellers
due to increased distance to open space at the fringe.
On the empirical front two papers have considered the issue of open space protection
and/or land regulation in a locational equilibrium framework. Walsh (2007) extends the
empirical approach developed by Epple and Sieg (2008) to structurally estimate a locational
equilibrium model of open space and housing markets in Wake County, North Carolina. The
model incorporates multiple employment centers and two types of open space, publicly owned
and privately held. Simulated versions of the model are used to undertake counterfactual
exercises which incorporate the endogenous nature of privately held open space – modeled
essentially as a residual land use. A key finding from this work is that public protection of open
space in a given location can lead to an overall decrease in a neighborhood’s overall (public +
private) provision of open space due to the acceleration of the conversion of privately held open
space which is attracted by the amenity created by the new public land.

20

A second notable empirical analysis is the work of Cheshire and Sheppard (2006). They
use hedonic methods to estimate implicit prices for “amenities produced by the planning system”
and then imbed these estimates in a modified monocentric city model that is calibrated to data for
the city of Reading in the United Kingdom. The fitted model is then used to calculate the gross
monetized value of planning by calculating the change in household expenditure functions
needed to hold utility constant under no planning counterfactual outcome—assuming that
without planning laws there would be no open space and that all industrial activity would be
equally distributed across the landscape. Working within the framework of the traditional urban
model allows Cheshire and Sheppard to implicitly incorporate general equilibrium adjustments
in their analysis. Their results suggest that there is a net loss from planning activities that may be
as high as 3.9% of annual incomes—with the largest positive benefits from these activities being
associated with the provision of accessible open space.
In related work, Turner et al. (2014) use an innovative reduced form approach to evaluate
the impact of land use regulation on the price of undeveloped land. They distinguish between
three different channels: "own lot" effects measure the price effect associated with restrictions
that regulations place on the lot itself; "external effects" which capture the price impacts that
derive from restrictions on proximate land uses; and, supply effects which stem from the impact
that land use regulations have on equilibrium prices through their attenuating effect on the supply
of developed land. They find that a one standard deviation increase in land use regulation
decreases land value by about one third. They attribute the bulk of this effect to own and
external lot effects with a 2 to 3 percent decrease in developable area contributing the residual.
Finally, we note that a large hedonic literature provides support for the claim that access
to open space amenities will lead to higher housing prices. McConnell and Walls (2005) review
21

approximately 40 published articles that use hedonic methods to assess the capitalization of open
space into housing prices. They document capitalization of a wide variety of open space
amenities including: general open space, parks, and natural areas; greenbelts; wetlands;
urban/suburban forest preserves, and agricultural lands.
iii.

Superfund, Brownfields and Industrial Site Remediation

The legacy of more than a century of manufacturing activity is that many U.S cities
feature large numbers of past industrial sites. These areas suffer from toxic releases and severe
localized damage to the land and nearby water (Sigman 2001). The most toxic of these sites
have been placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) and have been targeted for clean-up by
the Environmental Protection Agency through the Federal Superfund program. In 1982 an initial
400 sites were place on the NPL. Today there are more than 1300 sites on the NPL (US GAO
2013). These sites are however only the tip of the iceberg. The U.S. Government Accounting
Office estimates that there are additionally between 450,000 and 1 million brownfield sites in the
U.S. While not as toxic as NPL sites, redevelopment or re-use of these sites is complicated by
the presence or potential presence of hazardous wastes and can sit abandoned or unused.(US
GAO 2005) A large literature documents that property values are negatively impacted by
proximity to NPL sites (see Kiel 1995, Kiel and Williams 2007).11
As noxious industrial sites are cleaned up, what happens to urban form and the spatial
distribution of real estate prices? Two recent studies are of particular interest. Greenstone and
Gallagher (2008) examine how tract-level median household values respond to the clean-up of
NPL sites. They compare housing price growth in areas surrounding the first 400 hazardous

11

A summary of these findings can be found in Sigman and Stafford (2011) and USEPA (2009).
22

waste sites added to the NPL and thus slated for Superfund clean-up to housing price changes in
the areas surrounding the 290 sites that narrowly missed qualifying for the NPL. Greenstone and
Gallagher (2008) implement an instrumental variables approach that embeds a type of regression
discontinuity design. The discontinuity arises from the fact that, while all 690 of these sites were
scored with an index number representing their level of priority for clean-up, EPA subsequently
set an arbitrary score cut-off for listing based on the agency’s projection that it could afford to
clean 400 sites. Their main outcome equation relates changes in census tract home prices over
time to whether the site was designated as a NPL site.

∆

∗

∗

(3)

Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) instrument for the NPL Site listing dummy using a dummy
that equals one if the site’s hazardous ranking score (HRS) exceeded 28.5 at the baseline.
Based on this research design; Gallagher and Greenstone (2008) conclude that Superfund
listing has little to no effect on local median housing value changes. More recently, GamperRabindran and Timmins (2012) revisit the Greenstone and Gallagher results and find a positive
impact of clean-up on prices. The main reason for this difference in findings is that, while
Greenstone and Gallagher evaluated the impact of a site being listed for clean-up, GamperRabindran and Timmins focus on deletion from the NPL which occurs after clean-up is actually
completed. Thus, Greenstone and Gallagher are measuring the impact of providing information
that a site has been designated as a NPL site and may be cleaned up in the future while GamperRabindran and Timmins are measuring the impact of the actual clean-up. As of August 2014,

23

there were 1318 sites listed as NPL sites and 383 deleted sites on the Superfund list.12 These
data suggest that not all listed sites are cleaned up and this raises an expectations issue namely if
and when in the future will the clean-up actually occur. Home buyers are likely to have
different expectations over these random variables and this will affect their bidding for housing
near such sites.
Gamper-Rabindran and Timmins also document that the use of tract-level data can mask
important within-tract variation in exposure. They show that a clean-up has a larger effect in the
lower portions of the within-tract housing price distribution and use house level data to show that
cheaper houses within an exposed census tract tend to be located closer to the NPL site.
Less toxic brownfield sites have also been studied. Three recent studies are of particular
note. Currie et. al. (forthcoming) geocode housing sales data from five states (Texas,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Florida covering the years 1998 to 2005. They use
data from the Toxic Release Inventory to identify facilities that release toxic emissions and they
use micro data from the Longitudinal Business Database to identify the births and deaths of these
toxic plants. Their paper measures the housing market and health impacts of 1,600 openings and
closings of industrial plants that emit toxic pollutants. They find that housing values within
one mile decrease by 1.5 percent when plants open, and increase by 1.5 percent when plants
close.
Second, Taylor et.al. (2012) study 105 sites in the Minneapolis metropolitan area, the
majority of which are located in the urban core. A major innovation of this work is that they
study the difference between clean industrial sites and toxic sites and note the high level of
spatial correlation between specific contaminated sites and commercial and industrial sites in

12

See http://www.epa.gov/superfund/sites/npl/.
24

general. They argue that it is important to control for this potentially confounding factor. They
document that proximity to clean commercial sites (within .3 miles) lowers property values by
roughly 4.5% to 5.5%. Environmental contamination increases the negative impacts by
approximately 2.5% to 3.0%.

They find that once the site is remediated, the contamination

effect disappears.
Third, Haninger et.al. (2014) evaluate the U.S. EPA’s brownfields Program which awards
grants for the redevelopment of brownfields. They utilize a variety of identification strategies to
evaluate a set of 327 brownfield sites that were nominated for clean-up – 197 of which were
awarded grants for clean-up and 130 were not. They non-parametrically identify a treatment
threshold of 2040 meters. Estimates of the price effect from clean-up range from 5% to 32%.
A review of the recent literature argues for the presence of price effects associated with
close proximity to brownfields and polluted sites. These price effects suggest households are
sorting in response to these disamentities. However, from the perspective of the locational
equilibrium framework, one would also like to see more direct tests of sorting behavior. A
summary of the extant literature is provided in Banzhaf and McCormick (2007) and Noonan
(2005). The majority of this literature, going back to United Church of Christ (1987) documents
correlations between hazardous facilities and the presence of low-income/minority groups.
However, few of these studies explore the sorting behavior of individuals – instead viewing
siting decisions from an environmental justice perspective which focuses on correlations
between race/disadvantaged status and pollution. The handful of studies that have looked at
demographic changes related to citing or removal of toxic waste facilities have found mixed
results.13 It remains an open question of whether urban political leaders choose to locate

13

See for instance Been (1994), Been and Gupta (1997), Wolverton (2009) and Cameron and McConnaha (2006).
25

noxious facilities in minority residential communities or whether poor and minority households
choose to live close to such facilities because of the housing price discount.
The recent hedonic research documenting the price appreciation in localized areas where
noxious sites are cleaned highlights that gentrification will take place in those neighborhoods.
The economic incidence is such that land owners in those areas will gain the most. Such hedonic
studies do not recover welfare estimates nor do they document changes in population density
over time. As a noxious site located in prime piece of center city real estate is remediated, it is
possible that the population density in the area will increase. In this sense the reclamation of
center city land can contribute to the center city resurgence documented in many U.S cities.

B. Improving Quality of Life in the Center City
In recent years, there have been sharp improvements in center city quality of life brought
about by several synergistic trends including; declines in center city crime (Levitt 2004,
Schwartz et. al 2003, improvements in urban air pollution (discussed above see Kahn and
Schwartz 2008, Wolff forthcoming), multi-billion dollar investments in rail transit systems that
transport people to the city center (Baum-Snow and Kahn 2005, Kahn 2007), major investments
in cleaning the nation’s downtown rivers, and waterways (Olmstead 2010), building bike lanes
and urban parks such as the Rose Kennedy Greenway (Tajima 2003).
At the same time there have been emerging demographic trends such as more women
working in the labor force and thus delaying marriage and having fewer children (Goldin 2006).
Such households have less of a need to live in the school focused suburbs. At the industrial level
with manufacturing shrinking in its employment share, more people are working in the high tech
service sector and many of these industries gain from downtown locations. Such industries
26

disproportionately hire highly educated people (Moretti 2012). All of these trends further
strengthen the central business district.
Downtown environmental progress is likely to have played a key role in causing the
center city revival. While it is very difficult to parse out the individual effects of specific factors,
together these trends have strengthened center cities and have encouraged private developers to
make multi-billion dollar investments in new downtown real estate projects. The net effect of
these investments is to lead more and more people (especially young adults and older adults
whose kids are out of the house) to be willing to live downtown. In high amenity center cities
such as New York City and Paris, the rich have chosen to live in the center city (Brueckner,
Thisse, Zenou 1999, Brueckner and Rosenthal 2009).
This center city resurgence has been studied in detail (Glaeser and Shapiro 2003, Glaeser
and Gottlieb 2006) and seems likely to continue. More and more mayors are prioritizing
reinventing their downtowns with a focus on beauty and promoting tourism around their
waterfronts (see Carlino and Saiz 2008). Examples range from Pittsburgh to Chicago to
Shanghai to Seoul. As center city quality of life improves, center city property values rise.
Compare Manhattan’s real estate prices in the bleak 1970s versus in Mayor Mike Bloomberg’s
Manhattan of 2012. By raising center city property values, property tax revenue rises and urban
leaders can finance more of their pet projects. It is no accident that New York City mayors
focused on enforcing dog poop laws, providing bike lanes and enforcing anti-smoking
ordinances. At a time when crime is falling sharply, time outdoors is a complementary activity
to clean air and safe streets.

27

As urban quality of life in center cities has improved, it has triggered gentrification in the
center cities and this in turn triggers private sector investments in upgrading buildings and
offering better restaurants and retail shopping (Waldfogel 2008). The geographic patterns of
upscale supermarkets with organic offerings, such as Whole Foods, are not surprising (see
Meltzer and Schuetz 2012).
Whether this demand for downtown living leads millions of more people to live
downtown depends on the elasticity of downtown housing supply. Such studies as Glaeser,
Gyourko and Saks (2006) and in this Handbook Gyourko and Molloy (2015) highlight the
challenges in building more housing downtown. Kahn (2011) uses data from cities across
California and argues that more liberal cities are less likely to issue new housing permits. In
their study of Massachusetts cities, Glaeser and Ward (2009) conclude that cities with more
manufacturing and more minorities in 1940 are also associated with smaller minimum lot sizes.
If environmental quality rises in the center city but the housing supply is highly inelastic then
such demand will simply translate into higher downtown prices and the rich living downtown.
This proposition merits more research in urbanizing nations around the world. Brueckner and
Sidhar (2012) document that building height limits in India’s cities are contributing to suburban
growth. They document that cities with higher floor to area ratios are more compact.

III.

Global Externalities Exacerbated by the Intra-Metro Area Locational Choice of
Households and Firms
The equilibrium sorting and hedonic models discussed above focus on the demand for

location specific attributes such as air pollution, a short commute, or good school access.

28

Households have the right incentives to tradeoff such attributes against the market price they
must pay for homes located in such communities. However, equilibrium sorting models
typically ignore how a specific household’s locational choice has consequences for pollution
production. For example, if a household chooses to live close to public transit, such a household
may be more likely to use public transit more and drive less (Baum-Snow and Kahn 2005). In
aggregate, such locational choices reduce a city’s carbon footprint and help to reduce climate
change risk even though each individual household is small in terms of total greenhouse gas
production.
Unlike localized environmental goods, changes in greenhouse gas emissions associated
with expanded urban footprints do not have any direct effect on the relative attractiveness of
different urban locations so this type of extension to the model essentially boils down to a
measurement challenge in which researchers attempt to measure the impact of different spatial
structures on greenhouse gas emissions.
A standard claim in the popular media is that suburbanization has a large causal effect on
increasing driving and household electricity consumption. Such a result emerges from the
standard monocentric model. Suburban homes are far from the CBD’s jobs and far from public
transit. This leads such households to drive more miles. Since land prices fall with respect to
distance from the city center, suburbanites live in larger homes that use more electricity for basic
home functions such as air conditioning and leisure. Such suburban households live further
from public transit and are more likely to work in the suburbs. Together, these facts suggest that
they will drive more and consume more electricity than if they lived in the center city. These
activities will contribute to extra greenhouse gas production if the vehicle is fueled using
gasoline and if the home’s electricity is generated by coal and natural gas.
29

From a welfare and policy perspective, this discussion hinges on a failure to price the
externalities associated with energy consumption and production. For example, Parry and Small
(2005) estimate that internalizing gasoline consumption externalities in the U.S would require a
$1 increase in the gasoline tax.14 In the presence of such as tax, suburbanites would be more
likely to buy more fuel efficient vehicles and the carbon externality associated with
suburbanization would diminish. This example highlights that the social costs of
suburbanization literature is really focused on a second best world in which households and firms
are spreading out without facing the social costs of their actions. A critical implication is that
any empirical research focused on the externality consequences of suburbanization must account
for the dynamics of the carbon pricing regime faced by key decision makers. .
The greenhouse gas implications of the suburbanization trend depend on the technologies
used for generating suburban household electricity demand and for fueling private vehicles.
Today, with coal and natural gas providing most of our power and the bulk of private vehicles
still being run on gasoline there is a large carbon impact. In the future, if more households have
solar panels fueling electric vehicles, then the carbon consequences of the suburbanization of
U.S homes and jobs could be sharply reduced. In the absence of carbon pricing in the U.S, it
remains an open question how quickly the research frontier will advance so that the widespread
diffusion of solar homes and electric cars takes place.
A. Measuring the Causal Effect of Suburbanization on Household Energy Consumption
The typical research design seeking to test the hypothesis that suburbanization causes
greater household GHG emissions is based on running an OLS regression model of equation (4).
14

Davis (2011) and Muller, Mendelsohn, and Nordhaus (2011) quantify the externalities associated with coal fired
power plants.
30

In such an equation, the key explanatory variables are such observables as the household’s
distance from the city center and the population density in the area where the household lives.
∑

∑

∑

.

(4)

In this regression, the dependent variable is the level of annual household GHG emissions
produced by household living in metropolitan area in tract

This variable can be formed

with data on the household’s annual gasoline consumption and information on the household’s
annual home fossil fuel consumption such as on natural gas and oil and information on the
home’s annual electricity consumption and the local electric utility’s carbon emissions factor
(see Glaeser and Kahn 2010).

refers to the value of individual characteristic

for household

. It can include standard household attributes such as the household’s income, the head’s age,
and the household’s size.

refers to the value of characteristic in tract . For example, this

may include a household’s census tract’s population density and the tract centroid’s distance to
the Central Business District. The final set of variables, denoted by

, refers to attribute

of

MSA .
OLS estimates of this equation raises the issue of self selection.15 Since households are
not randomly assigned to live in neighborhoods valid concerns can be raised about whether a
select subset of people choose to live in the suburbs versus the center city. At the start of this
section, we presented a residential locational choice model. That model did not explicitly
15

Several recent studies have attempted to quantify geography-related variation in carbon intensities. Glaeser and
Kahn (2010), Holian and Kahn (2013), Lee and Lee (2014) provide estimates of the relationship between urban
population density and the total greenhouse gas emissions from transportation. Zheng et. al. (2011) quantify the
carbon footprint effects across China’s cities. VandeWeghe and Kennedy (2007) compare per capita auto- and
building-related GHG emissions across census tracts within greater Toronto, Canada. Between the most carbonintensive (typically suburban) and the least carbon-intensive (typically urban) tracts, they find that GHG emissions
vary by more than a factor of four.

31

include an intensive margin of how much do people travel once they choose a location within a
metro area. Suppose that households who enjoy driving are more likely to locate in the suburbs
further from jobs and shopping centers. The econometrician who ignores this self-selection will
be likely to recover biased estimates based on equation (4) because the distance variable is
correlated with unobserved attributes of the household. Researchers who rely on OLS have to
argue that other factors such as local school quality or housing demand are the key determinants
of locational choice and that these choices are independent of the transportation use.
Does living at high density close to the city center induce individuals to consume less
energy (that is, a “treatment effect”)? Or instead, has a select subgroup of the population chosen
to live in center cities? This selection effect may be due to unobserved population heterogeneity
such that there are people who are predisposed to living the “low carbon” lifestyle and thus have
less demand for residential space, and prefer using public transit and walking to driving.16
Applied economists have recognized this challenge and have tried to make progress using
a longitudinal research design. Many urbanists have claimed that people walk and exercise
more when they live in center cities. Eid et. al. (2008) use a geocoded version of the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. These data track each individual’s residential address,
weight, and other personal characteristics over time. They report that 79% of these people move
address at least once during their six year study period. By first differencing their data, they
remove individual fixed effects and focus on measuring the association between local
neighborhood attributes and a person’s Body Mass Index (BMI). This association can be

16

The causes of such environmentalism remains an open research question. The peer effects literature and research
on parental transmission of culture and values offers possible pathways for examining this issue (Becker 1976,
Bowles 1998, Iannaccone 1998).
32

measured because some households move from the center city to the suburbs and vice-versa.17
They test and reject the hypothesis that suburbanization contributes to rising obesity levels.
A randomized field experiment design would offer a cleaner way to disentangle selection
from treatment effects. Suppose that public housing is scattered across different neighborhoods
in a city. Those households who sign up for a public housing lottery would be randomly
assigned their place of residence. A researcher focusing on this subpopulation could study the
transportation patterns of these individuals to establish the causal effect of urban form on car use.
The researcher would face the challenge of establishing whether results based on this
subpopulation are likely to generalize to other subsets of the population.18
The bottom line in terms of this area of research is that while, a handful of papers have
been written that highlight potential strategies for identifying the causal link between urban
structure and household energy consumption – this issue remains an open question and merits
future work both in developed and in developing nations’ cities.
B. Suburbanization and Carbon Politics
Households who live a high carbon lifestyle are likely to be aware of this fact and thus to
oppose policies such as carbon taxes that would raise electricity and gasoline prices. For
example, Cragg et. al. (2013) document that U.S Congressional Representative voting on the

17

The authors do not model why people are moving across geographic areas and thus they are implicitly assuming
that the migration decision’s determinants are not correlated with unobserved determinants of BMI changes.
18
As an example, the “Move to Opportunity” (MTO) program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) introduced a randomized lottery in which low-income households who “won” the lottery
receive vouchers to move to low-poverty areas. The survey data include household vehicle access. This
experimental design would allow researchers to study whether the probability that a household owns a vehicle
increases when it moves to areas further from public transit and further from the city center. The natural control
group in this case is other MTO-eligible families who did not win the lottery (Ludwig et al, 2011).

33

American Clean Energy and Security Act in 2009 was positively correlated with their district’s
per-capita carbon emissions. Holian and Kahn (2014) document that California voters who live
in the suburbs are less likely to support the state’s landmark AB32 legislation. California’s
AB32 commits California to major greenhouse gas reductions by the year 2020 and 2050. It
includes new regulations including a cap and trade program for carbon dioxide.19 In the year
2010, California voters had the opportunity to repeal AB32 by voting in favor of Proposition 23.
These voting data provides researchers with the opportunity to studying geographical patterns in
the precinct level data. Holian and Kahn (2014) document that suburban geographic areas were
more likely to vote against cap and trade even after controlling for the fact that more liberal
voters live in the center city. This finding is of interest because it highlights that suburbanites are
self interested voters who believe that their operating expenses will rise in the presence of a
carbon tax. Center city voters recognize that they live in smaller apartments and drive less and
use public transit more. The aggregate effect of these choices is that they face a lower carbon
bill if a carbon tax is enacted. The voting patterns support this spatial hypothesis.
A majority of U.S metropolitan area jobs are located in the suburbs. Glaeser and Kahn
(2001) use geocoded zip code level employment data to document the empirical distribution of
jobs across cities and industries. As road networks have improved and center city land has
increased in price, jobs have suburbanized. Improvements in information technology have
allowed firms to fragment so that they reduce their demand for downtown real estate and only
retain workers who require face to face interaction with other firms to remain there (RossiHansberg and Sarte 2009).

19

http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/ab32/ab32.htm
34

Households who live and work in the suburbs are unlikely to use public transit. Aware of
this fact, they are less likely to support public policies that improve public transit or to use this
public transit. This fact helps to explain how over 16 major cities have made major investments
in rail transit systems over the last few decades but only Boston and Washington DC have seen
significant ridership of these systems (Baum-Snow and Kahn 2005).
Throughout the urbanizing world, people are decentralizing as new roads are built and as
household income rises. While environmental economists have stressed that the introduction of
a carbon tax is likely to offer greater long run benefits relative to its upfront costs, this group of
researchers has tended to ignore the spatial distribution of voters and its implications for the
economic incidence of new taxes. Whether the world wide suburbanization trend affects the
likelihood of a global carbon treaty would appear to be an important future research topic.

IV.

Environmental Amenities in a System of Cities
In this section, we survey ongoing research examining how environmental amenities

shape cross-city competition for workers and firms. We examine the causes of differential
environmental improvements in some cities (the evolving supply of pollution) and we seek to
understand its consequences for the sorting of heterogeneous workers (who differ with respect to
human capital) and the types of firms who hire them (i.e Facebook vs. service firms).
An enormous cross-sectional cross-city compensating differentials literature has used the
core Rosen/Roback modeling structure to estimate hedonic wage and real estate impacts of non-

35

market goods (for a general survey see Gyourko, Kahn and Tracy 1999). The classic
Rosen/Roback model of cross-city quality of life implicitly assumes that spatially tied attributes
are exogenously determined and fixed over time. The leading papers in the cross-city nonmarket quality of life literature have been static studies seeking to estimate the cross-sectional
hedonic equilibrium at a point in time (Graves and Linneman 1979, Berger, Blomquist and
Hoehn 1988, Gyourko and Tracy 1991, Albouy 2009). Such estimates are quite useful for
learning about the marginal migrant’s implicit price index for non-market goods and be used to
construct a Laspeyres price index for necessary expenditure to consume a fixed non-market local
amenity bundle such as climate attributes (Cragg and Kahn 1999, Costa and Kahn 2003).

This

approach is less informative in the case where households face migration costs in moving across
cities and when there is significant heterogeneity with respect to the preferences for local public
goods. In this case, the hedonic gradient represents the marginal mobile person’s willingness to
tradeoff money for local public goods and such estimates may reveal little about the preferences
of those far from the margin (Bayer, Keohnane and Timmins 2009). 20

20

For example, suppose that a Chicago resident who currently earns $100,000 could earn $140,000 if he moves to
San Francisco. Suppose that housing units are all the same size and that this Chicago resident currently pays
$20,000 in rent but would pay $120,000 for a housing unit in San Francisco. Abstracting from federal and local
taxes, this person sacrifices $60,000 in private consumption if he moves from Chicago to San Francisco. If we
observe this person make this move, then a lower bound on his willingness to pay for San Francisco’s amenities
over Chicago’s amenities is $60,000. Note that this example assumes that migration costs are zero and abstracts
from potential adjustments in the level of housing consumption. Suppose that due to family reasons that this person
would face a $250,000 migration cost for leaving Chicago. An econometrician who does not observe this cost
would see the person remain in Chicago and would infer that this person does not value San Francisco’s amenities.

36

A. A Cross-City Household Locational Choice Model

This section modifies the locational equilibrium model presented in section II to motivate
the discussion below of environmental quality and cross-city sorting by heterogeneous
households and firms. As presented here, the model is a modification of Bayer, Keohane and
Timmins’ (2009) cross-city locational choice model. At a point in time a household is located in
a specific metropolitan area ∈ and must choose whether to stay in its current location or move
to another location. Households differ with respect to their human capital endowments and can
foresee both the incomes and housing prices available to them at all potential locations.
Households recognizes that if they move they will incur moving costs (which are heterogeneous
and we discuss them below) but that it will enjoy a vector of location specific attributes G. As
with the intra-city model presented above, some of these attributes are environmental attributes
such as climate, proximity to coasts and local environmental quality. Finally, we assume that
each household has an idiosyncratic preference shock (error term) associated with each possible
. For simplicity we assume a linear indirect utility function and thus, the utility that

location

household i that initially is located in community j will receive if it chooses to locate in
community k is given by equation 5:
∗

∗

Γ

In equation 5, moving costs are zero if

,

∗

∗

. (5)

. Γ . captures both systematic heterogeneity in

taste for amenities (based on a vector of demographic characteristics,
coefficients component driven by the idiosyncratic shock

) and a random

. Inclusion of

in the Γ function

37

allows the model to reflect the fact that, on average, demographics such as education level
impact tastes for environmental quality (Kahn 2002).21
Assuming a logit error term collapses the implicitly high dimensional problem of
identifying the probability of household i, initially located in j, choosing location k as its final
destination into the familiar logit probability expression presented in equation (6).

∗

∑∈

∗
∗

,
∗

∗
,

∗
∗

∗

(6)

Several points regarding empirical implementation of equation (6) merit discussion.
First, there is a fundamental asymmetry between the decision maker and the econometrician.
The econometrician must impute what this household will earn in each local labor market.
While it is easy to impute the rental price of what each household will have to pay for housing in
cities such as Boston, Houston etc., a fundamental self-selection issue arises when using the
wages for college graduates who already live in Houston as an estimate of the wage a person
now living in Chicago would earn if he moved to Houston. To avoid self-selection concerns, the
researcher must assume either that there are no unobserved skills or that the factor price for these
skills is equal across cities (Heckman and Scheinkman 1987).
A key innovation in this model of location choice is the introduction of migration costs
(also see Kennan and Walker 2008). The introduction of migration costs means that migration is
an investment and that a forward looking migrant should also form expectations of how his
income and the amenities of the area will evolve over time. Incorporating fixed costs is
21

As presented here, preferences do not exhibit the single crossing property discussed above in section II.
Incorporating income into the Γ function is one way to address this issue.
38

particularly important in the modern economy, where there is an aging population who has built
up location specific social capital (Glaeser, Laibson and Sacerdote 2002). In this case hedonic
differences in prices may sharply understate the marginal valuation of amenities depending on
who is the marginal household (Bayer, Keohane and Timmins 2009).
Bayer, Keohane and Timmins (2009) estimate a version of this model to recover
estimates of the marginal willingness to pay for air quality improvements using data on
migration while allowing for positive migration costs. They argue that standard hedonic
methods will under-estimate the marginal willingness to pay for clean air and other location
amenities because there are infra-marginal households who value such amenities but face large
migration costs to moving and thus the hedonic gradient contains biased information about
household’s marginal valuations. In their application, they document that a major bias arises
because households are estimated to have high moving costs associated with leaving their state
and/or region of birth. A majority of U.S. citizens were born in areas with relatively high air
pollution levels. Bayer et.al. demonstrate that failure to account for a household’s birth-related
attachments to these relatively polluted areas imparts a large downward bias in estimates of the
willingness to pay for clean air.
In the presence of migration costs, forward looking households will consider both the
amenities of a location today and their expectations of future amenity levels in potential
destination cities (see Bishop (2012) and Bishop and Murphy (2012)). Bishop (2012) assumes
that such locational attributes as crime and air pollution follow an AR(1) process and uses city
specific estimates of this process to predict future amenity values. In cities where polluted areas
are expected to improve over time, today’s amenity value under-states future progress. If for
instance the AR(1) process is mean reverting and economic agents anticipate that relatively

39

polluted locations will improve toward the mean over time, then the econometrician who
estimates a static model and does not incorporate these dynamics will under-estimate the
willingness to pay for such an amenity. This bias arises because the econometrician observes
people moving to locations with high levels of pollution today and therefore infers that
individuals do not prioritize pollution avoidance heavily in their location decisions. When, in
fact, economic decision makers are basing their decisions on the lower levels of pollution that
they expect to experience in these locations over longer-run time horizons.

B. Modeling Cross-City Differences in the Local Public Goods Supply
Environmental and urban economists have not been explicit about how the G is produced
and who is doing this “production”. Implicit in this is the view that local public goods are either
exogenous or being produced through some unintended by product of economic activity.
In papers such as Kahn (1999) or Levitt (2004), researchers adopt a reduced form
approach and model a location’s local public goods vector by simply regressing measures of
amenities (such as air pollution, or crime) on a set of observables.

,

)

(7)

In this equation, the G is the city’s local public goods vector, X is a vector of city specific
demographics and industries located within the borders and Z is a vector of national policies that
have been implemented. This reduced form equation representing the supply of local public
goods, including many environmental attributes, highlights a key difference between urban
economics and industrial organization.

40

Starting with Rosen (1974, 2002), urban economists have thought of locations as
differentiated products whose attributes are in a characteristics space. In this sense, there is a
close link between urban and industrial organization economics. In the modern IO literature, for
profit product sellers choose what to bundle into a product such as a car or an airplane ride in
order to collect more revenue (Berry et. al. 1995, Blonigen et. al 2013). A key difference
between environmental and urban economics and industrial organization is that the suppliers of
real estate do not consciously choose all of the local public goods bundled into a specific
property. Instead, such local public goods as clean air and water are an emergent property of
regulation, and what industry and population locates within a geographic area and the daily
activities of such economic actors at their specific location.
Diamond (2012) introduces a straightforward reduced form endogenous amenity
modeling technique in which she assumes that endogenous city specific amenities are an
increasing function of the city’s share of college graduates. The correlation between college
graduates and amenities is likely to reflect both selection and treatment effects. College
educated individuals are likely to be richer and thus are willing to pay more to live in nicer areas
(selection). The clustering of such college educated in a small geographic area may also have a
treatment effect in that their local purchasing power is likely to attract niche retail stores and
restaurants (Waldfogel 2008). This group’s propensity to vote and to follow local politics may
discipline local politicians to address quality of life concerns (Moretti 2004). Given the positive
correlation between education and environmentalism, this group is also likely to prioritize green
issues (Kahn 2002).
One promising area for future research relates to how local governments respond to both
contemporaneously high levels of local public goods (the G vector) and expectations of future
41

increases in public good levels. In recent work, Brueckner and Neumark (2014) argue that in
those areas with better natural amenities (a high G) public sector workers earn higher wages.
Their core logic is that households inelastically demand such areas and local officials can tax
more (for redistribution purposes) without people moving away. In contrast in cities such as
Detroit, if rich people move out of the center city then the local government has less tax revenue
to spend on local public services and such a decline in G may have selective effects on who
remains in Detroit and on the probability that outsiders move to this center city.

C. Firm Locational Demand and Local Amenities
In the Roback (1988) model, there is no comparative advantage among heterogeneous
firms such that different firms earn greater profits at one location versus another because firms
do not differ.

The cross-city hedonic quality of life literature has developed independently of

the empirical firm locational choice literature that explores the role of local agglomeration
effects, transportation costs and access to input markets affects locational choice (Rosenthal and
Strange 2004, Dumais, Ellison and Glaeser 2002, Kerr et. al. 2012).

A second firm literature

has explored how differences across space in environmental regulation, labor regulation and
energy prices affects the geography of where different industries cluster (Carelton 1983, Becker
and Henderson 2000, Greenstone 2002, Henderson 1996, Holmes 1998, Kahn and Mansur
2013).
Today firms such as Facebook, Google, Amazon and Microsoft are locating in high
quality of life cities. Nascent agglomerations such as Santa Monica’s Silicon Beach are
emerging. High tech firms face a co-ordination issue that they often have incentives to locate
near each other. High quality of life areas help to solve the co-ordination problem and ex-post
42

help such firms who seek cross-firm learning and labor pooling to retain workers in the local
labor market.
For either factories or corporate headquarters, we can write down a locational choice
problem where firms choose the location that maximizes their profits. Similar to the Bayer,
Keohane and Timmins model of household locational choice, the core locational choice
probability model can be written as:

∗

∑∈

∗
∗

∗
∗

∗

(8)

Further flexibility can be obtained by allowing the coefficients in equation (8) to vary by
industry
where

and firm . Under such a specification,

for instance could be replaced by Β

is a vector of firm-level characteristics and

,

is a firm specific random component.

A key difference between the firm locational choice problem and the household problem
is the desire of some firms to locate near other firms in the same industry or complementary
industries. The firm agglomeration literature has devoted little attention to the role that place
based amenities (the

) play in determining where firms locate. For the subset of high tech

firms that seek high skill workers, they should recognize that where they locate is an investment.
They must form an expectation of what will be future centers of agglomeration and the high
quality of life cities such as Santa Monica can solve this co-ordination problem. For example,
for high tech firms the Agglomeration term in equation (8) may be a function of the local public
goods G index.

43

This discrete choice approach captures the sorting by heterogeneous firms. Those firms
that are land intensive will move to areas with cheaper land. Those that are labor intensive will
tend to avoid pro-union states (Holmes 1998). Those that are high emitters will avoid nonattainment counties under the Clean Air Act (Becker and Henderson 2000, Greenstone 2002).
Those firms that are energy intensive will tend to concentrate in places with low electricity prices
(Kahn and Mansur 2013). Such a probabilistic approach but can be aggregated up to predict how
local state policies influence the sorting of industries across space. California is a state with high
land prices, high electricity prices and is pro-union. It is no surprise that California has
deindustrialized over the last 40 years. This reduction in the scale of manufacturing lowers
pollution levels and thus feeds back into a type of virtuous cycle as these amenity improvements
can serve to increase the supply of high human capital labor that tends to migrate towards high
amenity locations.

D. The Evolution of Cross-City Differences in Environmental Amenities
In this section, we discuss four comparative statics with respect to how changes in the
spatial distribution of urban environmental amenities affects the spatial distribution of
heterogeneous households and firms; manufacturing dynamics, air quality dynamics, land use
zoning and climate amenities. Such environmental amenities dynamics affect the cross-city
locational choices of households and firms. We motivate the discussion with a discussion of the
role environmental amenities have played in the evolution of the City of Pittsburgh’s evolution
from a polluted industrial center to a high quality of life center of post-industrial commerce.

44

i.

The Case of Pittsburgh

Consider the case of Pittsburgh and the evolving role that natural resources have played
in its existence over the last 250 years. European settlement in the region began in the 1740s
with the establishment of an English trading post at the point of land where the confluence of the
Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers form the Ohio River. Early in the region’s history it was the
key role that these rivers played in transportation that gave Pittsburgh a natural advantage. The
strategic importance of controlling these natural transportation corridors led first the French and
then the British to establish forts at the confluence. Over the next 50 years, the city’s population
slowly grew up around Fort Pitt, its economy relying mainly on trading and the development of a
boat building industry – both predicated on the vital role that the city’s rivers played in moving
people and goods to the west.
Beginning in the 1800’s Pittsburgh’s natural transportation endowment was matched with
a second critical natural resource endowment as an engine of growth. Throughout the 1800s and
early 1900s the cost of transporting coal was a key determinant of where iron (and later steel)
production was located. The ready availability of local coal supplies combined with proximate
sources of iron ore gave the Pittsburgh region a critical natural advantage in iron production and
led to the region become a national leader in first iron and later steel production. By the close of
the 19th century, these natural advantages multiplied as manufacturers realized that they could
further reduce costs by eliminating the shipping of semi-finished products and integrated
production at the location of the coal fields. Thus, for more than 200 years (well into the second
half of the 20th Century) The City of Pittsburgh was an economic juggernaut fueled by natural

45

resource-based production advantages.22

By the year 1950, Pittsburgh’s population had peaked

at 676,000. After 150 years as a center for iron and steel production, the city had the third largest
concentration of corporate headquarters in the United States – built almost completely on heavy
manufacturing concerns.
This economic success came with environmental and health costs. As the population
density increased along the banks of the city’s three rivers, residents experienced increased rates
of infectious disease risk because of increasing concentrations of raw sewage being dumped in
these rivers as people lived at high population density. Urban public health research has
documented the urban death premium (Haines 2001). Major investments in water treatment and
sewage sharply reduced the urban mortality risk but new threats to urban quality of life emerged.
As trading and boat building gave way to iron and steel, an unintended consequence of the
greatly increased scale of this dirty activity was large amounts of local pollution which damaged
what could have been a beautiful city. In the words of one visitor to the city in 1846:

“Everybody who has heard of Pittsburgh, knows that it is a city of perpetual smoke and
looks as if it was built on a descent into a bottomless pit. But the locality is eminently
beautiful, in the confluence of two rivers, with bold hills everywhere in the background,
richly wooded and verdant.”23

Of course this pollution carried health implications as well. Ongoing epidemiology research
documents the health impacts of particulate matter from living in an area where coal was being
burnt (Clay et. al. 2013).
As is well known, by the early 1970s, Pittsburgh’s steel economy, predicated on the
natural advantages it enjoyed due to transportation and cheap coal, came crashing down as the

22

23

See Isard (1948) for a discussion of the evolving role of resource location in iron and steel production.

Case (1846).
46

U.S. economy began its seismic shift away from heavy manufacturing. In the short run, the loss
in manufacturing jobs was devastating to the region’s economy. However, as documented by
Kahn (1999) and Chay and Greenstone (2003), a silver lining of Rust Belt decline (starting in the
1970s and accelerated by the deep 1981 recession) has been a reduction of air and water
pollution levels in Rust Belt cities such as Pittsburgh.
Pittsburgh of today has successfully re-invented itself, taking advantage of the reductions
in industrial pollution that occurred with the loss of the steel industry to transition from a city
where natural resources are used as inputs to production processes to an economy where these
resources are packaged as amenities which make the city an integral recruitment tool for the
medical, high tech and institutions of higher education that now characterize the city’s economy.
Quoting from recruitment materials on Google’s Pittsburgh recruitment web site:

“Back in the day, this was a steel town, known for its smokestacks and smelters. Today,
it’s a technology hotbed, a model for cities trying to transition from an industrial past to
a knowledge-based future. Home to Carnegie Mellon and the University of Pittsburgh,
the ’Burgh produces some of the finest engineering talent in the world. It’s also one of
the most livable places in the U.S. Don’t take our word for it, though. Ask Forbes and the
Economist”

ii.

Air Pollution
In equation (7) above we noted that environmental and urban economists take a reduced

form approach in modeling a city’s G at a point in time. In the case of air pollution, a standard
accounting approach is to consider scale, composition and technique effects. Consider the
emissions generated by different industries.24 To simplify the problem assume there is a clean

24

To simplify this emissions inventory discussion, we focus on the emissions from industry. We recognize that the
transportation sector, and the household sector are also major contributors to local air pollution. Their emissions can
also be studied by examining scale, composition and technique effects (see Kahn and Schwartz 2008).
47

industry and a dirty industry. At a point in time the total emissions in this city can be expressed
as:
∗

∗

(9)
where the c subscript indicates the clean industry and the d subscript stands for the dirty industry.
A growing city can experience reduced pollution if the composition of economic activity
is shifting from dirty output to clean output and if the emissions factor for the dirty industry is
significantly higher than for the clean industry. Kahn (1999) and Chay and Greenstone (2003)
document the particulate progress observed in the U.S Rust Belt as heavy steel producers
reduced production in the face of heavy international competition. Kahn (2003) shows similar
results for Eastern European cities after the fall of communism. Similar trends are now playing
out in many of China’s richer coastal Eastern cities (Zheng et. al. 2014, Zheng and Kahn 2013).
Pope et. al. (1992) present an early natural experiment documenting the particulate reductions
achieved when a steel plant went on strike.
Over the last 40 years, U.S big cities have experienced an industrial composition shift as
the share of jobs in manufacturing has decreased and the share working in the service sector has
increased. There have been many causes of the deindustrialization of U.S major cities including
high wages and the rise of international trade (Autor et. al. 2013), and differential enforcement of
Clean Air Act regulation (Kahn 1997, Becker and Henderson 2000, Henderson 1996, Greenstone
2002).

As major cities feature fewer manufacturing jobs, this reduces the likelihood that

middle class households live in these cities.
This discussion has focused on the USA but the same issues arising in China. As center
city land prices rise, the opportunity cost for having land intensive manufacturing remain in the

48

center cities has increased. In many Chinese cities, urban mayors are eager to reclaim
manufacturing land to sell to real estate developers (see Zheng et. al. 2014). An open question
concerns whether such developers and local governments have strong incentives to remediate the
pollution damage (such as localized toxic emissions) caused by manufacturing. In the United
States, the Superfund and Brownfields cleanups are intended to achieve this goal.
Richer coastal cities such as Shanghai are tightening environmental regulations and this
provides a further incentive for manufacturing to migrate west to provinces featuring cheaper
land and laxer regulation. This industrial migration from eastern to western China raises the
possibility of future environmental progress in China’s richer eastern cities at the same time that
there is pollution degradation in China’s western cities. The extent of this pollution transfer
hinges on the emissions control technology built into the new factories opening in Western China
(Zheng et. al. 2014).
iii.

Land Use Regulation/Zoning
A growing set of empirical studies have documented that coastal high quality of life cities

are more likely to engage in land use restrictions than the average city. Such cities as Boston,
San Francisco and New York City have been documented to engage in more land use restrictions
(Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks 2005, 2006, Kahn 2011, Glaeser and Ward 2009). Such local
limits to growth are intended to preserve local quality of life but by limiting housing supply in
specific high amenity areas, they are likely to drive up home prices in such areas and deflect
middle class people to other geographic areas featuring more elastic housing supply such as
Phoenix. This in turn has implications for both access to local public goods and for the carbon
emissions of the residential sector (Mangum 2014).

49

Glaeser and Kahn (2008) argue that the large difference in the air conditioning carbon
footprint between San Francisco and other cities such as Houston means that, by downsizing the
amount of available housing, aggressive local land use zoning in coastal cities displaces people
to higher carbon areas. This suggests that an unintended consequence of local attempts to
preserve coastal quality of life is to exacerbate the global challenge of climate change. Mangum
(2014) builds on this research by developing a dynamic model of housing demand which he uses
to simulate how the residential sector’s production of greenhouse gas emissions is affected by
various counter-factual policies. He finds that imposing stricter land use regulations in high
carbon output cities would decrease the aggregate amount of carbon output by about 1.7 percent
(2.7 percent in new construction), again mostly through decreasing the housing consumed per
person and secondarily by moving population to low carbon cities. His findings build on the
research agenda presented in Gaigne, Riou and Thisse (2012) that stresses the importance of
considering general equilibrium effects when evaluating the impact of local policies related to
carbon footprints.
To quote Gaigne, Riou and Thisse (2012):
“There is a wide consensus among international institutions and national governments in favor of
compact (i.e. densely populated) cities as a way to improve the ecological performance of the
transport system. Indeed, when both the intercity and intra-urban distributions of activities are
given, a higher population density makes cities more environmentally friendly because the
average commuting length is reduced. However, when we account for the possible relocation of
activities within and between cities in response to a higher population density, the latter may
cease to hold. Indeed, an increasing-density policy affects prices, wages and land rents, which in
turn incentivizes firms and households to change place. This reshapes the urban system in a way
that may generate a higher level of pollution. Thus, although an increase in compactness is
environmentally desirable when locations are given, compactness may not be environmentallyfriendly when one accounts for the general equilibrium effects generated by such a policy.”

50

This quote highlights a tension in the applied economics literature. Most papers in the field
experiments and regression discontinuity literature adopt a partial equilibrium approach as they
focus on cleanly identifying a single parameter of interest. This quote highlights the importance
of embedding such estimates within a general equilibrium framework.
iv.

Climate
A large amount of cross-city hedonic research focuses on climate valuation. While

climate may appear to be a static attribute increased access to air conditioning and rising
households incomes have both lead to interesting dynamics with respect to the demand for
climate. Based on both the geographic migration of the population over time and on hedonic
pricing, one robust finding is the rising demand for warm winter areas. Hedonic research by
Cragg and Kahn (1999) and Costa and Kahn (2003) documents the rising implicit price of warm
winters in cross-city hedonic real estate regressions. Using decennial census data, they
document that all else equal that the implicit price on winter temperature has been rising over
time in hedonic real estate regressions. With the exception of coastal California and Oregon and
Washington, warm winter states tend to have high summer temperatures. This bundling of a
“good” and a “bad” amenity has been offset by the widespread penetration of air conditioning
access (Oi 1996). Barreca et. al. (2013) document that over the 20th century that there has been a
sharp reduction in the mortality rate caused by extremely hot days and they attribute this trend to
the diffusion of air conditioning.
As air conditioning has become cheaper and of higher quality over time, warm winter and
warm summer states have become more hospitable locations and more economic activity has
moved there. The overall trends in population locational choice are presented in Figure Two. In
the year 1900 and 2010, we report the cumulative percentage of all people in the United States as
51

a function of average February temperature. Consider the median person. In 1900, the median
American lived in a state whose February average temperature was 30 degrees F. In 2010 the
median American lived in a state whose temperature was 37 degrees. Note that we use the same
temperature distribution for both years.

The introduction of a cheap market product that offsets

summer heat has sharply changed the spatial distribution of economic activity. This example
highlights how market products influence climate demand and population locational choice.
Future research might explore how the diffusion of air conditioning in LDC cities affects the
spatial distribution of economic activity in these nations.
v.

Resilience to Climate Change Shocks
While there are many unknowns about climate change’s impacts on different urban areas,

climate scientists do agree that mean temperature and the variance of possible outcomes
regarding temperature, rainfall and storms is likely to increase over time as global greenhouse
gas emissions continue to rise.

Many climate models predict significant changes in average

summer and winter climate conditions. For example, in the Southwest, cities such as Las Vegas
are expected to become much hotter during summer months. Albouy et. al. (2013) use cross-city
hedonic regressions at a point in time to estimate the marginal valuations of climate. They
combine these estimates with predictions from climate change models of how climate conditions
are expected to change over time to predict how the climate amenity value of different cities will
change due to climate change.25

In addition to shifting mean temperature and rainfall, climate

scientists have tried to be clear about their uncertainty about model accuracy and the possibility
of fat tail events such as super storms. Weitzman (2009) explores the implications of “fat tails”
25

Such research implicitly assumes that there will be no future technological progress directed toward reducing the
discomfort of summer heat.

52

events becoming more likely and having incredibly high costs if they do take place.

This

research line has not incorporated spatial features into the analysis. In this section, we focus on
an emerging new research agenda examining how climate change is likely to affect the spatial
distribution of economic activity across diverse cities.
In an open system of cities, households and firms can migrate. This option provides a type
of insurance policy as the new news about climate change’s actual impacts unfold. As we
discussed earlier, migration costs will inhibit such adaptation.

Land prices will change in

response to these shifts in migration so that the marginal household and firm is indifferent across
locations (Rosen 2002). Incumbent real estate owners will bear the incidence of new news
related to how specific cities are coping with climate change (see Bunten and Kahn 2014).
Those households who face high migration costs of leaving at risk cities (either due to their
demographics or due to idiosyncratic locational capital that they have built up) will be more
likely to suffer because they are either unable to move from at risk places or will lose valuable
capital in doing so.
Around the world a large number of people and billions of dollars of real estate is located
close to coastal waterways. Such coastal living offers both easy access to water amenties,
beautiful views and a temperate climate. Such coastal living puts many urbanites around the
world at risk from sea level rise and natural disasters.
The impact of Hurricane Andrew on Miami and Katrina and Sandy perhaps offer a preview
of the challenges that cities will face if climate change leads to both sea level rise and more
severe and intense storms. These natural disasters highlight an emerging urban research area.
How will individual cities and their current urbanites be affected by climate change? Kahn

53

(2010) argues that migration offers urbanites the option to vote with their feet if their current
city’s quality of life declines due to climate change. Such potential exit incentivizes urban
politicians to devote effort to mitigating emerging new risks that different cities will face.
At risk cities have a variety of strategies to protect themselves from anticipated risks.
New Orleans is making enormous investments in new sea walls in response to Hurricane Katrina
(Kates et. al. 2006). Part of the challenge that older coastal cities face is that their existing
infrastructure, such as the New York City subway, is over 100 years old and was built at a time
when the emerging risks could not be imagined.
An unintended consequence of public investment in coastal armoring to fend off sea level
rise is to crowd out private self protection. More people are likely to move to a coastal city or
remain there if they feel safe there (Boustan, Kahn and Rhode 2012)? Kousky, Luttmer and
Zeckhauser (2006) present a multiple equilibrium model. If an at risk city such as New Orleans
uses public funds to invest in sea walls then private investors will be more likely to build hotels
because their investment is safer. In this equilibrium, the exogenously risky city experiences
economic growth because of the synergy between public and private investment.

A second

equilibrium in this case would be if the government does not expect that people will move to the
risky city and thus the government does not build the sea walls. Anticipating that there will be
no sea walls, the hotel investor does not invest in the hotel.
less economic activity locates in the risky place.

In this “libertarian” equilibrium,

From an ex-post regret standpoint, a key

unknown concerns the quality of these sea walls. If private investors and migrants are overconfident about the quality of the government provided sea walls then a tragedy could result.
This example bears a strong similarity to Peltzman’s (1975) famous unintended consequences
example of mandatory seat belts (a safety regulation) crowding out private effort.
54

For geographic areas that suffer natural disaster shocks, will their long run growth be
affected? The recent macro urban research focused on urban growth after major bombings
would say “no”. Davis and Weinstein (2002) studied Japan’s urban population dynamics after
World War II bombing and found that cities quickly converge back to their population regression
line in the aftermath of a shock (i.e bombings or natural disasters). Unlike with war bombing,
coastal cities face the challenge of the future expectation that they will suffer future shocks of
similar types of disasters (i.e New Orleans will suffer from a future Hurricane Katrina). Such
expectations may displace investment to less risky areas. In this sense, climate change risk may
lower economic growth in risky areas while increasing investment in other less risky geographic
areas that are close substitutes. Hsiang and Jina (2014) document the long run effects of
cyclones on national economic growth. They document large and persistent effects of such place
based shocks.
This section has focused on the impact of climate change on temperature and sea level
rise. Another major challenge that climate scientists focus on is drought. In 2014, much of the
Southwest is experiencing extreme drought. To economists, an obvious adaptation strategy is to
allow water prices to rise in order to trigger both demand and supply side responses and to direct
technological change to develop new strategies for augmenting our water supply such as water
desalinization.

Water regulators in the West have been slow to adopt this strategy. They often

face complex objectives as they tradeoff several criteria including equity and efficiency
(Timmins 2002).

Initial property rights disputes further inhibit the efficient allocation of water

(Libecap 2009). Whether climate change will nudge such non-profit maximizers to more
efficiently allocate a key scarce resource would be a valuable future research topic.

55

E. The Rise of Superstar Green Cities
Many cities are transitioning from being producer cities to becoming consumer cities
(Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz 2001). In the past coastal cities were major hubs of production and
transportation. This suggests that coastal cities and cities connected to rivers featured greater
concentrations of both industrial activity and population and this scaled up pollution. In 2014,
coastal and river cities in the United States now tend to have better exogenous amenities and
high levels of environmental quality (the endogenous amenity). In this section, we start on the
supply side to sketch some of the relevant factors responsible for the pollution progress but then
we focus on the resulting implications for the spatial equilibrium and the economic incidence of
uneven amenity improvements within a system of cities.
Today, the U.S features some extremely expensive “green cities” such as San Francisco,
New York City, Seattle, Portland, Boston, and Chicago, Los Angeles and San Diego. None of
these cities has a major manufacturing center. These cities all feature limited land supply both
due to their topography and due to their land use regulations (Glaeser, Saks and Gyourko 2005,
Saiz 2009, Kahn 2011). Such “superstar cities” feature extremely high home prices and a
growing share of international investors purchasing properties there to play rather than to work
(Gyourko, Mayer and Sinai 2013).
A type of social multiplier or environmental multiplier emerges. If an exogenously
beautiful area such as a Berkeley attracts individuals to live there, then such individuals (both
through voting on public goods and taxes and through choices in private markets. i.e tofu
demand) create endogenous local attributes that may further enhance the local amenity vector
(Waldfogel 2008). This multiplier is likely to feed on itself as like minded people increasingly
move to the area.
56

Standard political economy logic posits that people vote their economic self interest.
This issue arises in predicting whether specific cities will support or oppose new environmental
regulations such as limits on coal fired power plants. In areas such as West Virginia, whose
economy relies on coal extraction and cheap energy, workers have incentives to vote against
environmental regulation. In contrast, in high tech cities such as San Francisco the workers are
likely to already be environmentalists who are inclined to support environmental regulation and
they will anticipate that these regulations will not endanger their employment prospects. This
divergence in state environmental policy leads to even more sorting by households and firms and
the net result is that coastal cities become green area hubs, this attracts workers and firms who
want this lifestyle and then as voters they vote for policies to further re-enforce this lifestyle.
Thus, it is not surprising that a Red State/Blue State divide on greenhouse gas policies has
opened up (see Cragg et. al. 2013) and that the party composition of region’s Congressional
delegation can even affect the enforcement actions of federal regulators (Innes and Mitra, 2014).
In this sense, the urban system of cities has implications for the political economy of externality
mitigation legislation. We believe this connection between urban growth and economic
comparative advantage and political voting outcomes is an important future research topic.
At the same time that coastal high human capital liberal cities such as Boston and San
Francisco engage in strict zoning, there are other metropolitan areas such as Dallas offering more
affordable, larger new homes. In a diverse population, people are free to Tiebout sort to pursue
their own vision of the good life. Those who enjoy indoor leisure in larger homes will be more
likely to choose to live in affordable Texas. In a population where people differ with respect to
their tastes for local public goods, the subset of lower income households with a strong
preference for coastal big cities will be priced out of these markets. Such individuals can either

57

live in a distant suburb of that metropolitan area or live in another city. Their loss in consumer
surplus merits further research as it speaks to the cost of rising income inequality.
One way to allow more of the middle class to access these elite cities would be to build
more housing in them. Critics of such up-zoning have countered that cities such as Paris would
stop being Paris if too much tall building construction took place. An open question in this
literature relates to how much of the desirability of these superstar cities is due to their housing
supply regulation? Does such regulation create such desirability by making it exclusive or by
preserving the city’s charm? To disentangle these effects would require a structural model of the
demand and supply for endogenous city attributes. Is it the case that the demand to live in Paris
increases because potential entrants know that housing supply is limited and thus that their
Parisian neighbors will also be rich? In a diverse city, how do we aggregate public opinion to
determine how much a city’s “character” and “charm” has been diminished by new construction?
Returning to equation (7) where we discussed the supply of a city’s local public goods, how
much would a San Francisco’s quality of life be diminished by introducing higher rise buildings?

F. Cross-City Local Public Good Valuation Challenges and Opportunities
The previous section highlighted how environmental shifts impact the system of cities
through shifting the locational choice of heterogeneous households and firms. In this section, we
discuss how such dynamics affect an econometrician’s ability to recover marginal valuations of
household willingness to pay for local environmental goods such as clean air.

Researchers seek

to recover the population’s distribution of willingness to pay for such non-market environmental

58

goods because this is a key input in conducting cost-benefit analysis of past and future
environmental regulations.
Researchers in the valuation literature use several different revealed preference
techniques to infer marginal willingness to pay for local public goods. The most common
technique continues to be to estimate cross-sectional hedonic wage and rental regressions with
the goal of recovering what a standardized worker would earn in each local labor market and
what would be the price of a standardized housing unit in each city. The hedonic literature has
sought to decompose this differential into the exact observable parts of the bundle using
multivariate regression analysis by estimating regressions of the form;
∑

∑

(10)

In this regression, structure controls (X) are included as well as metropolitan area level
variables (Z) measuring local public goods and bads such as climate, and air pollution. OLS is
used to estimate these regressions at a point in time. An obvious challenge that emerges is
omitted variables bias. These regressions have a “kitchen sink” feel. In this age of the field
experiment, few reviewers are comfortable with the assumption that the error term in such a
regression (which represents all attributes of the home observed by the renter but not observed
by the econometrician) is uncorrelated with the explanatory variables.
In response to this concern, leading papers have introduced panel data approaches that
incorporate fixed effects in order to sweep out geographically fixed attributes. Consider the
seminal paper by Chay and Greenstone (2005) who study the value of particulate reductions on
county home prices. They exploit the fact that counties differ with respect to their assignment to
attainment or non-attainment status under the Clean Air Act and the rule for assigning counties
to this status has a fixed threshold (i.e if your county’s baseline pollution is less than the
59

regulatory cutoff then the county faces little regulation as it would be assigned to attainment
status). They examine home price dynamics in counties assigned to the Clean Air Act’s nonattainment status versus a control set of counties that just missed being assigned to face more
severe regulation. As they document in their first stage regressions, air quality improved in
those counties assigned to Clean Air Act treatment. They use a county’s assignment to nonattainment status as an instrumental variable for changes in TSP.
For an instrumental variable to recover consistent estimates of the second stage it must
also pass an exclusion restriction;
: ∆
: ∆

∗1

∗∆
1974

(11)
(12)

In equation (12), 1(TSP in 1974 >threshold) is a dummy variable that equals one if a
county’s ambient particulate level in 1974 exceeded the threshold such that the county was
assigned to Non-Attainment status under the Clean Air Act. The standard exclusion restriction
in instrumental variables estimation requires that the error term in equation (11) be uncorrelated
with the instrumental variable.
Residential and firm sorting in response to the exogenous amenity changes are likely to
take place so that this key assumption does not hold. The error term (U) in equation (11)
represents all unobserved attributes of the city that are changing over time and capitalized into
local home price changes. If the unobserved determinants of housing price changes (which
would include the housing stock’s quality, local school quality, restaurant quality) are improving
over time by more in cities assigned to high regulation than in low regulation counties then the
exclusion restriction is violated. Why might this be the case?
60

Implicit in the Chay and Greenstone argument is a ceteris paribus assumption that the
regulation’s impact on home prices solely works through its impact on ambient air quality. But
throughout this survey, we have stressed that an improvement in one amenity such as clean air
triggers behavioral responses by both households and firms. Recall for instance the work of
Banzhaf and Walsh (2008) which documents household sorting in response to changes in
exposure to toxic air pollution. A similar dynamic is likely to play out across U.S counties as
counties are assigned to high and low regulation levels.
As regulation reduces air pollution in a non-attainment county, this will directly lead to
air quality progress. In the medium term it will also reduce air pollution by reducing the
probability that dirty footloose manufacturing plants remain in the county. They will be more
likely to move to less regulated attainment counties (Kahn 1997, Becker and Henderson 2000,
Greenstone 2002). The exit of such firms will reduce both air pollution and other pollution
margins such as water pollution and toxic releases. As overall environmental quality improves
in these counties, more educated people are more likely to move in to the county and this will
tend to raise home prices because local public schools will improve, peer effects will improve
and local retail and shopping quality will improve (Waldfogel 2008). In a nutshell, as air
pollution sharply improves due to the regulation all else is not equal.26 The air quality regulation
has indirect effects on other local amenities and home price dynamics reflect this entire bundle’s
dynamics.27

26

Consider a distinctive example from Falck, Fritsch and Heblich (2011). Using data from Germany’s past, they
document that endogenous cultural amenities affect the spatial distribution of the highly educated. Their study is
based on a natural experiment that exploits the fact that baroque opera houses were built as part of local ruler’s
competition for status among their peers. They estimate cross-region growth regression and find that areas that
were close to these opera houses attracted the high skilled to live there and this agglomeration of the skilled
contributed to further local economic growth.
27
This same issue arises in cross-sectional spatial regression discontinuity studies. Black (1999) studies real estate
price variation for homes on different sides of a school attendance boundary. Such physically close homes share
the same crime and pollution attributes and the same accessibility to stores and commuting options. She interprets
61

We posit that exogenous improvements in air quality in cities such as Pittsburgh will
attract richer more educated people to move to these improving cities.28 They will move in and
renovate homes (i.e install Jacuzzis) and improve neighborhoods (perhaps their kids are better
role models at school) and these attributes are not seen by the econometrician. The net effect is
that the IV design presented in equations (11 and 12) is likely to over-state the partial effect of
improvements in particulate matter on home prices because all else is not held constant. The
improvement in air quality triggers a sorting of specific types of people and retail that has its
own impact on home prices (see Kuminoff, Smith and Timmins 2013, Kuminoff and Pope
2014). For example, if homes are now more valuable in Pittsburgh because of the air quality
improvement and thus the city collects more money in property tax revenue and offers better
schools this secondary effect will also be capitalized. This example highlights that researchers
using panel methods for inferring marginal valuations for amenity improvements must
distinguish between partial effects (i.e the marginal effect of air quality improvement caused by
the regulation holding all else equal) and total effects (i.e the total change in home prices caused
by the initially more stringent regulation).
the difference in the average prices at the boundary to reflect the parents’ willingness to pay for better schools
Implicit in such a research design is the assumption that unobservable determinants of home prices are smooth
across the school boundary. But, this statistical assumption masks a strong implicit economic assumption that is
unlikely to hold in cases where there is a major jump at a physical boundary in local public goods. Consider the
following model of household sorting. Households differ only with respect to their income. All households gain
utility from private consumption, school quality and Jacuzzi ownership. Assume that household utility features a
complementarity between school quality and owning a Jacuzzi. The econometrician observes the price of each
home and the local school quality but does not observe whether the home has a Jacuzzi. In this simple example,
rich people will live in the best school quality areas and will install a Jacuzzi. Their nearby poorer neighbors will
live in a worse school in a home without a Jacuzzi. The econometrician conducting the regression discontinuity
study will over-state the value of school quality because the jump in the school quality at the boundary causes the
home owner to install the Jacuzzi. The homes located in the high school quality district sell for a price premium
because they have better schools and they have a Jacuzzi.
28

Kahn (2007a) presents another example of this type of social multiplier effect based on his analysis of the medium
term effects of new rail transit lines. In studying the impact of the fast Red Line that connects Tufts University and
Harvard and MIT to downtown Boston, he documents that this subway’s local impact on nearby community income
and home prices grew over time. He posits that as time passed that new restaurants and retail and increased
investment in the local housing supply all contributed to gentrification near the transit stops but that this process
took time to unfold.
62

This example suggests that a valuable research program for studying the value of local
environmental amenities in the presence of household and firm sorting will involve the following
component parts. First researchers should identify plausibly exogenous supply-side causes of
increases in environmental quality and estimate their direct effects on local environmental
quality.29 Second, in the spirit of the approaches considered in Kuminoff et al. (2013),
researchers should explicitly model how heterogeneous households and firms respond to amenity
improvements. Third, analysts need to investigate the process through which changes in
household and firm composition impact other dimensions of local quality of life. For example, if
college graduates now move to a city because its air quality improves, how much does local
school quality improve by because there is greater property tax revenue collected and a better
local peer group? By combining these pieces of information, researchers should seek to
separately identify both the direct partial equilibrium effect and the indirect equilibrium
responses caused by the amenity improvement.

V.

The Urban Building Stock’s Energy Consumption
In this section, we study how urban growth contributes to greenhouse gas production by

exploring how the geography and the physical attributes of the extant urban real estate stock
affects aggregate electricity demand.

We focus on five key links between energy economics

and urban economics. First, from the standard monocentric model buildings closer to the city

29

The developing world’s cities offer a number of natural experiments . For example, Cesur et. al. (2013) document
the spatial roll out of natural gas access across Turkey’s cities. They demonstrate how this cleaner fuel substitutes
for coal and thus improves local air quality and reduces infant mortality. Greenstone and Hanna (2011) document
how the phase-in of vehicle control regulations in India’s cities has reduced local air pollution and infant mortality.
Zheng et. al. (2014) document the changing industrial patterns of China’s dirty industry as it moves away from the
coasts. All of these cases share the same structure such that there is a large change in the spatial distribution of
pollution allowing researchers to estimate sorting models to recover estimates of the willingness to pay for
environmental public goods.
63

center are likely to be taller and thus less likely to feature a single tenant living or working there.
As we discuss below, in such cases a split incentives problem arises. Second, due to the
durability of the capital stock older buildings are likely to be closer to the city center. Because
energy regulations tend to focus on new construction, this suggests that there will be important
spatial differences in energy intensity. Third, geographic areas differ with respect to climate
conditions, local electricity pricing, energy efficiency regulation and incentives for conservation.
A recent literature has sought to quantify the importance of these factors. Fourth, the types of
households and firms that choose to locate in a metropolitan area may influence the demand for
solar homes and LEED certified buildings. Environmental ideology, in addition to economic
incentives such as minimizing operating expenses, may play a key role in determining the
demand for green buildings.
A. Pollution Externalities Associated with Electricity Consumption
In 2012, residential and commercial buildings were responsible for 74% of total
electricity consumption in the United States.30 Given that electricity continues to be generated
using fossil fuels (for example coal is the fuel source for 70% of India’s power and more than
70% in China), urban real estate is a major producer of global greenhouse gas emissions. As
nations such as China erect hundreds of new housing and commercial towers that will last for
decades, it becomes of even greater importance to study the investment decisions in energy
efficiency made by real estate developers, building owners and their tenants. In the absence of a
global carbon pricing, nations are likely to continue to rely on dirty fossil fuels such as coal and

30

http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/flow/primary_energy.pdf,
http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/docs/xls_pdf/1.1.9.pdf
64

natural gas for power generation.

Such cheap fossil fuels exacerbate the climate change

externality.
Coal fired power plants are major producers of a large vector of local pollutants that can
cause significant harm to health and aesthetics (Davis 2011). The economic magnitude of these
localized damages hinges on how many people live downwind from these power plants and their
individual willingness to pay to not be exposed to pollution. Studies based on data from the
United States and from China have estimated large Pigouvian social costs associated with the use
of fossil fuel fired power plants (Muller and Mendelsohn 2007, Muller et. al. 2011, Zhou et. al
2006). In the United States today, fewer coal fired power plants are being built and some are
being shut down. The composition shift from coal to natural gas fired power plants should
reduce both the local and global greenhouse gas externality associated with electricity
consumption. This in turn suggests that, if major reductions can be achieved in the carbon
intensity of electricity, the Pigouvian benefits of green buildings (relative to conventional
buildings) will shrink as the carbon externality from electricity consumption shrinks.

B. The Building Stock’s Energy Consumption: A Bottom Up Approach
At any point in time the urban real estate stock is a mixture of residential, commercial
and industrial buildings of different vintages and sizes. In the past, empirical work aimed at
understanding the role of these different factors in determining energy consumption was limited
by a reliance on highly aggregated data such as per capita energy consumption collected at the
nation/year level. In this new Big Data era, researchers have increased access to highly
disaggregated data from the electric utilities that supply the power. These detailed data sets

65

provide consumption information by customer account at monthly, and sometimes even hourly,
frequencies. Explaining cross-sectional and temporal variation in residential and commercial
electricity consumption has become an active research topic. By merging data from the electric
utilities with structural characteristics taken from local appraiser’s offices or from databases such
as the CoStar data, researchers can observe a building’s attributes, its location, and its energy
consumption. Given that buildings differ along a number of attributes, researchers are now able
to decompose what portion of a building’s energy consumption is due to such factors as: the
physical attributes of the building; its location’s regulatory structure; energy prices; and, local
climate conditions.
It is useful to consider a simple model of a city’s energy consumption. In terms of
residential energy consumption, assume that there are four key factors that determine an
individual household’s energy consumption: characteristics of the household members
themselves (number, age structure, income, preferences); the characteristics of the structure in
which they live (size, vintage, quality, efficiency investments, etc.); the climate in which the
housing unit is located; and the price paid for energy. For the industrial sector, we aggregate
each industrial sector to the level of a representative firm. Each industrial sector’s total
electricity consumption is a function of its scale of activity in a given city its baseline energy
intensity, climate and energy prices.
Under these assumptions, the total energy consumption of the residential sector for city j
at time t can be written as:
∗

∈

,

,

,

. (13)

66

In the right hand side of equation (13), H represents the continuum of household types the
distribution of which in a particular city j is given by

. .

. is a function that maps the

characteristics of household members and the structure in which they live – each of which vary
by household type h – along with the climate and energy price vectors experienced in city j into
average energy demand.

is the total number of households in city j.

Similarly, we can represent the total industrial consumption in city j as:
∑∈

,

,

where I represents the set of industries in the economy,

(14)

captures the scale of industry in

city j, and ef iency represents the average energy efficiency of firms in industry i that are
located in city j.
The total greenhouse gas emissions associated with this consumption equals the sum of
each of these sector’s electricity consumption and then multiplied by the city j’s electric power
region’s emissions factor. EGRID data from the U.S EPA allows one to calculate the tons of
carbon dioxide per megawatt of power by region by year (see
http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-resources/egrid/). A standard number is that that the
social cost of carbon dioxide is $35 per ton. These numbers can be used to translate electricity
consumption into a bottom line social cost of carbon dioxide estimate.31

31

A second negative externality from electricity consumption is local air pollution. The EGRID data can be used to
calculate the sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions and mercury emissions associated with local power
consumption. These emissions may drift far from the origin city to geographic locations downwind of the power
plants (see Bayer, Keohane and Timmons 2009). In this sense, the consumption of electricity does not necessarily
have local impacts on the city because power is generated in the region not in the locale.

67

This accounting algebra highlights several micro economic channels through which a
city’s evolving building stock influences overall city energy consumption dynamics. For
example, in the very first issue of the Journal of Urban Economics, Harrison and Kain (1974)
called attention to the importance of durable capital as a defining characteristic of cities. Over
time, newer homes tend to be larger than older homes due to overall income growth. At any
point in time, a city’s building stock will be a mixture of different vintages. In cities with no
new construction such as Detroit, buildings built more than 40 years ago can be a large share of
the total stock. In recent years, such studies as Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) and Brueckner and
Rosenthal (2010) have examined the role that housing durability plays in determining a city’s
urban form.
From an analysis perspective, it is critical to understand, and control for, the interplay
among these different channels (building stock, climate, energy prices, urban geography, etc.)
when evaluating the impact of new policies. For example, if Detroit has no new housing being
constructed --- does it, at baseline, have a much higher electricity consumption per square foot
for its average housing stock than a similar city where old homes are being scrapped and new
homes are being built? If so, then these differences must be accounted for when making crosslocation policy comparisons.
Over time, energy efficiency codes for new buildings have been tightened (see
http://www.energycodes.gov/regulations). Given the durability of the building stock, the average
energy intensity may only be affected after several years have passed. Recent research has
investigated the effectiveness of past building codes regulation. Jacobson and Kotchen (2013)
collected data for roughly 2000 Gainesville Florida homes built at different dates. They compare

68

the energy consumption of buildings built just before and after the regulatory changes
(introduced in 2001) and find that the regulation is associated with a 4% reduction in electricity
consumption and a 6% reduction in natural gas.
The third term in equations (13) and (14) is local climate conditions. Both residential
and commercial real estate will consume more electricity in more humid hotter summer areas.
Researchers have estimated the relationship between summer cooling degree days using both
cross-sectional and panel approaches (Glaeser and Kahn 2008, Miller et. al. 2008,
Aroonruengswat and Auffhammer 2011).
The basic micro economic model here is a Becker Household Production Function. A
household seeks comfort and higher outdoor temperature reduces comfort. Greater expenditures
on air conditioning offsets the outdoor temperature. The marginal cost of reducing the indoor
temperature by one degrees is a function of the efficiency of the air conditioning unit and the
price of electricity. The rational household sets the thermostat so that the marginal benefits of
temperature reduction just equals the marginal cost of temperature reduction. In cooler cities
such as San Francisco, such comfort can be produced using fewer market inputs and in fact many
households do not own a central air conditioner. The wide spread diffusion of air conditioning
over the 20th century has allowed U.S households to enjoy the winter warmth of cities such as
Las Vegas and Phoenix without suffering from the summer heat (Oi 1996, Barreca et. al. 2013).
In this sense, market products can offset parts of a tied spatial local bundle. California is one of
the rare locations in the world to feature temperate winters and summers.

69

C. Weak Price Incentives for Conservation
For a typical single family home owner, their annual electricity bill is typically around
$1200 per year.32

The marginal cost in terms of effort of achieving a 15% reduction in

electricity consumption might exceed the cost savings given current electricity prices. Wolak
(2011) presents a bounded rationality model featuring a cost of action such that residential home
owners are only willing to take costly actions (i.e turning off the lights) if the financial savings in
lower electricity bills covers the cost of taking such an action. His analysis suggests in areas
with higher electricity prices that the residential sector will be more energy efficient because
there is “more money on the table”. In addition to the impact of the price levels per se,
households are confronted with a complicated electricity bill structure. Many electric utilities
charge households on an increasing block tariff structure such that the price schedule resembles a
staircase with a rising marginal price that jumps when consumption exceeds specific thresholds.
For example, in Southern California electricity consumers face a rate schedule with five steps
with the highest price being over 30 cents per kWh. Ito (2014) employs a regression
discontinuity design and demonstrates that Southern California electricity consumers respond to
average prices not marginal prices. A notable feature of his research design is that he compares
the consumption of nearby homes that are located in adjacent electric utility districts. This
means that there is within neighbor variation in the price of electricity. Ito exploits this and
estimates an average price elasticity of consumption of roughly -.12. This suggests that
residential consumers are not very price responsive. Recognizing this fact, utilities have sought
innovative tools for encouraging conservation. Some have appealed to public conservation
campaigns. Reiss and White (2008) present evidence that these can be effective in the short run.

32

http://www.eia.gov/electricity/sales_revenue_price/pdf/table5_a.pdf
70

A more novel approach is to distribute Home Energy Reports which are customizes reports
educating households on how their consumption of electricity compares to their neighbors. Such
peer pressure has been claimed to be an effective social incentive for encouraging conservation.
Allcott’s (2011) evaluation of these reports’ impact indicates that they reduce consumption by
2%. These various research designs highlight that there is still the open question of how to make
energy efficiency a more salient feature for households to consider. Higher electricity prices
would clearly provide an incentive for households to invest more effort studying this issue.
International evidence would be valuable here.
New technologies such as smart meters allows households to observe their electricity
consumption every 15 minutes and to see how different devices in the home use different
amounts of electricity. In the past, households received a bundled monthly bill telling them their
aggregate consumption and total expenditure. With the falling cost of installing smart meters,
the cost for electricity consumers of being educated about how different actions such as turning
on the lights or running the air conditioner are falling. Such educated consumers should be more
sophisticated shoppers for durables that reduce their operating costs and in aggregate improve
overall energy efficiency. Field experiments, perhaps randomizing who receives a smart meter,
testing this claim would be very useful.
D. The Commercial Real Estate Sector
In many cities, the commercial real estate sector (i.e office buildings, malls, stores,
restaurants) represents a large share of the total real estate stock but there has been surprisingly
little research on this sector’s economic behavior. Until recently, the lack of data has slowed
research. The DOE’s Commercial Buildings Energy Survey (CBECS) was last conducted in

71

2003.

In some cases, research partnerships with electric utilities and with private major

companies have allowed researchers access to unique micro data that has allowed for progress.
Kahn, Kok and Quigley (2014) partnered with a major Western Electric Utility who
provided billing account data for every commercial account in their service area. This research
team matched these data to the CoStar data. CoStar sells data for buildings that have transacted
in the previous ten year. By matching the two data sets, the researchers observed each building’s
monthly electricity consumption and had access to a large set of building attributes including its
real estate quality, size, year built and the tenant roster. They used these data to estimate
regressions such as those reported in equation (15)

ln

∙X

∙

(15)

In this equation, the dependent variable yi is natural logarithm of average daily electricity
consumption per square foot. Xi is a vector of the structural characteristics of building i,
including building size, vintage, and quality. To control for the impact of occupants on building
energy consumption, we also include Ti, a vector of variables measuring the percentage of the
building that is occupied by each industry n, based on their SIC classification. ε is an error term,
assumed to be i.i.d.
Kahn, Kok and Quigley (2014) report that newer vintages of commercial real estate
consume more electricity than older vintages and Class “A” higher quality real estate consumes
more electricity than lower quality real estate. They interpret these results to mean that a
building’s quality to its users and electricity inputs are complements. Given that building
quality is likely to be a normal good, this suggests that rising incomes in cities around the world

72

will lead to increased commercial building electricity consumption. They also find that tenant
contract terms matter. When tenants pay their own electricity bills through triple net leases they
consume less electricity. Government tenants, who presumably face soft budget constraints,
consume more electricity.
i.

Commercial Real Estate Energy Efficiency and Human Capital
A key difference between residential single family homes and commercial entities is that

the former are small utility maximizers while the latter are large profit maximizers. In contrast
to the large number of residential households, each of whom spend relatively little on electricity
bills, commercial electricity consumers are fewer in number and have much larger electricity
bills. Kahn and Kok (2014) study Walmart’s electricity consumption across its 220 California
stores using monthly data provided by the company covering the years 2006 to 2012. The
company provided additional data on each Walmart’s store’s climate conditions, year built, and
the size and purpose of the store. Kahn and Kok use as a control group a set of other major retail
stores that are independently managed but of the same size and age as these Walmart stores. In
comparing the electricity consumption across these two sets an interesting pattern emerges. The
Walmart stores feature almost no cross-store variation in their electricity consumption per square
foot. Using their management systems, Walmart has standardized efficiency gains in electricity
consumption. A human capital explanation for this is that Walmart’s size is such that it is cost
effective for it to invest in high quality managers who focus on energy efficiency and then apply
the cost-saving innovations that they identify to each of its stores. This claim mirrors an
argument explored by Bloom et. al. (2010) who find that higher quality managers of UK
manufacturing plants use less electricity in producing output. This research agenda suggests that
there is an inverse relationship between corporate management quality and X-inefficiency.
73

Given that electricity consumption contributes to the global climate change externality, this
hypothesis and the potential for economies of scale in achieving energy efficiency merits future
research.
ii.

The Market for Green Buildings
Urban residential and commercial structures are differentiated products. One attribute of

such products is their energy efficiency. Standard economic logic suggests that when the price
of electricity is high or is expected to rise (perhaps because a carbon tax is expected in the future)
that there will be greater demand for “green buildings”. An emerging vehicle demand literature
has documented that rising gasoline prices are associated with rising demand for fuel efficient
hybrid vehicles. (Li et. al. 2009, Beresteanu and Li 2011, Klier and Linn 2010). There are other
factors such as personal ideology that also correlate with demand for distinctive green cars such
as the Toyota Prius (Kahn 2007).

Gas prices are highly salient in that car drivers refuel on a

weekly basis. In contrast, many households never see their monthly electricity bill because they
pay with automatic billing. Sexton (2014) uses data from South Carolina and documents that
when households sign up for automatic billing payments that their electricity consumption
increases by 4% and commercial consumers increase their consumption by 8%. He attributes
these effects to the absence of salient bills as these consumers no longer are confronted with
what they are actually paying for electricity.
While fuel economy is the defining attribute of a “green car”, in the case of “green
buildings” there continues to be an open debate about what objective attributes signal a
building’s “greenness”. The presence of solar panels is one possible definition. In the United
States, the government has played an active role in being a market maker. The Energy Star

74

program, jointly sponsored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S.
Department of Energy, is intended to identify and promote energy-efficient products, appliances,
and buildings. In a parallel effort, the U.S. Green Building Council, a private nonprofit
organization, has developed the LEED green building rating system to encourage the “adoption
of sustainable green building and development practices.”33 The inventory of certified green
commercial space in the U.S. has increased dramatically since the introduction of rating schemes
(Kok et al., 2011).
A growing empirical hedonic real estate pricing literature has sought to estimate the
market capitalization of such green attributes using hedonic regressions of the form;
log

∗

∗

(16)

In this regression, the researcher controls for housing structure observables and includes
interactions of time and geographic fixed effects (for example zip code by year fixed effects).
Controlling for these variables, the researcher tests whether

is positive.

One recent study

investigated the capitalization of solar panels into the price of homes in San Diego and
Sacramento County in California. Solar panels are a source of pride for environmentalist
households and lower the operating costs of owning a home. Dastrup et. al. 2012 find that all
else equal that solar homes sell for a 3% price premium. A plausible concern is that the presence
of solar panels is correlated with other unobserved measured of a structure’s quality. Using their
panel data on home sales, they observe some solar homes that sold before the solar system was
installed. They exploit this within home variation to establish that homes that in the future will
33

The LEED label requires sustainability performance in areas beyond energy use, and the requirements for
certification of LEED buildings are substantially more complex than those for the award of an Energy Star rating.
The certification process for homes measures six distinct components of sustainability: sustainable sites, water
efficiency, materials and resources, indoor environmental quality, innovation, as well as energy performance.
Additional points can be obtained for proximity to public transport, and for awareness and education.
75

install solar panels do not sell for a price premium before such an installation.
In another California hedonic real estate study, Kahn and Kok (2014) study the
capitalization of energy star and LEED homes in California. The control group are homes in the
same zip code and on the same street as the energy efficient homes sold at the same point in
time. Kahn and Kok report that Energy Star homes sell for a 3% price premium but LEED
homes do not sell for a price premium. The open question here pertains to what this label
premium represents in terms of the present value of saved operating expenses and in terms of
better indoor air quality and home performance.
A home owner who wants solar panels faces a make versus buy decision. She can either
buy a home that already has them or purchase a home and have the system installed. This option
places restrictions on how high the solar price premium for resold homes can be. Over time due
to international competition, the price of a solar panels is declining. An emerging literature is
studying this adoption decision. State and national subsidies have certainly played a role in
encouraging the adoption of solar panels (Bollinger and Gillingham 2012). Kahn and Vaughn
(2009) document the clustering of LEED buildings in liberal/environmentalist states such as
California. An open topic concerns the diffusion of solar technology to cities in the developing
world. Such cities often suffer from grid reliability challenges and solar would allow households
to be independent.
For the commercial real estate market, a series of papers that study investor and tenant
demand for “green” office space in the U.S. show that buildings with an Energy Star label –
indicating that a building belongs to the top 25 percent of the most energy-efficient buildings –
or a LEED label have rents that are two to three percent higher as compared to regular office

76

buildings. Transaction prices for energy-efficient office buildings are higher by 13–16 percent.
Further analyses show that the cross-sectional variation in these premiums has a strong relation
to real energy consumption, indicating that tenants and investors in the commercial property
sector capitalize energy savings in their investment decisions (Eichholtz et al., 2010, 2013).
There has also been recent research on the supply side of the green commercial buildings
market focused on the motivations of real estate owners and developers to compete on who “is
the most green”. The LEED certification has different levels of building greenness such as
silver, gold and platinum and the threshold of points needed to cross to a higher level of
greenness can be achieved through relatively minor investments (Noonan et. al. (2013), Matisoff
et. al. 2014). An open question is whether such a “green” arms race actually contributes to
overall sustainability goals such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The LEED criteria
include many indicators of sustainability (such as using recycled materials) while the Energy
Star criteria are more narrowly focused on energy consumption.34
There are several possible next steps for this “value of green buildings” literature. Note
that hedonic regressions such as equation (16) do not control for the actual energy and water
consumption of the building. Suppose that in estimating equation (16) that the key explanatory
variable is a dummy that equals one if the building is LEED certified. If continuous indicators of
operating expenses could be observed, would the discrete certification dummy still be
capitalized? Given asymmetric information about a building’s actual operating costs, does the
green building dummy act as a coarse partition. Or, do green buildings perform better on other
criteria such as offering higher indoor air quality and hence raising worker productivity and
quality of life?
34

This literature could also explore whether green certification is more valuable

http://www.usgbc.org/Docs/Archive/General/Docs1095.pdf
77

in areas with higher average electricity prices. By including such an interaction term, scholars
could study whether the demand for green buildings is mostly tied to minimizing operating costs.
Such research could mimic Ito’s (2014) spatial regression discontinuity design to observe the
pricing of nearby buildings located in different electric utility zones.
iii.

Challenges in Increasing the Urban Real Estate’s Energy Efficiency
Given the durability of the urban real estate stock, the vast majority of buildings are not

new. An ongoing effort seeks to increase the energy efficiency of this stock and many have
argued that the equilibrium is unlikely to be a pareto optimum because of information
asymmetries.
Consider a car buyer. The Internet offers easy to access information on any make and
model’s miles per gallon. Marketing experts have argued that this should be expressed as
gallons per mile to help buyers calculate their annual operating expenses (Allcott 2011). In the
case of apartments, there is no analogous energy labelling. Potential renters are likely to be
unaware of what their monthly electricity bills will be in a building that they have never lived in
before. This information asymmetry poses a sustainability challenge because if potential renters
had full information about each apartment’s energy efficiency then the inefficient apartments
would rent for less (especially in areas featuring high electricity prices) and this would
incentivize the owners of these apartments to invest in greater energy efficiency.
In recent years, California has passed new regulations (AB1103) requiring the owner or
operator to disclose the benchmarking data and rating to a prospective buyer, lessee of the entire
building, or lender that would finance the entire building based on a schedule of compliance
established by the State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission.

78

Recent research has examined the role of energy labels using data from around the world.
The EU energy label seems to be quite effective in resolving the information asymmetry in
understanding the energy efficiency of dwellings: Brounen and Kok (2011) estimate hedonic
pricing gradients for recently sold homes in the Netherlands and document that homes receiving
an “A” label in terms of energy efficiency sell for a 10 percent price premium. It is relevant to
note that the Netherlands has chosen a color coded easy to understand educational labeling
system where homes are partitioned into those that receive an “A”, “B”, “C”, etc. This report
card system is similar to how North Carolina reports grades for local school district’s school
quality (Kane et. al. 2006).

In the case of Energy Star labelling, Houde (2014) uses a structural

model to document that consumers respond to labels in different ways such that some greatly
value such labels while others do not. The causes of these different responses merits future
research.
Conversely, dwellings that are labeled as inefficient transact for substantial discounts
relative to otherwise comparable, standard homes. Similar evidence has been documented for
Singapore: Deng et al. (2012) find that homes labeled under the government-designed Green
Mark scheme sell for a 4 - 6 percent price premium. In China today, no one trusted set of
standards for ranking buildings exists (Zheng et. al. 2012). The emergence of trusted energy
efficiency standards is an important example of the public goods that developing country
governments can cheaply provide in furthering urban environmental sustainability.
Electric utilities are becoming increasingly aware of the “power of Big Data” and are
actively working with academics to devise strategies for encouraging energy efficiency. In states
such as California where utilities must comply with a renewable portfolio standard (defined as
the ratio of green power purchased divided by total power generated), one cost effective strategy
79

is to invest in energy efficiency and hence shrink the denominator. This regulatory pressure has
increased the willingness of utilities to introduce field experiments to learn about what strategies
are effective.
iv.

The Renter/Owner Split Incentives Problem in Cities
As predicted by the monocentric model, center cities are more likely to feature multi-

family apartment buildings and multi-tenant commercial buildings than will be found in the
distant suburbs. Such tall buildings offer significant economies of scale with respect to land
consumption but they raise issues of how to design proper energy efficiency incentives to
encourage efficient investment by both the owner of the building and his tenants (see Levinson
and Niemann 2004, Maruejols and Young 2011).
Based on the year 2000 Census, 65% of metropolitan area housing units with five or
more units were located within ten miles of the CBD while 42% of the metropolitan area single
family housing stock was located within ten miles of the CBD. A “split-incentives” literature
has documented the energy efficiency challenge in multi-family housing (Levinson and Niemann
2004). If the owner of the apartment complex pays the energy bills, then the renter faces a zero
marginal cost for energy consumption. Since renters anticipate that they will not live in the
building for a long period, they are unlikely to update energy intensive durables such as the
refrigerator or other appliances that they cannot easily take with them to their next home. If the
renter pays the energy bills, then the owner has little incentive to invest in energy efficient
investments such as energy efficient windows or an energy efficient air conditioning system.
For evidence from the commercial real estate sector see Kahn, Kok and Quigley 2014.

80

This would appear to be a key example where a randomized field experiment research
design would yield valuable new knowledge. Suppose that a REIT was willing to select at
random which of its buildings in its portfolio that it would be willing to offer net leases versus
triple net leases. This randomization of rental contract terms would allow the researcher to study
how the building manager and the tenant change their behavior in the face of the new incentives.
By studying the dynamics of such buildings’ electricity consumption, the researcher could
estimate whether incentives matter for overall electricity consumption. The non-experimental
evidence reported in Kahn, Kok and Quigley (2014) and Levinson and Niemann (2004) suggest
that they do but a field experiment design would be more definitive.
E. Carbon Pricing and the Building Stock’s Energy Efficiency
At this point in time, the global free rider problem has precluded the adoption of the
global carbon tax. Such a credible policy would raise local electricity prices and incentivize
developers and owners of existing buildings to invest in energy efficiency. In many developing
nations today, a huge wave of urbanization is taking place. The investments made now will last
for decades. If the investors anticipate that carbon pricing will become a reality then they are
more likely to invest in energy efficiency now. Energy efficiency investments in new capital in
the developing world’s cities remains an important future research topic. Research on
endogenous innovation (see Acemoglu and Linn 2004) highlights an optimistic hypothesis. If
there is a growing global demand for “green buildings”, then this creates strong market
incentives for engineers to focus their efforts in creating such new varieties.

The empirical

induced innovation literature has consistently reported evidence of improvements in energy
efficiency of new products such as air conditioners shortly after energy prices rise (Newell et. al.
1998).
81

VI. Conclusion
In this chapter we have explored the connection between cities and the environment,
highlighting the bidirectional nature of this relationship. One set of the reviewed literature
examines the role that environmental amenities play in determining the economic geography of
where diverse households and firms locate both within cities and across cities. A second set of
relevant literature explores how a city’s economic geography and the composition of its durable
capital impact the environment – focusing largely on energy consumption and carbon emissions.
We used the long run history of Pittsburgh to illustrate our sweeping theme that the
relationship between cities and their environment has changed over the last century in a
systematic way. This change has had a profound impact on where and how individuals and firms
choose to locate. These shifts in the geography of economic activity have in turn influenced
how cities impact the environment.
In the past, as highlighted by the case of Pittsburgh, the comparative advantage of cities
was largely determined by access to transportation and productive resource that arose out of the
natural environment. As these cities grew into the economic engines that characterize the
industrial age, unchecked externalities severely impeded quality of life for their residents. Over
forty years ago, Nordhaus and Tobin (1972) wrote:
“Many of the negative "externalities" of economic growth are connected with urbanization and congestion.
The secular advances recorded in NNP figures have accompanied a vast migration from rural agriculture to
urban industry. Without this occupational and residential revolution we could not have enjoyed the fruits of
technological progress. But some portion of the higher earnings of urban residents may simply be
compensation for the disamenities of urban life and work. If so we should not count as a gain of welfare the
full increments of NNP that result from moving a man from farm or small town to city. The persistent
association of higher wages with higher population densities offers one method of estimating the costs of
urban life as they are valued by people making residential and occupational decisions.”

82

Due to a confluence of trends many cities have enjoyed a sharp improvement in their non-market
quality of life with many of these gains concentrated along environmental margins. As a result,
the requirement for big cities to provide “combat pay” has attenuated as non-market quality of
life has increased and is a complement of the modern consumer city.
Air quality, water quality and energy efficiency have become an emergent property of
the industry, buildings, regulations, voters, and households who locate within a city’s borders.
Progress along these dimensions has been seen in cities such as Chicago, London and New York
City. Researchers see the start of similar trends in China. As demonstrated in work surveyed by
Zheng and Kahn (2013), China’s emerging system of cities is wrestling with many of these same
issues. Some of China’s cities are choosing to specialize in heavy industry and this is raising
pollution challenges. At the same time, rich Eastern Chinese cities are deindustrializing and
pollution is declining. As the urban middle class grows in cities around the world, more and
more citizens will demand non-market quality of life and environmental progress.

83

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn. (2004). "Market size in innovation: theory and evidence
from the pharmaceutical industry." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 3: 1049-1090.
Albouy, David. (2008). “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
Metropolitan Areas.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14472.
Albouy, David, Walter Graf, Ryan Kellogg, and Hendrik Wolff. (2013). Climate amenities,
climate change, and American Quality of Life. No. w18925. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Allcott, Hunt. (2011). "Social norms and energy conservation." Journal of Public Economics 95,
no. 9: 1082-1095.
Allcott, Hunt. (2011). "Consumers' perceptions and misperceptions of energy costs."The
American Economic Review 101, no. 3: 98-104.
Aroonruengsawat, Anin, and Maximilian Auffhammer. (2011). "Impacts of climate change on
residential electricity consumption: evidence from billing data." In The Economics of climate
change: Adaptations past and present, pp. 311-342. University of Chicago Press.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. (2013). The china syndrome: Local labor
market effects of import competition in the united states." American Economic Review.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Eleanor McCormick. (2006). Moving beyond cleanup: Identifying the
crucibles of environmental gentrification. National Center for Environmental Assessment, US
Environmental Protection Agency.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Wallace E. Oates, and James N. Sanchirico.(2010). "Success and design of
local referenda for land conservation." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 29.4: 769798.
Banzhaf, H. Walsh,R. (2008). “Do People Vote with Their Feet? An Empirical Test of Tiebout’s
Mechanism”. American Economic Review 98(3), 843-863.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S.
Shapiro. (2013) .Adapting to climate change: the remarkable decline in the US temperaturemortality relationship over the 20th century. No. w18692. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr. (2014). Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous Coal
and American Home Heating. No. w19881. National Bureau of Economic Research.

84

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Matthew E. Kahn. (2005). "Effects of Urban Rail Transit Expansions:
Evidence from Sixteen Cities, 1970-2000." Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs: 147206.
Bayer, Patrick, Nathaniel Keohane, and Christopher Timmins. (2009). “Migration and Hedonic
Valuation: The Case of Air Quality.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
58(1): 1-14.
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira and Robert McMillan (2007). A Unified Framework for
Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods, Journal of Political Economy, 115(4)
588-638.
Bayer, P., & Timmins, C. (2007). Estimating Equilibrium Models Of Sorting Across Locations*.
The Economic Journal, 117(518), 353-374.
Bayer, P., McMillan, R., Murphy, A., & Timmins, C. (2011). A dynamic model of demand for
houses and neighborhoods (No. w17250). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, Gary S. (1976). "Altruism, egoism, and genetic fitness: Economics and
sociobiology." Journal of Economic Literature: 817-826.
Becker, Randy, and J. Vernon Henderson. (2000). “Effects of Air Quality Regulations on
Polluting Industries.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(2): 379-421.
Been, Vicki. (1994). "Locally undesirable land uses in minority neighborhoods: Disproportionate
siting or market dynamics?." Yale Law Journal: 1383-1422.
Been, Vicki, and Francis Gupta. (1997). "Coming to the Nuisance or Going to the Barrios-A
Longitudinal Analysis of Environmental Justice Claims." Ecology LQ 24: 1.
Bento, A. M., Franco, S. F., & Kaffine, D. (2006). The efficiency and distributional impacts of
alternative anti-sprawl policies. Journal of Urban Economics, 59(1), 121-141.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. (1995). "Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium." Econometrica 63.4 : 841-890.
Beresteanu, Arie, and Shanjun Li. (2011). "Gasoline Prices, Government Support and the
Demand for Hybrid Vehicles in the United States.” International Economic Review 52, no. 1:
161-182.
Bishop, Kelly C. (2012). “A Dynamic Model of Location Valuation and Hedonic Valuation”.
ASU Working Paper.
Bishop, Kelly C., and Alvin D. Murphy. (2011). "Estimating the willingness to pay to avoid
violent crime: A dynamic approach." The American Economic Review 101, no. 3: 625-629.

85

Black, Sandra E. (1999) "Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary
education." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 2: 577-599.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin. (2012) “Portage and Path Dependence." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May, 587-644,
Bloom, Nicholas, Christos Genakos, Ralf Martin, and Raffaella Sadun. (2010) "Modern
Management: Good for the Environment or Just Hot Air?." The economic journal 120, no. 544:
551-572.
Blomquist, Glenn C., Mark C. Berger, and John P. Hoehn. (1988) "New estimates of quality of
life in urban areas." American Economic Review 78, no. 1: 89-107.
Blonigen, Bruce A., Christopher R. Knittel, and Anson Soderbery. (2013) Keeping it fresh:
Strategic product redesigns and welfare. No. w18997. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bollinger, Bryan, and Kenneth Gillingham. (2012) "Peer effects in the diffusion of solar
photovoltaic panels." Marketing Science 31, no. 6: 900-912.
Boustan, Leah Platt, Matthew E. Kahn, and Paul W. Rhode. (2012) "Moving to higher ground:
migration response to natural disasters in the early twentieth century." The American Economic
Review 102, no. 3: 238-244.
Bowles, Samuel. (1998) "Endogenous preferences: The cultural consequences of markets and
other economic institutions." Journal of economic literature: 75-111.
Brounen, Dirk and Nils Kok. (2011). "On the Economics of Energy Efficiency in the Housing
Market." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 62, 166-79.
Brounen, Dirk; Nils Kok and John M. Quigley. (2013). "Energy Literacy, Awareness, and
Conservation Behavior of Residential Households." Energy Economics, 38, 42-50.
Brounen, Dirk; Nils Kok and John M. Quigley. (2012). "Residential Energy Use and
Conservation: Economics and Demographics." European Economic Review, 56(5), 931-45.
Brueckner, Jan K., Jacques-Francois Thisse, and Yves Zenou. (1999). “Why is Central Paris
Rich and Downtown Detroit Poor? An Amenity-Based Theory.” European Economic Review,
43(1): 91-107.
Brueckner, J. K. (2000). Urban sprawl: diagnosis and remedies. International regional science
review, 23(2), 160-171.
Brueckner, Jan K., and David Neumark. (2014). "Beaches, Sunshine, and Public Sector Pay:
Theory and Evidence on Amenities and Rent Extraction by Government Workers." American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 198-230.

86

Brueckner, Jan K., and Stuart S. Rosenthal. (2009) "Gentrification and neighborhood housing
cycles: will America's future downtowns be rich?." The Review of Economics and Statistics 91,
no. 4: 725-743.
Brueckner, Jan K., and Kala Seetharam Sridhar. (2012) "Measuring welfare gains from
relaxation of land-use restrictions: The case of India's building-height limits."Regional Science
and Urban Economics 42, no. 6: 1061-1067.
Bunten, Devin, Matthew E. Kahn. (2014) The Impact of Emerging Climate Risk on Urban Real
Estate Price Dynamics, NBER Working Paper #20018.
Cameron, Trudy Ann, and Ian T. McConnaha. (2016). "Evidence of environmental migration."
Land Economics 82.2: 273-290.
Carlton, Dennis W. (1983). "The location and employment choices of new firms: an econometric
model with discrete and continuous endogenous variables." The Review of Economics and
Statistics , 440-449.
Carlino, Gerald A., and Albert Saiz. (2008) City beautiful. No. 3778. IZA discussion papers.
Case, L.J.B. (1846). “Notes from a Journal No III”. Ladies’ Repository,volume 14, 181-183
Cesur, Resul, Erdal Tekin Aydogan Ulker. (2013). Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: Evidence
from the Expansion of Natural Gas Infrastructure. NBER Working Paper 18736
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. (2003). “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1121-1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. (2005). “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376-424.
Cheshire, P., & Sheppard, S. (2006). The welfare economics of land use planning. Journal of
Urban economics, 52(2), 242-269.
Clay, Karen, and Werner Troesken. (2010) Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World's First
Environmental Kuznets Curve? Coal Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog. No.
w15669. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. (2003) "The rising price of nonmarket goods."The
American Economic Review 93, no. 2: 227-232.
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. (2011). Electricity Consumption and Durable Housing:
Understanding Cohort Effects, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101(3)
pages 88-82.

87

Cragg, Michael I., and Matthew E. Kahn. (1999). "Climate consumption and climate pricing
from 1940 to 1990." Regional Science and Urban Economics 29, no. 4: 519-539.
Cragg, Michael I., Yuyu Zhou, Kevin Gurney, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2013). "Carbon
geography: the political economy of congressional support for legislation intended to mitigate
greenhouse gas production." Economic Inquiry 51, no. 2: 1640-1650.
Cullen, J. B., & Levitt, S. D. (1999). Crime, urban flight, and the consequences for cities.
Review of economics and statistics, 81(2), 159-169.
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker. Do housing prices reflect
environmental health risks? Evidence from more than 1600 toxic plant openings and closings.
American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Dastrup, Samuel R., Joshua Graff Zivin, Dora L. Costa, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2012).
"Understanding the Solar Home price premium: Electricity generation and “Green” social
status." European Economic Review 56, no. 5: 961-973.
Davis, Lucas W. (2011). “The Effect of Power Plants on Local Housing Prices and Rents :
Evidence from Restricted Census Microdata.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4): 13911402.
Davis, Donald and David Weinstein (2002). Bones, Bombs and Break Points; The Geography of
Economic Activity, American Economic Review 92(5) 1269-1289.
Deng, Yongheng; Zhiliang Li and John M. Quigley. (2012). "Economic Returns to EnergyEfficient Investments in the Housing Market: Evidence from Singapore." Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 42(3), 506–15.
Diamond, Rebecca. (2012). "The determinants and welfare implications of us workers’ diverging
location choices by skill: 1980-2000." Job Market Paper, Harvard University December.
Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward L. Glaeser. (2002). "Geographic concentration as a
dynamic process." Review of Economics and Statistics 84, no. 2: 193-204.
Eid, Jean, Henry G. Overman, Diego Puga, and Matthew A. Turner. (2008). "Fat city:
Questioning the relationship between urban sprawl and obesity." Journal of Urban
Economics 63, no. 2: 385-404.
Eichholtz, Piet M.A.; Nils Kok and John M. Quigley. (2010). "Doing Well by Doing Good:
Green Office Buildings." American Economic Review, 100(5), 2494–511.
Eichholtz, Piet M.A.; Nils Kok and John M. Quigley. (2013). "The Economics of Green
Building." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(1), 50-63.

88

Ellickson, B. (1971). “Jurisdictional fragmentation and residential choice”. American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 61 (May), 334-339.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William Kerr. (2010). What causes industry
agglomeration? Evidence from coagglomeration patterns, American Economic Review 100:2
(June), 1195-1213
Epple.D., Platt, G. (1998). “Equilibrium and local redistribution in an urban economy when
households differ in both preferences and income”. Journal of Urban Economics 43(1), 23-51.
Epple, Dennis, and Holger Sieg (1999). “Estimating equilibrium models of local jurisdictions.”
Journal of Political Economy 107(4).
Falck, Oliver, Michael Fritsch, and Stephan Heblich. (2011). "The phantom of the opera:
Cultural amenities, human capital, and regional economic growth." Labour Economics 18, no. 6:
755-766.
Gaigné, Carl & Riou, Stéphane & Thisse, Jacques-François. (2012). Are compact cities
environmentally friendly? Journal of Urban Economics, Elsevier, vol. 72(2), pages 123-136.
Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, and Christopher Timmins. (2011). "Hazardous waste cleanup,
neighborhood gentrification, and environmental justice: Evidence from restricted access census
block data." The American Economic Review 101, no. 3: 620-624.
Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, and Christopher Timmins. (2013). "Does cleanup of hazardous waste
sites raise housing values? Evidence of spatially localized benefits." Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 65, no. 3: 345-360.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew Harding, and David Rapson. (2012). "Split incentives in
residential energy consumption." Energy Journal 33, no. 2 (2012): 37-62.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. (2006). “Urban Resurgence and the Consumer
City.” Urban Studies, 43(8): 1275–99.
Glaeser, Edward L. & Joseph Gyourko, (2005). "Urban Decline and Durable Housing," Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 113(2), pages 345-375.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. (2011). “Decentralized Employment and the
Transformation of the American City. ” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
8117.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew E Kahn. (2004). “Sprawl and Urban Growth.” In Handbook of
Regional and Urban Economics 4, ed. J. V. Henderson, and J. F. Thisse, 2481-2527.

89

Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. (2010). “The Greenness of Cities: Carbon Dioxide
Emissions and Urban Development.” Journal of Urban Economics, 67(3): 404-418.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. (2001). “Consumer City.” Journal of Economic
Geography, 1(1): 27-50.
Glaeser, Edward L., Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. (2008). "Why do the poor live in
cities? The role of public transportation." Journal of Urban Economics 63, no. 1: 1-24.

Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote. (2002) "An economic approach to
social capital." The Economic Journal 112, no. 483: F437-F458.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Jesse M. Shapiro. (2003) "Urban growth in the 1990s: Is city living
back?." Journal of regional science 43, no. 1: 139-165.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks. (2006). "Urban growth and housing
supply." Journal of Economic Geography 6, no. 1: 71-89.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Bryce A. Ward. (2009). "The causes and consequences of land use
regulation: Evidence from Greater Boston." Journal of Urban Economics 65, no. 3: 265-278.
Goldin, Claudia, (2006). “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment,
Education and Family.” American Economic Review, 96(2) 1-21.
Graves, Philip E., and Peter D. Linneman. (1979). "Household migration: Theoretical and
empirical results." Journal of urban economics 6, no. 3: 383-404.
Greenstone, Michael, and Justin Gallagher. (2008). "Does hazardous waste matter? Evidence
from the housing market and the superfund program." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123,
no. 3: 951-1003.
Greenstone, Michael, and Rema Hanna. (2011). “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water
Pollution, and Infant Mortality in India.” MIT Working Paper CEEPR WP 2011-014.
Gyourko, Joseph, and Raven Molloy. (2015), Regulation and Housing Supply. Handbook of
Regional and Urban Economics.
Gyourko, Joseph, Matthew E. Kahn, and Joseph Tracy. (1999). “Quality of Life and
Environmental Comparisons.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Vol. 3. ed. Paul
Cheshire, and Edwin S. Mills. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1413-1454.
Gyourko, Joseph, and Joseph Tracy. (1991). “The Structure of Local Public Finance and the
Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy, 91(4), 774-806.

90

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. (2013). "Superstar cities."American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5, no. 4: 167-199.
Haines, Michael R. (2001). "The urban mortality transition in the United States, 1800-1940."
In Annales de démographie historique, no. 1, pp. 33-64. Belin.
Haninger, Kevin, Lala Ma and Christopher Timmins, (2014). The Value of Brownfield
Remediation. NBER Working Paper 20296.
Harrison Jr, David, and John F. Kain. (2014). "Cumulative urban growth and urban density
functions." Journal of Urban economics 1, no. 1: 61-98.
Heckman, James, and Jose Scheinkman. (1987). "The importance of bundling in a GormanLancaster model of earnings." The Review of Economic Studies 54, no. 2: 243-255.
Henderson, J. Vernon. (1996). “The Effect of Air Quality Regulation.” American Economic
Review, 86(4): 789-813.
Holian, Matthew J., and Matthew E. Kahn. (2013). The Rise of the Low Carbon Consumer City.
No. w18735. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Holian, Matthew J., and Matthew E. Kahn. (2014). Household Demand for Low Carbon Public
Policies: Evidence from California. No. w19965. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Holmes, Thomas J. (1998). "The effect of state policies on the location of manufacturing:
Evidence from state borders." Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 4 (1998): 667-705.
Houde, Sebastian, (2014). How Consumers Respond to Environmental Certification and the
Value of Energy Information, University of Maryland Working Paper.
Hsiang, Solomon and Amir Jina. (2014). The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on
Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence from 6,700 Cyclones. NBER Working Paper #20352.s
Hu, Shishan, Scott Fruin, Kathleen Kozawa, Steve Mara, Suzanne E. Paulson, and Arthur M.
Winer. (2009). "A wide area of air pollutant impact downwind of a freeway during pre-sunrise
hours." Atmospheric Environment 43, no. 16: 2541-2549.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1998). "Introduction to the Economics of Religion." Journal of
economic literature, 1465-1495.
Innes, Robert and Arnab Mitra. (2014). Parties, Politics and Regulation: Do Republican
Congressmen Reduce Local Enforcement of Clean Air Laws?”, Economic Inquiry, Forthcoming.
Isard, W. (1948). Some locational factors in the iron and steel industry since the early nineteenth
century. Journal of Political Economy, 56.
91

Ito, Koinichiro (2014) Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
Nonlinear Electricity Pricing,” American Economic Review, 104(2): 537-63, 2014.
Jacobsen, Grant D., and Matthew J. Kotchen. (2013). "Are building codes effective at saving
energy? Evidence from residential billing data in Florida." Review of Economics and
Statistics 95, no. 1: 34-49.
Kahn, Matthew E. (1999). “The Silver Lining of Rust Belt Manufacturing Decline.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 46(3): 360-376.
Kahn, Matthew E. (2002). “Demographic Change and the Demand for Environmental
Regulation.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21(1): 45-62.
Kahn, Matthew E. (2003). "New evidence on Eastern Europe's pollution progress."Topics in
economic analysis & policy 3, no. 1.
Kahn, Matthew E. (2007). "Gentrification Trends in New Transit‐Oriented Communities:
Evidence from 14 Cities That Expanded and Built Rail Transit Systems." Real Estate
Economics 35, no. 2: 155-182.
Kahn, Matthew E. (2009). "Urban growth and climate change." Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 1, no.
1: 333-350.
Kahn, Matthew E. (2010). Climatopolis: How Our Cities Will Thrive in Our Hotter Future.
Basic Books.
Kahn, Matthew E. (2011). "Do liberal cities limit new housing development? Evidence from
California." Journal of Urban Economics 69, no. 2: 223-228.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Joel Schwartz. (2008). “Urban Air Pollution Progress Despite Sprawl:
The ‘Greening’ of the Vehicle Fleet.” Journal of Urban Economics, 63(3): 775-787.
Kahn, Matthew E. Nils Kok, John Quigley, (2014). Carbon Emissions from the Commercial
Building Sector: The Role of Climate, Quality, and Incentives, Journal of Public Economics,
113C: 1-12.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Nils Kok. (2014). Big-Box Retailers and Urban Carbon Emissions: The
Case of Wal-Mart. No. w19912. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Erin T. Mansur. (2013). "Do local energy prices and regulation affect the
geographic concentration of employment?." Journal of Public Economics 101: 105-114.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Ryan K. Vaughn. (2009). "Green market geography: The spatial
clustering of hybrid vehicles and LEED registered buildings." The BE Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy 9, no. 2.

92

Kane, Thomas J., Stephanie K. Riegg, and Douglas O. Staiger. (2006). "School quality,
neighborhoods, and housing prices." American Law and Economics Review 8, no. 2: 183-212.
Kates, Robert William, Craig E. Colten, Shirley Laska, and Stephen P. Leatherman. (2006).
"Reconstruction of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina: a research perspective." Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 103, no. 40: 14653-14660.
Kennan, John, and James R. Walker. (2011). "The effect of expected income on individual
migration decisions." Econometrica 79, no. 1: 211-251.
Kiel, Katherine A. (1995). "Measuring the impact of the discovery and cleaning of identified
hazardous waste sites on house values." Land Economics: 428-435.
Kiel, Katherine A., and Michael Williams. (2007). "The impact of Superfund sites on local
property values: Are all sites the same?." Journal of urban Economics 61, no. 1: 170-192.
Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn. (2010). "The price of gasoline and new vehicle fuel economy:
evidence from monthly sales data." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2, no. 3: 134153.
Kotchen, Matthew J., and Shawn M. Powers. (2006). "Explaining the appearance and success of
voter referenda for open-space conservation." Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 52, no. 1: 373-390.
Kok, Nils; Marquise McGraw and John M. Quigley. (2011). "The Diffusion of Energy
Efficiency in Building." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101(3), 77–82.
Kousky, Carolyn, Erzo FP Luttmer, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. (2006). "Private investment and
government protection." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 33, no. 1-2: 73-100.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., and Jaren C. Pope. (2014). "Do ‘Capitalization Effects’ for Public Goods
Reveal the Public’s Willingness to Pay?." International Economic Review.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins. (2013). "The New Economics
of Equilibrium Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using Housing Markets." Journal of Economic
Literature 51, no. 4: 1007-1062.
Lee, Sungwon, and Bumsoo Lee. (2014). "The influence of urban form on GHG emissions in the
US household sector." Energy Policy 68: 534-549.
Lee, Sanghoon, and Jeffrey Lin. (2013). Natural Amenities, Neighborhood Dynamics, and
Persistence in the Spatial Distribution of Income by. No. 13-48. Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia.

93

Levinson, Arik, and Scott Niemann. (2004). "Energy use by apartment tenants when landlords
pay for utilities." Resource and Energy Economics 26, no. 1: 51-75.
Levitt, Steven D. (2004). "Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain
the decline and six that do not." Journal of Economic perspectives: 163-190.
Li, Shanjun, Chris Timmins, and Roger H. von Haefen, (2009). How Do Gasoline Prices Affect
Fleet Fuel Economy? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 113-137.
Libecap, Gary D. (2009). "Chinatown revisited: Owens Valley and Los Angeles—bargaining
Costs and fairness perceptions of the first major water rights exchange." Journal of Law,
Economics, and organization 25, no. 2: 311-338.
Ludwig, Jens, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg J. Duncan, Lawrence F.
Katz, Ronald C. Kessler et al. (2011). "Neighborhoods, obesity, and diabetes—a randomized
social experiment." New England Journal of Medicine 365, no. 16: 1509-1519.
Mangum, Kyle. (2014). The Global Effects of Housing Policy, Georgia State University,
Working Paper.
Matisoff, Daniel C., Douglas S. Noonan, and Anna M. Mazzolini. (2014). "Performance or
Marketing Benefits? The Case of LEED Certification." Environmental science & technology 48,
no. 3: 2001-2007.
Maruejols, Lucie, and Denise Young. (2011). "Split incentives and energy efficiency in
Canadian multi-family dwellings." Energy policy 39, no. 6: 3655-3668.
Meltzer, Rachel, and Jenny Schuetz. (2012). "Bodegas or bagel shops? Neighborhood
differences in retail and household services." Economic Development Quarterly 26, no. 1: 73-94.
McConnell, V., & Walls, M. A. (2005). The value of open space: Evidence from studies of
nonmarket benefits. Washington, DC, USA: Resources for the Future.
Miller, Norman L., Katharine Hayhoe, Jiming Jin, and Maximilian Auffhammer. (2008).
"Climate, extreme heat, and electricity demand in California." Journal of Applied Meteorology
and Climatology 47, no. 6: 1834-1844.
Moretti, Enrico. (2004). "Human capital externalities in cities." Handbook of regional and urban
economics 4: 2243-2291.
Moretti, Enrico. (2012). The new geography of jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Robert Mendelsohn. (2007). "Measuring the damages of air pollution in
the United States." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 54, no. 1: 1-14.

94

Muller, Nicholas Z., Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus. (2011). “Environmental
Accounting for Pollution in the United States Economy.” American Economic Review, 101(5):
1649-1675.
Nechyba, T. (1997). “Existence of equilibrium and stratification in local and hierarchical public
good economies with property taxes and voting”, Economic Theory 10 277-304.
Nevin, A. M. (1888). The Social Mirror: A Character Sketch of the Women of Pittsburg and
Vicinity During the First Century of the County's Existence. TW Nevin.
Newell, Richard, Adam Jaffe, and Robert Stavins (1999). The Induced Innovation Hypothesis
and Energy Saving Technological Change. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3) 941975.
Noonan, Douglas S. (2005). "Neighbours, Barriers and Urban Environments: Are Things'
Different on the Other Side of the Tracks'?." Urban Studies 42.10: 1817-1835.
Noonan, Douglas S., Lin-Han Chiang Hsieh, and Daniel Matisoff. (2013). "Spatial effects in
energy-efficient residential HVAC technology adoption." Environment and Behavior. 45(4),
476–503.
Nordhaus, William D., and James Tobin. (1972). "Is growth obsolete?." In Economic Research:
Retrospect and Prospect Vol 5: Economic Growth, pp. 1-80. NBER.
Oi, Walter Y. (1996). "The welfare implications of invention." In The Economics of New Goods,
pp. 109-142. University of Chicago Press.
Olmstead, Sheila M. (2010). "The economics of water quality." Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 4, no. 1: 44-62.
Parry, Ian WH, and Kenneth A. Small. (2005). "Does Britain or the United States have the right
gasoline tax?." The American Economic Review 95, no. 4: 1276-1289.
Peltzman, Sam. (1975). "The effects of automobile safety regulation." The Journal of Political
Economy: 677-725.
Pope III, C. Arden, Joel Schwartz, and Michael R. Ransom. (1992). "Daily mortality and PM10
pollution in Utah Valley." Archives of Environmental Health: An International Journal 47, no. 3:
211-217.
Rappaport, Jordan, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. (2003). “The United States as a Coastal Nation.”
Journal of Economic Growth, 8(1): 5–46.
Rappaport, Jordan. (2009). "The increasing importance of quality of life." Journal of Economic
Geography 9, no. 6: 779-804.
95

Reiss, Peter C., and Matthew W. White. (2008). "What changes energy consumption? Prices and
public pressures." The RAND Journal of Economics 39, no. 3: 636-663.
Roback, Jennifer. (1982). “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” The Journal of Political
Economy, 90(6): 1257-1278.
Rosen, Sherwin. (1974). "Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure
competition." The journal of political economy: 34-55.
Rosen, Sherwin. (1979). “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life.” In Current Issues in
Urban Economics, ed. Peter Mieszkowski and Mahlon Straszheim,
74–104. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rosen Sherwin. (2002). “Markets and Diversity.” American Economic Review, 92(1): 1-15.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. (2004). "Evidence on the nature and sources of
agglomeration economies." Handbook of regional and urban economics 4: 2119-2171.
Rossi‐Hansberg, Esteban, and Pierre‐Daniel Sarte. (2009). "Firm Fragmentation and Urban
Patterns.” International Economic Review 50, no. 1: 143-186.
Schwartz, Amy Ellen, Scott Susin, and Ioan Voicu. (2003). "Has falling crime driven New York
City's real estate boom?." Journal of Housing Research 14, no. 1: 101-136.
Sexton, Steven. "Automatic Bill Payment and Salience Effects: Evidence from Electricity
Consumption." Review of Economics and Statistics. Forthcoming.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh. (2004). “Estimating the
General Equilibrium Benefits Of Large Changes In Spatially Delineated Public
Goods.” International Economic Review, 45(4): 1047-1077.
Sigman, Hilary. (2001). "The Pace of Progress at Superfund Sites: Policy Goals and Interest
Group Influence." Journal of Law and Economics 44, no. 1: 315-343.
Skrabec, Q. R. (2010). The World's Richest Neighborhood: How Pittsburgh's East Enders Forged
American Industry. Algora Publishing.
Smith, Kirk R. (2000). "National burden of disease in India from indoor air
pollution."Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97, no. 24: 13286-13293.
Smith, V. Kerry. (2012). "Reflections—In Search of Crosswalks between Macroeconomics and
Environmental Economics." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 6, no. 2: 298-317.
Smith, V. K., & Huang, J. C. (1995). Can markets value air quality? A meta-analysis of hedonic
property value models. Journal of political economy, 209-227.

96

Smith, V., Sieg, H., Spencer Banzhaf, H., & Walsh, R. P. (2004). General equilibrium benefits
for environmental improvements: projected ozone reductions under EPA's Prospective Analysis
for the Los Angeles air basin. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 47(3),
559-584.
Stradling, David, and Peter Thorsheim. (1999). "The smoke of great cities: British and
American efforts to control air pollution, 1860-1914." Environmental History: 6-31.
Stull,William J. (1974). Land use and zoning in an urban economy. American Economic Review
64(3): 337–347.
Tajima, Kayo. (2003). "New estimates of the demand for urban green space: implications for
valuing the environmental benefits of Boston's big dig project."Journal of Urban Affairs 25, no.
5: 641-655.
Taylor, Laura, Xiangping Liu and Daniel Phaneuf. (2012). “Disentangling the Property Value
Impacts of Environmental Contamination from Locally Undesirable Land Uses”, Working Paper.
Tarr, Joel A., ed. (2003). Devastation and renewal: an environmental history of Pittsburgh and
its region. University of Pittsburgh Press.
Timmins, Christopher. (2002). "Measuring the dynamic efficiency costs of regulators'
preferences: Municipal water utilities in the arid west." Econometrica 70, no. 2: 603-629.
Tra, Constant I. (2010). "A discrete choice equilibrium approach to valuing large environmental
changes." Journal of Public Economics 94.1: 183-196.
Turner, Matthew. A. (2005). Landscape preferences and patterns of residential development.
Journal of Urban Economics, 57(1), 19-54.
Turner, Matthew A., Andrew Haughwout, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. "Land use regulation
and welfare." Econometrica, Forthcoming
United Church of Christ. Commission for Racial Justice. (1987). Toxic wastes and race in the
United States: A national report on the racial and socio-economic characteristics of communities
with hazardous waste sites. Public Data Access.
US GAO(2005) Report to Congressional Requesters, Brownfield Redevelopment: Stakeholders
Report that EPA;s Program Helps to Redevelop Sites, but Additional Measures Could
Complement Agency Efforts.
US GAO (2013) Report to Congressional Requesters, Superfund: EPA Should Take Steps to
Improve Its Management of Alternative to Placing Sites on the National Priorities List
97

VandeWeghe, J. R., & Kennedy, C. (2007). A spatial analysis of residential greenhouse gas
emissions in the Toronto census metropolitan area. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 11(2), 133144.
Waldfogel, Joel. (2008). “The Median Voter and the Median Consumer: Local Private Goods
and Population Composition.” Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2): 567-582.
Walsh, R. (2007). Endogenous open space amenities in a locational equilibrium. Journal of
Urban Economics, 61(2), 319-344.
Weitzman, Martin L. (2009). "On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic
climate change." The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1: 1-19.
Wolak, Frank A. (2011). "Do residential customers respond to hourly prices? Evidence from a
dynamic pricing experiment." The American Economic Review 101, no. 3: 83-87.
Wolff, Hendrik. (2014). "Keep Your Clunker in the Suburb: Low‐emission Zones and Adoption
of Green Vehicles." The Economic Journal, 124(578) F481-F512.
Wu, J., Plantinga, A. J. (2003). The influence of public open space on urban spatial structure.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46(2), 288-309.
Wolverton, Ann. (2009). "Effects of socio-economic and input-related factors on polluting
plants' location decisions." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 9.1.

Zabel, Jeffrey E., and Katherine A. Kiel. (2000). "Estimating the demand for air quality in four
US cities." Land Economics: 174-194.
Zheng, Siqi, Jing Cao, Matthew E. Kahn, and Cong Sun. (2014). “Real Estate Valuation and
Cross-Boundary Air Pollution Externalities: Evidence from Chinese Cities.” Journal of Real
Estate Finance and Economics, 48(3) 398-414.
Zheng, Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2008). “Land and Residential Property Markets in a
Booming Economy: New Evidence from Beijing.” Journal of Urban Economics, 63: 743-757.
Zheng, Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2013). "Understanding China's Urban Pollution
Dynamics." Journal of Economic Literature 51, no. 3: 731-772.
Zheng, Siqi, Cong Sun, Ye Qi, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2014). The Evolving Geography of
China’s Industrial Production: Implications for Pollution Dynamics and Urban Quality of Life.
Journal of Economic Surveys, 28(4); 709-724.

98

Zheng, Siqi, Rui Wang, Edward L. Glaeser, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2011). "The greenness of
China: household carbon dioxide emissions and urban development." Journal of Economic
Geography. 11(5) 761-792.
Zheng, Siqi, Jing Wu, Matthew E. Kahn, and Yongheng Deng. (2012). "The nascent market for
“green” real estate in Beijing." European Economic Review 56, no. 5: 974-984.
Zhou, Ying, Jonathan I. Levy, John S. Evans, and James K. Hammitt. (2006). "The influence of
geographic location on population exposure to emissions from power plants throughout
China." Environment International 32, no. 3: 365-373.

99

1900 Population CDF

2010 Population CDF

100

75

50

25

0
0

20

40
February Temperature

60

Figure Two

100

