NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY EFFECTIVENESS IN CHINA:
EVIDENCE FROM A FAVAR MODEL
John Fernald
Mark M. Spiegel
Eric T. Swanson
Working Paper 20518
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20518

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We thank Eric Hsu and Kuni Natsuki for excellent research assistance, and Yin Wong Cheung, Xu
Han, Ryuzo Miyao, Yosuke Takeda, and seminar participants at the Chinese University, Hong Kong
and NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics for helpful discussions, comments, and suggestions.
The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were employees of the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily
reflect those of anyone else affiliated with the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John Fernald, Mark M. Spiegel, and Eric T. Swanson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Effectiveness in China: Evidence from a FAVAR Model
John Fernald, Mark M. Spiegel, and Eric T. Swanson
NBER Working Paper No. 20518
September 2014
JEL No. C38,E43,E52
ABSTRACT
We use a broad set of Chinese economic indicators and a dynamic factor model framework to estimate
Chinese economic activity and inflation as latent variables. We incorporate these latent variables into
a factor-augmented vector autoregression (FAVAR) to estimate the effects of Chinese monetary policy
on the Chinese economy. A FAVAR approach is particularly well-suited to this analysis due to concerns
about Chinese data quality, a lack of a long history for many series, and the rapid institutional and
structural changes that China has undergone. We find that increases in bank reserve requirements reduce
economic activity and inflation, consistent with previous studies. In contrast to much of the literature,
however, we find that central-bank-determined changes in Chinese interest rates also have substantial
impacts on economic activity and inflation, while other measures of changes in credit conditions, such
as shocks to M2 or lending levels, do not once other policy variables are taken into account. Overall,
our results indicate that the monetary policy transmission channels in China have moved closer to
those of Western market economies.

John Fernald
Research Department, Mail Stop 1130
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.fernald@sf.frb.org
Mark M. Spiegel
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
mark.spiegel@sf.frb.org

Eric T. Swanson
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
eric.swanson@uci.edu

1. Introduction
China’s economy has experienced remarkable structural and institutional change in recent
decades. This change may affect the efficacy of counter-cyclical monetary and fiscal policy for
Chinese economic activity and inflation. In this paper, we examine whether or not that is the
case in the context of a factor-augmented vector autoregression, or FAVAR, along the lines of
Bernanke and Boivin (2003) and Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005). Most previous studies
have found that market-based monetary policies, such as interest rates and reserve requirements,
are unimportant in China relative to more direct, blunt credit policies such as “window guidance”
for commercial bank lending levels. In contrast to this literature, we find, using recent data, that
interest rates and reserve requirements are more important than direct quantity measures of
lending (which, on their own, are insignificant). These results suggest that ongoing institutional
changes in China may have led the monetary policy transmission mechanism in that country to
have become more similar to that in the U.S. and other Western market economies (see, e.g.,
Bernanke and Blinder, 1992, and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999).
Studying the monetary transmission mechanism in China raises two interesting
challenges that motivate our approach of using a FAVAR model on relatively recent data. First,
the well-known skepticism about the quality of Chinese data—which even Vice Premier Li
Keqiang famously admitted were unreliable1—makes a FAVAR very appropriate. That is, we
take a broad and expansive approach and use a large number of series associated with Chinese
economic activity and inflation to estimate the true underlying, latent values of these series.
Second, the rapid pace of institutional and structural change in China motivates our focus on the

1

Wikileaks (2007).

1

recent period, which includes both the Great Recession and the ensuing recovery. To the extent
that China’s economy, as well as its policy and banking institutions, have become more marketoriented, it is reasonable to think that the monetary transmission mechanism might have evolved
as well.
In terms of Chinese data, the quality of the reported output figures has long been under
scrutiny (e.g., Holz, 2003, 2008; Nakamura et al., 2014). One approach, which we follow in our
FAVAR model, is to focus on a variety of measures of economic activity. For example, Vice
Premier Li claimed that he looked at several indicators such as electricity production, rail cargo
shipments, and loan disbursements to gauge Chinese economic activity. In a recent study,
Fernald and Spiegel (2013) validate the information content of a range of indicators of Chinese
economic activity relative to an external, independent statistical measure of that activity—
namely, exports to China and Hong Kong, as reported by their major trading partners (the United
States, European Union, and Japan). This measure should be highly correlated with true
economic activity (either through domestic absorption or through re-processing for export), but
is not subject to manipulation or bias by Chinese officials. Fernald and Spiegel report that a
number of the alternative indicators they examine are more informative than is GDP as measures
of economic activity. Moreover, they find that these alternative indicators typically do better in
combination—i.e., taking the first principal component of a set of indicators. They find that a
small set of indicators are particularly informative (electricity usage, new floor space added,
China’s reported exports, and raw materials used), but the more general point is the
informational content of the economic indicators other than GDP.
A FAVAR approach is particularly well suited to examine monetary policy effectiveness
when output and inflation are imperfectly observed, latent variables. Under this approach, one

2

considers a large number of economic indicators to estimate the unobserved latent variables that
drive the systematic components of the economy. This approach also minimizes ad hoc
decisions about which data to include in a VAR and which not. Indeed, even in the U.S. context
with relatively reliable data, Bernanke and Boivin (2003) and Bernanke et al. (2005) note that
series such as output and inflation are not directly observable—there are a variety of measures of
each. They argue that the FAVAR approach leads to better empirical estimates.
Applied to China, the dynamic factor model approach distills a diverse set of economic
indicators into underlying factors representing Chinese economic activity and inflation. The
factor-model logic suggests that such activity and inflation factors are plausibly more accurate
measures of these variables than any individual data series, and therefore may better represent
the information sets relevant for policymakers or used by economic agents to make decisions.
Turning to the monetary transmission mechanism, market-based monetary policy
instruments (such as changes in interest rates) were generally considered inadequate to control
China’s economy in the 1990s. For example, Qin et al. (2005) argue that this inadequacy
reflected the slower pace of reforms in the banking and financial sectors relative to the rest of the
economy. As a result, studies of this period suggest that interest-rate policies pursued by the
Peoples’ Bank of China (PBOC) had little, if any, impact on the real side of the Chinese
economy (e.g., Geiger, 2006; Laurens and Maino, 2007). Instead, policymakers seeking to
control cyclical fluctuations relied on relatively direct credit policies, such as telling banks when
to lend and not to lend. Studies of monetary policies pursued by the PBOC during this period
tend to find that the monetary authority pursued a simple money growth rule, as in the case of
Burdekin and Siklos’ (2008) findings for their 1990-2003 sample period.

3

As the 1990s came to a close, financial liberalization in China appeared to increase the
impact of monetary policy—and interest-rate policies in particular—on the real side of the
Chinese economy (e.g., Dickinson and Liu, 2007). Zhang (2009) demonstrates in a DSGE
model of the modern Chinese economy that an interest rate targeting rule employed by the
PBOC would likely be more effective than a money supply targeting rule in stabilizing China’s
economy. Chen et al. (2011) argue that the effectiveness of non-standard forms of monetary
policy, such as “window guidance” for commercial bank lending levels, are likely to diminish as
financial markets become less distorted. Similarly, Fukumoto et al. (2010) argue that Chinese
window guidance has been successful in the past, but that its success will diminish as the
Chinese financial sector develops, in favor of more standard instruments, such as policy interest
rates. Still, financial liberalization is incomplete in China, with remaining ceilings on bank
deposit rates and floors on lending rates (e.g. Feyzioğlu et al., 2009).
Given this institutional environment, it is an open question how standard China’s
monetary transmission mechanism currently is, where the standard monetary transmission
channel would be exemplified by the findings in Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and Christiano et
al. (1999).2 To investigate this issue, we incorporate our dynamic factor model estimates of
Chinese output and inflation into a standard monetary policy VAR, identified via a recursive
ordering as in the studies above.

2

It is beyond the scope of this paper to analyze the full range of policy tools. Today, Chinese monetary policy
employs multiple instruments and targets (He and Wang, 2012), and the relative importance of these instruments is
unclear. He and Wang (2012) characterize China’s monetary policy framework as a “dual rate system,” where
deposit and lending rates, as well as window guidance targets for lending are set by monetary authorities, while
bond rates are market-determined. They argue that this framework is conducive to continued liberalization of
Chinese financial markets. We also do not discuss optimal policy. Liu and Zhang (2010) demonstrate in a
particular model for China that a hybrid monetary policy that targets both the money supply and the interest rate
would outperform one that targets the interest rate alone.

4

We begin with a simple three-equation FAVAR, comprising an economic activity factor,
an inflation factor, and a (single) monetary policy instrument. In contrast to the previous
literature, we find that increases in PBOC benchmark interest rates have standard impulse
responses—that is, economic activity slows significantly in response to the shock, and inflation
falls. Increases in reserve requirements also slow economic activity significantly. In contrast,
innovations to M2 or lending have modest—and statistically insignificant—effects on output and
inflation.3
These findings are representative of those from larger FAVAR systems as well:
Innovations to interest rates and reserve requirements have economically and statistically
significant effects, while our large standard error estimates for innovations to lending, M2, and
government spending are consistent with no impact.
Of course, lending could still be part of the monetary transmission mechanism, as it is in
standard market-oriented economies such as the U.S. That is, increases in interest rates and (to a
lesser extent) reserve requirements do reduce the pace of growth of lending and monetary
aggregates. The lack of an independent effect of innovations in these aggregates to these
variables is consistent with typical findings for the U.S., where much of the variation in quantity
aggregates reflects idiosyncratic shocks to money demand rather than systematic policy (e.g.,
Bernanke and Blinder, 1992).
Our FAVAR allows us to analyze the role of countercyclical policy during and since the
recent global financial crisis. China’s growth experience during this period was exceptional:

3

We also consider the effects of a fiscal policy instrument—overall government spending—because, to the extent
that Chinese policymakers use multiple levers simultaneously, changes in monetary instruments could have a fiscal
component as well. However, we find that the standard error bands for the effects of government spending are very
large, due the very high month-to-month volatility of that variable.

5

while economic activity in both advanced and emerging economies fell dramatically, China’s
real GDP growth remained robust, averaging 7.4 percent during the period covering the U.S.
recession. (This performance is all the more remarkable given that China’s heavy reliance on
trade might have been expected to make it exceptionally vulnerable to the global downturn.)
Surprisingly, we find that China’s strong performance during the global financial crisis was not
attributable to countercyclical monetary policy pursued by the Chinese government. That is, in
the context of our FAVAR, when we set the interest-rate and reserve-ratio innovations to zero,
China’s economic performance during the crisis would actually have been better. The reason is
timing: China was tightening monetary policy early in 2008. Given the estimated transmission
lags, the contractionary effects of that tightening were hitting the economy in late 2008 and into
2009—exacerbating the effects of the global financial crisis on China.
The paper most closely related to the present one is He, Leung, and Chong (2013), who
also use a FAVAR model to estimate the effects of Chinese monetary policy on the Chinese
economy.4 In contrast to the present paper, those authors treat Chinese output and inflation as
observed variables (measured by industrial production and the consumer price index,
respectively), and use latent factors to capture the effects of other variables on the Chinese
economy, such as other Chinese economic indicators and measures of U.S. output and inflation.
They find that industrial production responds modestly to a shock to either the benchmark
lending rate or “market-based” PBOC policies, but responds strongly to shocks to total lending
or M2. In contrast, we apply a dynamic factor model to Chinese output and inflation as well,
given the widespread concerns about the quality of official Chinese measures of those variables.

4

Lescaroux and Mignon, (2009) also estimate a FAVAR model for China to measure the impact of global oil
shocks on the Chinese economy. They do not examine the effects of monetary policy, but do include M2 as one of
their economic indicator variables.

6

We also perform our analysis on a more recent sample then He et al. (2013), and are thus better
able to study the performance of the Chinese economy during the recent global financial crisis
and recovery.
The remainder of our paper is organized into 6 sections. Section 2 introduces our
FAVAR methodology. Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 presents our main results.
Section 5 conducts a number of robustness checks of those results. Section 6 concludes. An
Appendix provides additional robustness analysis.

2. FAVAR Estimation Method
Economic agents in China and elsewhere look at a wide variety of economic indicators to
synthesize a view of the state of the economy. However, estimating a standard vector
autoregression (VAR) for a large system of variables is infeasible without a very long history of
data. This is particularly problematic for China, due to its combination of limited data
availability and rapid structural transformation. In practice, then, the relatively short samples of
consistent data that we have for Chinese series makes estimation of large VARs either
impossible or highly unreliable due to overparameterization.
In a dynamic factor model, however, a small number of essential factors are extracted
from the set of all observable data—for example, a Chinese “economic activity” factor can be
extracted from data series on industrial production, electricity use, rail cargo shipments, loan
disbursements, international trade data, and so on. By focusing attention on the essential
underlying factor (economic activity), the dimensionality of the model can be greatly reduced,
allowing for estimation of a VAR in the underlying factor.

7

In particular, we assume that our numerous Chinese economic indicators, X t , are
determined by only a small number of underlying factors, Ft , plus idiosyncratic noise,  t ,
according to:
X t  Ft   t

(1)

where t indexes observations, the size of the vector Ft is less than the size of the vector X t , and
the matrix  is called the loadings of the indicators X on the factors F . The idiosyncratic
errors  t may be correlated both across series and across observations t, so long as that
correlation is not “too strong.”5
In a dynamic factor model, the factors F (and data series X ) are related over time,
typically according to a linear process:
Ft  A( L) Ft 1   t

(2)

where A(L) denotes a polynomial in the lag operator. Dynamic factor models date back to papers
by Geweke (1977) and Sims and Sargent (1977). They have enjoyed a great resurgence of
interest since Stock and Watson (1998, 1999), and Forni et al. (2000), building on previous work
by Connor and Korajczyk (1986), showed how these models can be efficiently applied to large
panels of macroeconomic time series.

5
For details, see Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983) and Stock and Watson (2000). In the classical literature on
factor analysis, the idiosyncratic errors ε are assumed to be uncorrelated across series and over time. This led
Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983) to coin the term “approximate factor model” to refer to the more general case
considered here. Consistent with the modern literature, we use the term “factor model” to refer to the more general
case.

8

A factor-augmented VAR, or FAVAR, is a VAR in which some of the variables are
factors taken from a dynamic factor model:

 Ft 
 Ft 1 
Y   A( L) Y    t
 t
 t 1 

(3)

where Yt denotes a vector of observable variables and Ft a vector of factors as above. Thus, a
FAVAR differs from a dynamic factor model in two main respects: First, some of the factors are
assumed to be directly observed, while in a dynamic factor model this is generally not the case.6
Second, in a FAVAR, the econometrician is typically interested in identification of the FAVAR,
rather than just forecasting. Thus, the key objects of interest in a FAVAR are typically impulse
response functions or variance decompositions, rather than just forecasts.
Following Stock and Watson (1998, 1999), we use principal components to estimate the
factors Ft in the dynamic factor model (1). This method is numerically robust and
computationally efficient, and is econometrically consistent for the latent factors F under the
standard technical conditions discussed in Stock and Watson (1998, 1999). In contrast to Stock
and Watson, but consistent with some other studies in the literature (e.g., Ang and Piazzesi,
2003), we divide our economic indicators into two groups—one containing measures of output
and the other containing measures of inflation—and extract the first principal component from

6
Bernanke and Boivin’s (2003) preferred specification for U.S. data is to treat the federal funds rate as the
observed variable in the model, but they also consider specifications in which output and/or inflation are also
observed. For China, He et al. (2013) assume that industrial production and the CPI are observable variables. Given
the questions that have been raised about the quality of Chinese data, we prefer to treat IP and the CPI as noisy
indicators of the underlying latent activity and inflation factors.

9

each group to get our measures of an “output” factor and an “inflation” factor.7 This approach
aids intuition by ensuring that each factor has a clear economic interpretation.8
Given that many Chinese series have short histories or periods of missing data, our
treatment of missing data is of central importance. We first estimate the latent factors F and
factor loadings  from the data X using only those months for which we have data on all series,
say from some date t0 to the end of our sample T . We next impute values for any data that are
missing in month t0  1 . We infer the values of the latent factors Ft0 1 using the data that are
observed in month t0  1 together with the factor loadings  and variances of the idiosyncratic
errors  and  . Once we have imputed values for the missing data in month t0  1 , we
reestimate the factor loadings Λ and latent factors F over the sample from t0  1 to T . We
iterate this process backward, month by month, until we have imputed missing values for all
series in all months t. This is essentially the same procedure as advocated by Stock and Watson
(1998) for dealing with missing data.
As we demonstrate below, our estimate of Chinese economic activity captures well the
broad macroeconomic movements in China, particularly the impact of the global financial crisis
and the subsequent recovery from that period. Following Bernanke and Boivin (2003) and
Bernanke et al. (2005), we then incorporate our estimate of Chinese economic activity into a

7

We also considered a specification with two output factors, measured as the first and second principal
components of the economic activity indicators, and an inflation factor measured in the same way as above. The
variance shares of the output factors were about 16% and 12%, respectively. While the second factor’s variance was
non-trivial, the impulse response functions for the extended six-variable FAVAR were quite similar to that reported
for our baseline five-variable FAVAR below. We thus use a single output factor for our baseline specification in the
interest of parsimony.
8

In the robustness analysis of Section 5, we consider the alternative approach of extracting two factors from all of
the data collected into a single group.

10

VAR. We can then apply standard VAR methods to estimate and identify the effects of Chinese
monetary policy on the economy.
An important question is how we identify the monetary policy instrument and monetary
policy shocks. For equation (3), we treat the policy variables as observables, i.e., the elements of
Y. We then assume a typical recursive ordering, with the economic activity and inflation factors
ordered first, followed by the policy variables—i.e., we assume that policy can respond
endogenously to changes in activity or inflation within the month, but that policy innovations
affect economic activity and inflation with a lag of one month or more.

3. Data
We start our sample in January 2000 and end in September 2013. Because of rapid
institutional and structural change in China, data from the 1990s is arguably not very informative
about the current workings of monetary policy, a view that is supported by He et al. (2013), who
identify a structural break in the relationships among Chinese data in 2002. Importantly, our
sample period covers the sharp downturn during the global financial crisis as well as China’s
rapid subsequent recovery.
Note that some of the most important series that one might want to include in a set of
measures of economic activity, such as the PMI manufacturing index, are only available for
China beginning relatively recently, in 2005. This highlights the usefulness of our FAVAR
methodology for China, which allows the inclusion of variables that have missing values over
some portion of our sample.9

9

Although our FAVAR model is designed to fill in missing variables, the lack of continuity in the data is also a
reason for focusing on the more recent period rather than extending back to the 1990s. In particular, if most of the
variables are missing, it is unclear how comparable the estimated factors are over time.

11

The Chinese New Year raises a particular challenge. This holiday has a major effect on
monthly economic activity, but sometimes falls in January, sometimes in February, and
sometimes crosses both months. We address this issue for each individual economic activity and
inflation variable xit by first averaging the values of the series for January and February. We
then distribute that average value across the two months assuming that the growth rate from
December to January equals the growth rate from January to February. This assumption
addresses the large swings in economic activity that appear in our data for these two months, but
also implies that we are not getting any identification from those two months considered
separately.
After removing the effects of the Chinese New Year, we use the Census X-12 ARIMA
package to seasonally adjust the raw levels of each individual variable.10 We then take monthto-month growth rates (calculated as 100 times the log-change) of each series and, following
Stock and Watson (2012), remove a local mean from each series via a biweight filter. We then
apply the factor-model methodology as described above to the seasonally-adjusted monthly
growth rates in order to extract the activity and price factors.
A list of all the variables included in our study is provided in Table 1 (all variables were
downloaded from the CEIC Asia Database). As in Ang and Piazzesi (2003), we divide the data
series into two categories, economic activity and inflation, on a priori grounds. For economic
activity, our baseline specification includes a broad set of 29 different indicators that we expect
to be correlated with Chinese output. As a robustness check, we also consider a “narrow” set of
indicators for economic activity based on the work of Fernald and Spiegel (2013). Those authors

10

In principle, the X-12 package can be used to adjust for moving holidays or other calendar effects such as
Chinese New Year. However, those adjustments require imposing a fair degree of judgment about the impact of
these calendar effects that is beyond the scope of this paper.

12

validate potential indicators of Chinese economic activity against an independent statistical
measure of that activity, namely, exports to China and Hong Kong as reported by their major
trading partners (namely, the United States, European Union, and Japan). Fernald and Spiegel
argue for taking the first principal component of electricity usage, new floor space added,
China’s reported exports, and raw materials used. We use this narrower set of indicators
(excluding raw materials, which is only available quarterly) as a check on the results of our more
comprehensive factor model using all 29 economic activity indicators.11
For inflation, we have a smaller set of available economic indicators, comprising four
measures of consumer prices and two of producer prices.
The top panel of Figure 1 presents estimates of the latent Chinese economic activity
factor generated by the broad and narrow data sets, along with Chinese industrial production (IP)
for comparison. In the figure, it can be seen that the estimates of economic activity are highly
correlated, both with each other and with the IP series. This is fairly reassuring, since these
series are intended to capture essentially the same latent variable. The narrow economic activity
factor appears to have more high-frequency noise and volatility than the broad factor, and IP
seems to be somewhat noisier and more volatile than both of the latent factors, consistent with
the view that adding more indicators improves our estimate of the true underlying state of
economic activity in China. Our economic activity estimates also capture well the slowdown in
China during the global financial crisis, and the country’s subsequent recovery. It is apparent
that while China weathered the economic downturn better than most, it also was heavily hit by

11
Boivin and Ng (2006) demonstrate that adding more data to a dynamic factor model can, in principle, have the
perverse effect of reducing forecast quality if the idiosyncratic errors of the factors are highly cross-correlated or if a
factor with substantial forecasting power is dominant in a small dataset but is a dominated factor in a larger dataset.
By considering a “narrow” as well as “broad” data set for our dynamic factor model, we make our analysis more
robust to this potential problem.

13

the global downturn. Finally, Figure 1A suggests that our methodology for filling in missing
data does not distort our estimate of economic activity, since our narrow factor is based on
indicators for which we have a complete history of data over our sample.12
The bottom panel of Figure 1 reports our estimated inflation factor. Again, our series
appears to be picking up the effects of the crisis well, including both the downturn in prices
during the crisis and the subsequent pickup in Chinese inflation during the recovery. As in the
case of the economic activity series, the data clearly demonstrate a strong impact from the crisis
on Chinese prices.
For monetary policy, we consider five observable measures, reported at the bottom of
Table 1: a benchmark short-term (less than 20-day) interest rate set by the PBOC; a longer-term
rate (6 months or less) for loans from the PBOC; the reserve requirement ratio; the money
supply, as measured by M2; and the quantity of bank lending. The bank lending variable should,
in principle, capture changes in window guidance, the Chinese government’s well-documented
policy of manipulating credit conditions through direct instructions to banks concerning whether
to increase or decrease their lending activity.13 Interest rates and reserve requirements are in
units of percentage points, and we do not seasonally adjust them. M2 and bank lending are in
units of seasonally-adjusted month-to-month growth rates.14 As with the individual data series,

12

We also experimented with estimating an economic factor directly on 12-month changes in the data, rather than
on month-to-month changes. The correlation of the resulting narrow and broad factors was 0.88. Clearly, there is
much more noise in the month-to-month estimates, especially with the narrow measures. That said, the year-overyear indicators would not be appropriate given the “ordering” identification in our VAR.
13

While we do not explicitly account for sterilization activity, our measure of M2 should also reflect central bank
sterilization decisions through the central bank’s budget constraint, as in Chang et al. (2012).
14
We do not account for some of the policies that have been pursued by Chinese authorities. For example, the
PBOC on several occasions took regulatory steps which appeared to curb activity in the “shadow” banking system
of China. It would be difficult for us to characterize the magnitudes of these policy actions. Of course, if these
actions are correlated with other, observed, policy moves, the VAR may pick them up.

14

we remove a local mean from each of these policy variables (other than the interest rates,
although that didn’t matter) using a biweight filter.15
Finally, we also consider a measure of fiscal policy—the seasonally-adjusted month-tomonth growth rate of government spending, which includes both central and local government
spending—because, to the extent that Chinese policymakers use multiple levers simultaneously,
changes in monetary instruments could have a fiscal component as well.16

4. Results
We begin by considering simple three-variable VAR systems, with the economic activity
factor, inflation factor, and each policy variable individually. All of our main empirical results
come through in this simple specification. We then consider the policy variables in combination,
but our main conclusions that policy interest rates and reserve requirements matter—while M2
and lending have modest or no effects—remain robust. In all cases, we estimate our model with
two monthly lags for each of the variables, in accordance with the AIC and BIC lag-selection
criteria.17
Figure 2 reports results using the broad economic activity factor. Each row of Figure 2
corresponds to a different three-variable VAR, including a different monetary policy instrument.
Each row of the figure graphs the impulse responses of the economic activity and inflation

15

Results were not much affected by the filtering. The exception was for the reserve requirement, where the raw
data show a marked rise starting in 2007, with a modest dip down decline during the financial crisis, and then a
further rise. Without filtering, this trend shows up as an effect that is larger and a priori too persistent, relative to
what we report. This example highlights some of the caveats around any VAR using a short sample of data.
16

We also considered the overall fiscal surplus as a measure of fiscal policy. This variable was also insignificant
in its impact on our activity series. However, we prefer the government spending variable as it appears to be much
less noisy from month to month.
17

Depending on the model, the criteria typically choose between one and three lags. Results are robust to
allowing for three lags. Allowing more lags inherently leads to choppier and less precise results, given the relatively
short sample we use and the explosion in the number of parameters. He et al. (2013) also use two lags.

15

factors to a one-standard-deviation shock to the corresponding monetary policy instrument,
assuming a recursive ordering for the variables in which the monetary policy instrument is
positioned last (so that monetary policy can respond within the month to output and inflation, but
neither output nor inflation responds within the month to monetary policy). We concentrate on
the responses of the factors themselves, rather than the observable economic indicators, as those
may be subject to misreporting or bad measurement (e.g., Fernald et al., 2013). In all cases, we
plot cumulated impulse responses (with one-standard-deviation standard error bands); since the
activity and inflation factors correspond to growth rates rather than levels, the cumulated
responses tell us how the levels of activity and prices respond to a given policy innovation.
The top row shows our main result: In response to a positive shock to the PBOC shortterm interest rate, both activity and (with a lag) prices fall significantly over the next two years.
These responses are in line with standard intuition and results for the effects of monetary policy
in market-oriented economies such as the U.S. (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999).
In contrast, most studies of China do not find that market-based policy instruments are
statistically significant (e.g., He et al., 2013). We explore the robustness of this result further
below.18
The second row of Figure 2 shows that an increase in the required reserve ratio also
reduces economic activity and prices significantly.
Interestingly, rows three and four show that innovation to monetary aggregates (M2) and
bank lending have a positive effect on economic activity and prices, as one would expect, but
these responses are not statistically significant, differing from zero by only about one standard

18

We also looked at the response to innovations in the PBOC rate for loans up to six months as the monetary
policy instrument and obtained results that were qualitatively similar.

16

error. Our FAVAR model thus suggests that movements in monetary aggregates and window
guidance in the form of quantitative targets for lending may not, in fact, be important channels
for monetary policy over this period. Indeed, the lack of a substantive effect of innovations in
M2 or bank lending on activity and inflation is consistent with typical findings for the U.S.,
where much of the variation in quantity aggregates reflects idiosyncratic shocks to money
demand rather than fundamental changes in monetary policy (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder, 1992).
These simple results contrast with those of He et al. (2013), who find that economic
activity is substantively positively affected by increases in credit availability, as measured by the
volume of bank lending. Those authors also do not find a role for PBOC interest rates.19 We
discuss some reasons for the differences between their results and ours below.
Finally, the bottom row of Figure 2 shows that government expenditures also have a
small but insignificant positive effect on economic activity and prices. We note, however, that
the monthly government spending data appears to be very noisy and may not be a good measure
of the true stance of fiscal policy. As such, we view the inclusion of government expenditures in
our specification as primarily a vehicle to enhance our ability to gauge the impact of different
monetary policy instruments by allowing for fiscal effects.20
Figure 3 reports analogous results using the narrow economic activity factor rather than
the one estimated using the broader set of indicators. Results for interest rates are qualitatively
similar, though less statistically significant, which we attribute to the fact that the narrow

19

Ju et al. (2013) also find a role for monetary policy to influence Chinese trade activity through its influence on
the credit channel in a micro study.
20

We also examined government spending shocks in a five-variable specification with reserve requirements and
the benchmark interest rate added. Fiscal policy consistently failed to have a significant impact on the economic
activity or price factors, regardless of the ordering of the fiscal policy shock within the system.

17

economic activity factor seems to be less precisely estimated than the broad factor, owing to the
smaller number of indicators used. In particular, the policy innovations that displayed tenuous
significance using the broad activity factor—M2, bank lending and government spending—are
now often inside the one-standard-error bands. Among these, only bank lending retains even its
marginally significant positive impact on economic activity, while none of the three have a
noticeable (or statistically significant) impact on prices. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that a
much noisier, but externally verifiable, measure of economic activity yields qualitatively similar
results for the policy variables that seem to matter the most, namely interest rates and reserve
requirements.
Figures 4 and 5 report results for larger, five-variable FAVAR systems. In terms of
recursive ordering, both systems include the broad economic activity factor and inflation factor
as the first two variables, and the required reserve ratio and short-term interest rate as the last two
variables.21 The third variable in each of the figures differs—Figure 4 uses M2, and Figure 5 the
quantity of bank lending. The ordering assumptions imply that the reserve ratio or the short-term
interest rate can respond within the month to changes in M2, or bank lending, or government
spending, but that those variables do not respond within the month to the reserve ratio or the
overnight interest rate.22 (That said, putting M2 or lending last in the VAR doesn’t affect our
results much.)

21

We focus on the short-term interest rate because it was so similar to results with the six-month rate.

22
We do not have a strong view as to whether output or inflation should be ordered before the other in the VAR
(and, in fact, both recursive orderings are suspect). For the impulse responses we are interested in—namely, the
responses to the monetary policy instruments—the relative ordering of output and inflation in the VAR does not
matter, so our results are robust to this choice. However, it should be kept in mind that the impulse responses in the
first two rows of Figures 4 and 5 do depend on the ordering of these two variables.

18

The results from the simple three-variable systems are remarkably robust. Shocks to the
short-term interest rate reduce economic activity and prices, and shocks to the required reserve
ratio also reduce activity. But M2 remains quantitatively unimportant for activity, and both M2
and bank lending exhibit price “puzzles” (responses that seem to have the wrong sign) according
to these models.
Still, the results do show that M2 and lending are not just noise. Both decline (lending
significantly so) when the short-term interest rate rises. This suggests that some of the effect of
the interest rate increases might be working through reduced lending (as one would expect), even
if innovations to lending per se do not appear to matter. This would be in keeping with the
standard monetary transmission mechanism (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder, 1992), as well as some
of the findings in the literature for China (e.g., Ju et al., 2013) that suggest part of the impact of
monetary policy is through its influence on lending and credit.
An interesting question is why we find different results from previous studies, such as He
et al. (2013). Subsequent to identifying a structural break in China’s monetary transmission
mechanism with the launch of its floating exchange rate regime in 2005, those authors find that
industrial production responds modestly to a shock to either the benchmark lending rate or to
their estimate of the stance of “market-based” PBOC policies as a latent variable for their latter
sample period estimated from 2002-2010.23 They generate the market-based policy measure by
choosing 15 policy data series, including interest rate and reserve requirement policies as
indicator variables. In contrast to the market-based policy stance, they find strong responses of
industrial production and prices to shocks to total lending or M2 for this latter period, and

23

Note that their time period roughly corresponds to our 2000-2013 time period, indicating that the move to a
managed exchange rate peg should not pose a structural break problem for our analysis. They identify no impact for
the early period, which runs from 1998-2005.

19

conclude that controlling loan volumes or the money supply is “more effective” than
manipulating market-based monetary instruments in China.
Our paper differs from He et al. (2013) in a number of respects. First, we use more
recent data, with substantively more coverage of the global financial crisis and its aftermath.
Second, we apply the FAVAR framework somewhat differently: while He et al. (2013) treat
industrial production and the consumer price index as observed series, we put little faith in the
reliability of any individual activity or price series and instead rely on the factor model to
characterize Chinese economic activity and inflation; we then examine the response of these
factors to observed movements in policy variables, such as the overnight lending rate or reserve
requirements. Our approach is more in keeping with the standard FAVAR literature (e.g.,
Bernanke et al., 2005), which as discussed above is particularly suited to address the problems
associated with noise in Chinese data and that country’s rapid structural transformation. Third,
our dynamic factor estimation methodology allows us to consider indicator variables with
missing values, which enables us to include a broader set of indicators to characterize economic
activity. This feature is particularly desirable for China, where many important series contain
episodes of missing values or start in the middle of our sample.
We are able to partially replicate previous studies with our model, and several results are
suggestive. First, if we end our sample prior to the failure of Lehman Brothers (when the Great
Recession became Great), then interest rate innovations are unimportant. Thus, including the
Great Recession period is important for our finding that interest rates matter. Even over the
earlier sample, however, we find that M2, bank lending, and government spending remain
unimportant in our VAR. Second, some previous studies do not control for Chinese New Year
the way we do. For example, He et al. (2013) run X-12 on raw monthly growth rates without

20

controlling for the changes in timing of the New Year from one year to the next. When we
follow that approach, we find that M2 and government spending are marginally significantly
expansionary. This result appears to be spurious, being completely a reflection of the systematic,
contemporaneous comovement in economic activity, M2, and government spending around
Chinese New Year. Hence, these results point to the importance of treating the Chinese New
Year carefully—either the way we have in this study, or else modeling the time-varying monthly
seasonal explicitly. Importantly, the interest-rate responses that we estimate are largely
unaffected by whether we control for Chinese New Year or not, perhaps because interest rates do
not show much seasonal variation around the New Year holiday. Finally, given that we find
interest rates and reserve requirements have a significant effect on economic activity and
inflation, an important question is how important are they for the actual observed variation in
activity and prices?
We address this question in two ways. First, variance decompositions (not shown) show
that innovations to interest rates and reserve requirements explain only a modest share of the
variation in economic activity and prices. For example, in the five-variable VAR with M2,
innovations to interest rates and reserve requirements together explain about 20 percent of the
variance in activity and less than 10 percent of the variance in inflation at horizons of 12 or 24
months. Not surprisingly, in a fast-growing, rapidly evolving economy like China’s, nonmonetary factors are much more important in explaining the pace and volatility of growth.
Second, Figure 6 reports counterfactuals for three-variable VAR specifications in which
we include the economic activity factor, inflation factor, and either the benchmark interest rate
(Figure 6A) or reserve requirements (Figure 6B). We examine the counterfactual of how the
economic activity factor would have evolved if we “turned off” the innovations to the short-term

21

interest rate and reserve requirements, respectively. These results show that, during the Great
Recession, monetary policy actually exacerbated the slump in economic activity to some extent.
The reason is intuitive: China tightened monetary policy in early 2008. The contractionary
effects of those policy moves were hitting the economy later in 2008—when the global
economy, and China’s economy with it, were hit by the downturn. This experience illustrates
one of the challenges of countercyclical monetary policy.

5. Robustness
5.1 External shocks
As China is a very open economy with a heavy reliance on imported raw materials,
external shocks are potentially very important. As a robustness check on our above results, we
therefore add a monthly proxy for external output (namely, U.S. industrial production) and an
index of commodity prices. This results in a seven-variable specification, with produces the
impulse response functions shown in Figure 7.24
Our earlier results for the five-variable system are largely robust to the inclusion of these
additional external variables. In particular, we continue to find that an increase in the benchmark
interest rate results in a persistent decline in both economic activity and inflation. We also
continue to find that an increase in the required reserve ratio results in a persistent decline in
economic activity and inflation, the latter with a lag. We also continue to not find a significant
role for money supply (M2) shocks.

24

To treat the external shocks as contemporaneously exogenous, we order our seven-variable specification with
the U.S. industrial production variable first, the commodity shock series second, and series three through seven
following the same order as the five-variable series reported in Figure 4, above.

22

In terms of the effects of external shocks on the Chinese economy, we largely obtain
expected results as well. A positive shock to U.S. industrial production results in a persistent
increase in both economic activity and Chinese inflation, again, the latter with a lag. We do get a
positive short-term relationship between positive commodity price shocks and economic activity,
but that is likely spurious as we also find a positive relationship between U.S. industrial
production and commodity prices. U.S. industrial production is likely to be a noisy indicator for
overall global activity outside China, which may push up both commodity prices and Chinese
economic activity. We do find that a positive commodity price shock pushes up Chinese
inflation initially, as would be expected.
5.2 Pooled factor data
Our specifications follow Ang and Piazzesi (2003) and others in categorizing indicator
variables as being associated with either economic activity or inflation. An alternative approach,
followed by Bernanke et al. (2003), is to pool all of the observable indicator variables and
estimate the latent factors of the model directly on this single set of indicators.
An advantage of this latter method for the present paper is that our inflation factor is
based on a relatively small number of Chinese inflation indicators that are available at a monthly
frequency for a sufficiently long time period. The six inflation indicators that we do use could be
insufficient for obtaining good estimates of true Chinese inflation (but would nevertheless be
better than using any single indicator such as the CPI!). As a robustness check, we thus reestimate our baseline specification using all 34 of indicator variables to estimate two latent
factors without any category restrictions. As shown in Figure 8a, the first estimated factor from
this procedure matches the economic activity factor from our baseline specification extremely
closely. Similarly, Figure 8b shows that the second fitted factor also matches the inflation factor
23

from our baseline specification very closely. The correlation coefficient between the first factor
and the activity factor estimated above was 0.89, while the correlation coefficient between the
second factor and the above price factor was 0.29. Nevertheless, as shown in Appendix Figure
A1, the impulse response functions with these factors substituted for the activity and price
factors in the five-variable specification in Figure 4 look quite similar to those in that figure. In
particular, we continue to find that a positive shock to the domestic interest rate has a persistent
negative impact on the first factor and also on the second factor, the latter with a lag.

6. Conclusions
This paper uses a FAVAR methodology to assess the impact of Chinese monetary policy.
A FAVAR approach appears to be particularly well suited to the Chinese economy, both due to
its relatively short span of quality data available and to the likely fact that Chinese economic
conditions and policy rules have changed dramatically over recent years. Our FAVAR approach
accommodates data with different starting dates, and therefore allows for a broad set of indicator
variables. Moreover, the FAVAR representation allows for the incorporation of many activity
and price indicator variables while retaining a parsimonious VAR specification to assess policy
impacts. Again, this is particularly promising for China, as the time series available for analysis
are relatively short while the data are likely to be noisy and therefore benefit from our broad set
of indicator variables.
Our results suggest that, contrary to earlier findings in the literature, China’s monetary
transmission mechanism is beginning to look more standard. In particular, we identify a
substantive role for interest rate policies in the determination of both real economic activity and
prices. The latter occurs with a lag. While these results contrast with earlier studies of the
Chinese economy, they are directly consistent with a number of studies in the literature for the
24

U.S., suggesting that China’s idiosyncratic monetary transmission mechanisms may be a
function of distortions to the Chinese economy, particularly in the Chinese commercial banking
system. These studies predict that, as these distortions diminish, the standard monetary policy
instruments are likely to gain importance in the monetary transmission mechanism and
consequently, in Chinese monetary policy.
An important caveat is that our monetary policy FAVAR analysis does not tell us
whether the channels of the monetary transmission mechanism are the same in China as in
Western economies. The VAR itself simply tells us about timing. That is, the VAR finds that
changes in interest rates that cannot be predicted based on current as well as lagged activity and
inflation are associated with later contractions in activity and prices. The mechanisms at work in
Western economies are that changes in central bank policy rates lead to changes in other market
interest rates as well as broader financial conditions. These changes, in turn, affect the economic
decisions of various agents in the economy. Further research is needed to assess the degree to
which these channels of monetary transmission are the same in China.
Of course, China’s economy is far from fully liberalized, and more non-standard Chinese
monetary policies—such as window guidance to Chinese commercial banks—are likely to
continue to play a role in its monetary policy going forward. Still, our results indicate that the
liberalization of China’s economy to date, particularly in its financial sector, has left that
country’s monetary transmission mechanism closer to those of Western economies than
previously realized.

25

References
Ang, Andrew and Monika Piazzesi (2003), “A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term
structure dynamics with macroeconomic and latent variables,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 50(4), 745-787.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Alan S. Blinder (1992), “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review 82(4), 901-921.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Jean Boivin (2003), “Monetary policy in a data-rich environment,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 525-546.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring the Effects of Monetary
Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120(1), 387-422.
Boivin, Jean and Serena Ng (2006), “Are More Data Always Better for Factor Analysis?,”
Journal of Econometrics 132, 169-194.
Burdekin, Richard C. K. and Pierre L. Siklos (2008), “What Has Driven Chinese Monetary
Policy Since 1990? Investigating the People’s Bank’s Policy Rule,” Journal of
International Money and Finance 27, 847-859.
Chamberlain, Gary and Michael Rothschild (1983), “Arbitrage, Factor Structure, and MeanVariance Analysis in Large Asset Markets,” Econometrica 51, 1305-1324.
Chang, Chun, Zheng Liu, and Mark M. Spiegel (2013), “Capital Controls and Optimal Chinese
Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-13.
Chen, Hongyi, Qianying Chen and Stefan Gerlach (2011), “The Implementation of Monetary
Policy in China: the Interbank Market and Bank Lending,” HKIMR Working Paper
26/2011.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii (2010), “China’s Current Account and the
Exchange Rate,” in R. C. Feenstra and S. J. Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in World
Trade, Chapter 7, NBER, University of Chicago Press, 231-271.
Connor, Gregory and Robert Korajczyk (1986), “Performance Measurement with the Arbitrage
Pricing Theory: A New Framework for Analysis,” Journal of Financial Econometrics
15, 373-94.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1999), “Monetary Policy Shocks:
What Have We Learned and to What End?” in Handbook of Monetary Economics 1A, ed.
by John Taylor and Michael Woodford, Elsevier, 65-148.
Dickinson, David, and Jia Liu (2007), “The real effects of monetary policy in China: An
empirical analysis,” China Economic Review 18, 87-111.
Fernald, John, and Mark Spiegel (2013), “Is China Fudging Its Figures? Evidence from Trading
Partner Data,” unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Forni, Mario, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2000), “The Generalized
Dynamic Factor Model: Identification and Estimation,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 82, 540-54.
26

Fukumoto, Tomoyuki, Masato Higashi, Yasanuri Inamura, and Takeshi Kimura (2010),
“Effectiveness of Window Guidance and Financial Environment In Light of Japan’s
Experience of Financial Liberalization and a Bubble Economy,” Bank of Japan Review
2010-E-4.
Feyzioğlu, Tarhan, Nathan Porter, and Előd Takáts (2009), “Interest Rate Liberalization in
China,” IMF Working Paper WP/09/171.
Geiger, M. (2006), "Monetary Policy in China (1994-2004): Targets, Instruments and Their
Effectiveness," Wurzburg Economic Papers 68.
Geweke, John (1977), “The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series,” in Aigner, D.J.
and A.S. Goldberger (eds.), Latent Variables in Socio-Economic Models (North Holland:
Amsterdam) Ch. 19.
He, Dong, and Honglin Wang (2012), “Dual-Track Interest Rates and the Conduct of Monetary
Policy in China,” China Economic Review 23, 928-947.
He, Qing, Pak-Ho Leung, and Terence Tai-Leing Chong (2013), “Factor-Augmented VAR
Analysis of the Monetary Policy in China,” China Economic Review 25, 88-104.
Holz, Carsten A. (2003), “‘Fast, Clear and Accurate:’ How Reliable Are Chinese Output and
Economic Growth Statistics?” The China Quarterly 173, March, 122-63.
Holz, Carsten A. (2008), “China's 2004 Economic Census and 2006 Benchmark Revision of
GDP Statistics: More Questions than Answers?” The China Quarterly 193, March, 150163.
Ju, Jiandong, Shu Lin, and Shang-jin Wei (2013), “Monetary Policy, Credit Constraints, and
Firm Exports: Evidence from China,” unpublished manuscript, Columbia Business
School.
Laurens, Bernard J. and Rodolfo Maino (2007), “China: Strengthening Monetary Policy
Implementation,” IMF Working Paper 07/14.
Lescaroux, François and Valérie Mignon (2009), “Measuring the Effects of Oil Prices on
China’s Economy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive Approach,” Pacific
Economic Review 14(3), 410-425.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, and Miao Liu (2014), “Are Chinese Growth and Inflation Too
Smooth?” NBER Working Paper 19893.
Qin, Duo, Pilipinas Quising, Xinhua He, and Shigou Liu (2005), “Modeling Monetary Policy
Transmission and Policy in China,” Journal of Policy Modeling 27, 157-175.
Sargent, Thomas and Christopher Sims (1977), “Business Cycle Modeling without Pretending to
have Too Much A Priori Economic Theory,” in Sims, C. et al. (eds.), New Methods in
Business Cycle Research (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis: Minneapolis).
Stock, James and Mark Watson (1998), “Diffusion Indexes,” NBER Working Paper 6702.
Stock, James and Mark Watson (1999), “Forecasting Inflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics
44, 293-335.
Stock, James and Mark Watson (2002), “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20, 147-62.
27

Stock, James and Mark Watson (2012). “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009
Recession.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 81-135.
Sun, Lixin, J. L. Ford, and David G. Dickinson (2010), “Bank Loans and the Effects of Monetary
Policy in China: VAR/VECM Approach,” China Economic Review 21, 65-97.
Wikileaks (2007). http://wikileaks.org/cable/2007/03/07BEIJING1760.html.
Zhang, Wenlang (2009), “China’s Monetary Policy: Quantity Versus Price Rules,” Journal of
Macroeconomics 31, 473-484.

28

Table 1: Data summary
Data series
Broad
Economic
Activity
Factor

Narrow
Economic

First
observation
2005m12

Last
observation
2012m12

Consumer Confidence Index
Exports
Trade Balance
Import sitc: MF: Petroleum, Petroleum Pdt
& Related Material
Foreign Reserve
FX Rate: PBOC: Month End: RMB to USD
Fixed Asset Investment
FAI:: New Construction
FAI:: Equipment Purchase
PMI: Non Mfg: Business Activity
Index: Shanghai Stock Exchange: Composite
Index: Shenzhen Stock Exchange:
Composite
Index: Shanghai Shenzhen 300 Index
PE Ratio: Shanghai SE: All Share
PE Ratio: Shenzhen SE: All Share
Real Estate Climate Index (RECI)
Electricity consumption
Electricity production
Rail freight traffic
Real Estate Investment: Residential Building
Crude steel production
Trucks sales
Purchasing Managers' Index
PMI: Mfg: New Export Order
Consumer Expectation Index
Floor Space Started: Commodity Building
Retail Sales of Consumer Goods
Industrial production
Gas consumption index

1990m1
1992m1
1992m1
1994m1

2013m9
2013m10
2013m10
2013m9

1989m1
1994m1
1994m1
1999m8
2004m1
2007m1
1990m12
1991m4

2013m9
2013m10
2013m10
2013m10
2013m10
2013m10
2013m10
2013m10

2005m4
1996m8
1994m1
2004m1
2002m12
1996m1
1998m8
1995m12
2001m1
2005m1
2005m1
2005m1
1990m1
1995m12
1990m1
1995m1
2003m1

2013m10
2013m10
2013m10
2013m10
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m9
2013m3

Exports

1992m1

2013m10

# employees: industrial enterprise

29

Activity
Factor

Price
Factor

Policy
Variables

Other

Electricity production
Floor Space Started: Commodity Building

1996m1
1995m12

2013m9
2013m9

Consumer Price Index

1995m1

2013m10

CPI Core (excl. Food & Energy)
CPI Food
Consumer Price Index: 36 City

2006m1
1995m1
2002m1

2013m10
2013m10
2013m9

Govt Expenditure

1995m1

2013m9

Money Supply M2
Required Reserve Ratio
Central Bank Benchmark Interest Rate:
Loans less than 20 days
Loans

1997m1
1985m1
1993m5

2013m10
2013m10
2013m10

1997m1

2013m9

US Industrial production
Commodity prices

1985m1
1991m1

2013m11
2013m12

Note: U.S. Industrial Production and Commodity Prices were downloaded from Haver
Analytics. All other variables were downloaded from the CEIC Asia database.

30

Figure 1a: Broad and Narrow Economic Activity Factors. The figure shows the economic
activity factors extracted from broad and narrow sets of economic indicators. The solid (red) line
depicts the broad activity factor, dashed (blue) line the narrow activity factor, and dotted (green)
line Chinese industrial production for comparison. For all series, we took the twelve-month
moving average and then normalized to mean zero and unit variance.

31

Figure 1b: Inflation Factor. The figure shows twelve-month moving average of the inflation
factor, normalized to mean zero and unit variance.

32

Figure 2: Impulse Responses from Three-Variable VARs (with Broad EA Factor). Note:
Three-Variable VARs (broad economic activity factor, inflation factor, policy variable). Each
row corresponds to a separate three-variable VAR, with the broad economic activity factor (EA),
inflation factor (PR), and the policy variable shown. The left column shows the impulse
response function of the economic activity factor, and the right column shows the impulse
response of the inflation factor, to a policy innovation. Impulse responses are in logarithmic
percent and are cumulative responses to a one-standard-deviation innovation. Shaded areas
indicate bootstrapped one-standard-error bands around the point estimates. Periods are months.
33

Figure 3: Impulse Responses from Three-Variable VARs (with Narrow EA Factor). ThreeVariable VARs (narrow economic activity factor, inflation factor, policy variable). Each row
corresponds to a separate three-variable VAR, with the narrow economic activity factor (EA),
inflation factor (PR), and the policy variable shown. The left column shows the impulse
response function of the economic activity factor, and the right column shows the impulse
response of the inflation factor, to a policy innovation. Impulse responses are in logarithmic
percent and are cumulative responses to a one-standard-deviation innovation. Shaded areas
indicate bootstrapped one-standard-error bands around the point estimates. Periods are months.
34

Figure 4: Five-Variable FAVAR System (with M2 and Reserves). Five-variable VAR (broad
economic activity factor, inflation factor, M2, required reserves, interest rate). Identification is
recursive, in the order listed. Graphs show cumulative responses to a one-standard-deviation
innovation. Impulse responses for EA, PR, and M2 are in logarithmic percent, ReqResRat and
IntRt20d are in percentage points. Shaded areas indicate bootstrapped one-standard-error bands.
Periods are months.

35

Figure 5: Five-Variable FAVAR System (with Bank Lending and Reserves). Five-variable
VAR (broad economic activity factor, inflation factor, bank lending, required reserves, interest
rate). Identification is recursive, in the order listed. Graphs show cumulative responses to a onestandard-deviation innovation. Impulse responses for EA, PR and Lending are in logarithmic
percent, ReqResRat and IntRt20d are in percentage points. Shaded areas indicate bootstrapped
one-standard-error bands. Periods are months.

36

Figure 6a and Figure 6b: Contribution of Interest Rate (top) and Reserve Requirements
(bottom) to Economic Activity. Contribution of reserve requirements and interest rates to
broad economic activity factor over our sample. The dashed (red) line in each panel depicts the
estimated economic activity factor. The solid (blue) line depicts the counterfactual values from a
three-variable VAR, setting the innovations to the short-term interest rate or reserve
requirements to zero.
37

Figure 7: Seven-Variable FAVAR (with US Industrial Production and Commodity Prices).
Seven-variable VAR (U.S. industrial production, commodity prices, broad economic activity
factor, inflation factor, M2, required reserves, interest rate). Identification is recursive, in the
order listed. Graphs show cumulative responses to a one-standard-deviation innovation.
Impulse responses for IP_US, Commodity, EA, PR, and M2 are in logarithmic percent,
ReqResRat and IntRt20d are in percentage points. Shaded areas indicate bootstrapped onestandard-error bands. Periods are months.

Figure 8a: Output and Inflation Factors Estimated using All Data. The figure shows two
economic activity factors. The solid line represents our baseline economic activity factor. The
dashed (red) line represents the first latent factor where economic activity and price input series
are not separated into two groups.

1

Figure 8b. The figure shows two inflation factors. The solid line represents our baseline inflation
factor. The dashed (red) line represents the second latent factor where economic activity and
price input series are not separated into two groups.

2

Figure A1. Five-Variable System with Factors estimated with all observable non-policy
variables (Factor 1, Factor 2, M2, Required Reserves, Interest Rate). Note that in these graphs,
“EA” refers to Factor 1, and “PR” refers to Factor 2. Graphs show cumulative responses to a
one-standard-deviation innovation. Impulse responses for EA, PR, and M2 are in logarithmic
percent, ReqResRat and IntRt20d are in percentage points. Shaded areas indicate bootstrapped
one-standard-error bands. Periods are months.

3

