                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND SECTORAL PRODUCTIVITY IN THE EUROZONE

                                         Martin Berka
                                      Michael B. Devereux
                                         Charles Engel

                                       Working Paper 20510
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20510


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2014




Devereux's research is supported by ESRC Award Number ES/I024174/1 and SSHRC. Engel
acknowledgesresearch support from National Science Foundation grant no. 1226007. The authors
would like to thankdiscussants at the conference on Exchange Rates and External Adjustment, CEPR
and SNB, Zurich,August 2012; the RBNZ; Hitotsubashi University; the conference on Renminbi
and Global Economy,CUHK, May 2013; the 5th Bi-Annual Bank of Canada/ECB conference on
'Exchange Rates: A GlobalPerspective', ECB, Frankfurt, June 2013; The Bank of Canada Annual
Research Conference, November 2013; the Bank of France; UC Irvine; Penn State University;
University of Kyoto; the Missouri Economics Conference, March 2014; the ABFER Conference,
Singapore 2014; the Sheffield Workshop in Macroeconomics, May 2014; and the XXIX Annual
Economic Meeting, Central Bank of Uruguay, August 2014. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Martin Berka, Michael B. Devereux, and Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real Exchange Rates and Sectoral Productivity in the Eurozone
Martin Berka, Michael B. Devereux, and Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 20510
September 2014
JEL No. F31,F41

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the link between real exchange rates and sectoral total factor productivity measures
for countries in the Eurozone. Real exchange rate patterns closely accord with an amended Balassa-
Samuelson interpretation, both in cross-section and time series. We construct a sticky price dynamic
general equilibrium model to generate a cross-section and time series of real exchange rates that can
be directly compared to the data. Under the assumption of a common currency, estimates from simulated
regressions are very similar to the empirical estimates for the Eurozone. Our findings contrast with
previous studies that have found little relationship between productivity levels and the real exchange
rate among high-income countries, but those studies have included country pairs which have a floating
nominal exchange rate.


Martin Berka                                      Charles Engel
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Auckland                            University of Wisconsin
Private Bag 92019                                 1180 Observatory Drive
Auckland 1142                                     Madison, WI 53706-1393
New Zealand                                       and NBER
and CAMA                                          cengel@ssc.wisc.edu
m.berka@auckland.ac.nz

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Prices of consumer goods differ substantially across countries, and vary considerably
between any two countries over time. In the aggregate, relative goods prices com-
pared across countries are defined as real exchange rates. The central theoretical
framework for interpreting real exchange rates is the Balassa-Samuelson model, in
which persistent movements in real exchange rates over time and across countries
are driven by cross-country differentials in sectoral total factor productivities. Yet
it is widely acknowledged that the Balassa-Samuelson model does not do well in ex-
plaining real exchange rates (e.g. Chinn and Johnston, 1996, Rogoff, 1996, Tica and
Družić, 2006, Lothian and Taylor, 2008, Chong, Jordà and Taylor, 2012) except over
very long time horizons. In most empirical studies, especially in time series data, the
evidence for the effect of productivity growth on real exchange rates is quite weak.
This problem is especially apparent in the study of real exchange rate movements
among high-income, financially developed countries with floating exchange rates.
    This paper revisits the investigation of real exchange rate determination using a
new data set of European price levels at a disaggregated level. The price data covers
a large group of European countries, it has a very broad coverage, encompassing
almost the whole consumer basket, and it has an extremely high degree of cross-
country comparability. Our sample of European countries allows us to construct a
panel of real exchange rates at the sectoral and aggregate level in a large number
of European countries over the period 1995-2009. Since the data is in levels we can
construct a real exchange rate distribution across countries at any point in time, and
track the movement of this distribution over time.
    Our particular focus is the properties of real exchange rates in the Eurozone, where
bilateral nominal exchange rates are fixed. It is well known from the literature on
open economy macroeconomics that floating nominal exchange rates are influenced
by monetary policy decisions and shocks, financial shocks, and quite possibly also by
non-fundamental shocks. When nominal prices adjust more slowly than the nominal
exchange rate, these shocks also influence the real exchange rate. Our working hy-
pothesis is that the real exchange rate among countries that share a common currency


                                           1
is more fertile ground for finding evidence of the Balassa-Samuelson effect because
the short-run real exchange rate movements are not driven by these monetary and
financial factors that influence nominal exchange rates.
   We combine our panel of real exchange rates with measures of sectoral total fac-
tor productivities for each country, as well as a separate measure of unit labor costs.
We then conduct panel regressions of real exchange rates to explore the link between
the real exchange rates and productivity. Our empirical results indicate that for the
Eurozone countries, there is substantial evidence of an amended Balassa-Samuelson
effect. An increase in total factor productivity in traded goods is associated with a
real appreciation, and an increase in total factor productivity in non-traded goods
correlates with a real depreciation. But these links appear only when we separately
control for unit labor cost differentials across countries. We find that, holding pro-
ductivity constant, higher unit labor costs lead to real exchange rate appreciation.
One interpretation for this phenomenon is that there are separate institutional forces
driving factor prices, independent of factor productivities. In our theoretical model,
we allow for this channel by introducing shocks to labor supply that are unrelated to
productivity.
   The Balassa-Samuelson model must be modified when the exports of a country are
not perfect substitutes for its imports (e.g. Fitzgerald, 2003). We show in a simple
flexible-price model how differences in unit labor costs may influence real exchange
rates both through their effects on the relative prices of non-traded goods and also the
terms of trade. We have noted that the Balassa-Samuelson effect may be difficult to
find when nominal exchange rates are volatile and goods prices are sticky. We proceed
to examine the implications for the Balassa-Samuelson theory when nominal exchange
rates are not volatile, since countries share a common currency, but nominal prices
are sticky. We construct a small dynamic general equilibrium model of real exchange
rates, with sticky prices and monetary policy under fixed exchange rates. We can use
the model to generate a panel of real exchange rate levels and movements over time
which matches the European panel for the Eurozone countries. Using the same cross-
section and time series dimensions as the data, the model is simulated using shocks to
sectoral productivities and labor supply shocks. We find a close relationship between

                                           2
the empirical estimates and the model simulation estimates. Real exchange rates in
the model are driven by an amended Balassa-Samuelson pattern of shocks to sectoral
productivity and unit labor costs, and the simulation estimates are extremely close to
those in the Eurozone data. We find that a sticky price version of the model, where
20% of prices change every quarter, best explains the empirical estimates. Although
a fully flexible price version of our model does quite a good job in explaining the
empirical results, it tends to predict movements in real exchange rates in response
to traded sector productivity and unit labor costs that are too large relative to the
empirical estimates.
       The paper is related to a large literature on the explanation of secular movements
in real exchange rates. A central prediction of many theoretical models (including, but
not restricted to the Balassa-Samuelson model) is that the cross-country distribution
of real exchange rates should be related to relative GDP per capita. High income
countries should have stronger (more appreciated) real exchange rates. Rogoff (1996),
for example, uses relative GDP per capita as a proxy for the relative productivity in
the traded sector. Rogoff finds in cross-sectional 1990 data that includes poor and rich
countries, a strong relationship between relative GDP per capita and the real exchange
rate.1 However, Rogoff then notes ”. . . whereas the relationship between income and
prices is quite striking over the full data set, it is far less impressive when one looks
either at the rich (industrialized) countries as a group, or at developing countries as
a group”. In particular, among high-income countries with floating exchange rates,
there is little evidence of a relationship between GDP per capita and the real exchange
rate.
       The Balassa-Samuelson theory suggests real exchange rates should be related to
sectoral total factor productivity (TFP) rather than income levels, as in the Ro-
goff study. There are few studies that examine the cross-sectional dimension of the
Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis using sectoral data on TFP, because most TFP data
that is used for cross-country comparisons is in index form and is only useful for look-
   1
    Bergin, Glick, and Taylor (2006) note that this cross-sectional relationship has strengthened
over time, and suggests that the tradability of goods is endogenous and may increase as a sectors
productivity grows.



                                               3
ing at the time-series dimension. The evidence favorable to the Balassa-Samuelson
effect is much weaker in the time-series dimension. A number of studies have looked
at the relationship between productivity and real exchange rates, but in most cases
can report only evidence of a long run relationship such as cointegration. Thus, Chinn
and Johnston (1996) use measures of total factor productivity, and find that when
controlling for other variables such as government expenditure, there is evidence of
cointegration of the real exchange rate and the relative productivity variable for 14
OECD countries.2 Canzoneri, et. al. (1996) find cointegration between relative la-
bor productivities and the real exchange rate for a panel of OECD countries. Lee
and Tang (2007) examine the effect of sectoral productivity growth in a panel of
OECD economies with floating exchange rates, and find conflicting evidence for the
impact of labor productivity as opposed to TFP on the real exchange rate. Their
results provide only mild support for the traditional Balassa-Samuelson mechanism.
Gubler and Sax (2011) find no evidence at all for the Balassa-Samuelson prediction.
They argue that OECD real exchange rates tend to move in the opposite direction
to Balassa-Samuelson in response to sectoral TFP differentials.3
       A notable finding of some of these papers (e.g. De Gregorio et al. (1994), Can-
zoneri et al (1996), Lee and Tang (2007)) is that there is often stronger evidence of
the effect of relative sectoral productivity on internal, within-country relative prices
than can be found in between-country real exchange rates. This may be due to the
presence of nominal exchange rate fluctuations that have little to do with relative
productivity differentials. Again, this suggests to us that a focus on real exchange
rate determination in a sample where nominal exchange rate movement is absent or
minimized may be a fruitful avenue of investigation.
       Two recent studies examine nonlinear convergence models of the real exchange
rate, relating it to relative income per capita. Lothian and Taylor (2008) use 180 years
of data to find a long-run relationship between relative per capita income levels and
   2
     De Gregorio et. al. (1994) use the same TFP data and country coverage as Chinn and Johnston
to examine the dynamics of the prices of nontradable relative to tradable goods.
   3
     Hsieh and Klenow (2007) relate the Balassa-Samuelson model to the well-known finding that
the price of investment goods tends to be higher in poorer countries. Using ICP-Penn World Tables
data they find that poorer countries have lower TFP in the tradable-investment sector than in the
non-tradable consumption sector, leading to lower prices of consumption goods in these countries.


                                               4
real exchange rates among the U.S., U.K. and France. Chong et. al. (2010) examine
the real exchange rates of 21 OECD countries from 1973-2008. That study uses
nonlinear time series techniques to purge real exchange rates of short-run monetary
and financial factors, and then finds a link between relative income per capita levels
and long-run real exchange rates.
   Bordo et. al. (2014) find a long-run relationship between relative income and real
exchange rates in a panel of fourteen countries relative to the U.S. with a sample of
over 100 years of data, allowing for a time trend which they argue captures changing
trade costs. Chen et. al. (2014) document a building block of the Balassa-Samuelson
hypothesis. They find that in the cross section of prices provided in the International
Comparison Project, the relative price of non-traded goods accounts for two-thirds
of the cross-sectional variation in real exchange rates. Choudri and Schembri (2014)
extend the Balassa-Samuelson model to allow for differentiated products in exports,
and then find time-series support for a long-run relationship between sectoral pro-
ductivity and the real exchange rate in accounting for the Canada-U.S. real exchange
rate.
   The channel through which relative productivity levels influence real exchange
rates is their effect on the relative price of non-traded goods. Engel (1999) produces
evidence that little of the variance of changes in U.S. real exchange rates can be
accounted for by the relative price of non-traded goods. Almost all of the variance
arises from movements in the consumer prices of traded goods in the U.S. relative
to other countries. Several studies (e.g., Devereux 1999, Engel, 1999, Burstein et.
al. 2003, 2005, Betts and Kehoe, 2006) suggest that differences in consumer prices of
traded goods across countries may be accounted for by changes in the relative price of
non-traded distribution services, but the evidence for this hypothesis is weak for high-
income countries. However, the seminal paper by Mussa (1986) documents a number
of differences between the behavior of real exchange rates in countries with fixed
nominal exchange rates versus countries that have floating rates. Among these are
the significantly higher volatility of real exchange rates under floating. Our findings
in this paper are striking evidence against nominal exchange regime neutrality (using
Mussas famous phrase.)

                                           5
    As mentioned above, the price level data we use in the paper is unique and of
very high quality. One major advantage of our study, relative to many papers in the
literature, is that the price data has both a broad coverage, governing the complete
consumer basket in the Eurozone countries studied, and has a very high degree of
cross country comparability. In Section 3 of the paper below, as well as an extensive
data Appendix, we describe the construction of the data, and emphasize the extensive
set of procedures that Eurostat follows to ensure that goods in each of the categories
are measuring very similar products across countries.
    The second unique feature of our data is an annual panel of sectoral TFP levels
across nine Eurozone countries. This TFP data allow us to make cross-sectional
comparisons, as well as the time comparisons, across sectors and countries. To our
knowledge, this is the first time that a sectoral TFP panel in levels has been used to
study real exchange rate determination and the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section sets out a basic theoretical
model of real exchange rates with shocks to productivity and labor supply, and derives
a simple analytical example of the link between real exchange rates, productivity,
and unit labor costs. Section 3 outlines our data, and shows some properties of
European real exchange rates for the Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries. This
section also describes the properties of sectoral productivity and unit labor costs
for a restricted sample of countries. We provide empirical estimates of an amended
Balassa-Samuelson relationship for the Eurozone. Section 4 calibrates the theoretical
model, and performs the same regressions on simulated data as were done with the
Eurozone data. Some conclusions follow.


2      Real Exchange Rates in a Theoretical Model
2.1    A Basic New Keynesian model
Our data is a balanced panel of European countries’ real exchange rates. In the
model simulations, we construct a panel of equivalent dimensions. But the theoretical
explication of the model can be developed using the standard two-country DSGE
approach. Let these countries be called ‘Home’ and ‘Foreign’. We primarily present

                                          6
equations for Home. Equations for the Foreign country are symmetric to those for
Home, and Foreign variables are denoted with a *.
       The utility of a representative infinitely lived Home country household evaluated
from date 0 is defined as:

                                 ∞
                                                               !
                                 X          Ct1−σ     N 1+ψ
                       Ut = E0         βt         − Υt t           , β < 1.                      (1)
                                 t=0
                                            1−σ       1+ψ
where Ct in (1) is the composite Home consumption bundle, and Nt is Home labor
supply. We allow that the disutility in labor supply Υt to be time-varying and country-
specific. This plays a role in generating real exchange rate variability across countries
and over time, as described below. The composite consumption good is defined as:
                                                                θ
                                      1− 1               1− 1 θ−1
                                 1                   1
                            Ct = γ θ CT t θ + (1 − γ) θ CN t θ     ,

where CT t and CN t represent, respectively, the composite consumption of traded and
non-traded goods.        The elasticity of substitution between traded and non-traded
goods is θ. Traded consumption in turn is decomposed into consumption of Home
retail goods, and Foreign retail goods, as follows:
                                                                λ
                                       1− 1              1− 1 λ−1
                                  1                  1
                           CT t = ω λ CHt λ + (1 − ω) λ CF t λ     ,

where λ is the elasticity of substitution between the Home and Foreign traded good.
Home households put weight ω on Home consumption goods in their consumption
basket. In the Foreign country, households put weight ω on Foreign consumption
goods. In a perfectly symmetric model, there would be no home bias in consumption
if ω = 1/2, but the stronger the preference of households for the good produced in
their own country, the larger is ω.
       Retail consumption of traded goods requires the use of non-traded goods in order
to facilitate consumption, however.4 This can be rationalized by the argument that
   4
    The importance of distribution costs in real exchange rate determination has been emphasized
in the literature on exchange rate pass-through. See for example Burstein, et al. (2003). Engel
(1999) investigates the link between distribution costs and traded consumer prices in accounting for
real exchange rate volatility. The role of a distribution sector in regards to the predictions of the
Balassa-Samuelson model has been emphasized theoretically by Devereux (1999) and empirically by
Macdonald and Ricci (2005).

                                                 7
there are costs of distribution of traded goods, and these costs must be incurred by
local (i.e. non-traded inputs). Hence, we assume that the production of consumption-
related retail goods in sectors H and F are assembled according to:
                                                                                φ
                                                                               φ−1
                                         1    1− 1                1    1− 1
                      CHt =          κ   φ   IHt φ   + (1 − κ)    φ   VHt φ
                                                                                     φ
                                                                                    φ−1
                                         1    (1− 1 )                 1    1− 1
                      CF t =         κ   φ   IF t φ     + (1 − κ)     φ   VF t φ

where IHt represents inputs of the Home export good into the retail consumption
of that good, and VHt represents input of the Home non-traded good into the retail
consumption of the export good. The elasticity of substitution between non-traded
inputs and the export good itself is φ. Our calibrations in section 4 will set φ to be
fairly low, representing the fact that distribution services are not a good substitute
for the actual consumption good. The notation for the retail consumption of imports
(Foreign goods) is similarly defined.
   The consumption aggregates imply the following price index definitions:
                                                                             1
                           Pt = γPT1−θ          1−θ
                                                                           1−θ
                                    t + (1 − γ)PN t                                ,
                                                          1
                                                         1−λ
                                    1−λ
                         PT t = ω P̃Ht  + (1 − ω)P̃F1−λ
                                                     t        ,

where PT t and PN t represent traded and non-traded price levels, and P̃Ht and P̃F t are
retail prices of consumption of Home and Foreign traded goods. Finally, these retail
prices in turn depend on prices at the dock as well as the non-traded goods price.
Hence:
                                                                                1
                                                                               1−φ
                                       (1−φ)
                        P̃Ht =       κPHt               + (1 −   κ)PN1−φ
                                                                      t
                                                                                1
                                                                               1−φ
                                               (1−φ)
                        P̃F =        κPF t              + (1 − κ)PN1−φ
                                                                    t


   We assume that prices of goods at the dock are equal in the Home and Foreign
countries in the Eurozone, so that:

                                    ∗
                             PHt = PHt ,                    PF t = PF∗ t


                                                        8
The real exchange rate, however, may not be a constant because of prices of non-
traded consumption goods and distribution services are not equalized across the Home
and Foreign countries, and because of the possibility that consumption baskets differ.
We define the real exchange rate as the price of Foreign relative to Home consumption
                                                            Pt∗
                                                    Qt =        .
                                                            Pt
Note that the nominal exchange rate between the Home and Foreign country is fixed
at one because countries in the Eurozone share a common currency.
       We assume that international financial markets are complete. As is well known,
this implies a risk sharing condition given by:
                                                   Ct−σ   Ct∗−σ
                                                        =                                                           (2)
                                                    Pt     Pt∗
       Households choose consumption of individual goods and labor supply in each
sector in the usual way. The implicit labor supply for Home households is given by:

                                              Wt = Υt Pt C σ Ntψ

where Wt is the nominal wage. The demand for traded and non-traded goods is
described as:
                                     −θ                                        −θ
                               PT t                                        PN t
                CT t = γ                    Ct ,      CN t = (1 − γ)                    Ct
                               Pt                                           Pt
Demand for Home and Foreign composite traded Goods is denoted as:
                        !−λ                              !−λ
                   P̃Ht                            P̃F t
          CHt = ω           CT t ,  CF t = (1 − ω)           CT t
                   PT t                            PT t

We can express the individual consumption demand for Home and Foreign traded
goods (net of the distribution services) as
                −φ        !−λ                                  −φ                                !−λ
            PHt        P̃Ht                                 PF t                             P̃F t
 IHt = κω                       CT t ,    IF t = κ(1 − ω)                                                  CT t ,
            P̃Ht       PT t                                 P̃F t                            PT t

       Firms in each sector produce using labor and a fixed capital stock.5 A typical
firm in the non-traded (traded) sector has production function YN t (i) = AN t NN t (i)α ,
   5
   The implications for real exchange rates would not differ materially were we to allow for endoge-
nous capital accumulation.

                                                        9
YHt (i) = AHt NHt (i)α . Thus, there are two technology shocks - shocks to the non-
traded sector AN t , and to the traded sector AHt . In addition to the labor supply
shock Υt , these shocks are the key fundamental driving forces of equilibrium real
exchange rates in the model.
   With perfectly flexible prices, assuming that each firm is a monopolistic competitor
with constant elasticity of substitution between varieties within each sub-sector, a
firm in the Home country would set its price equal to marginal cost, adjusted by a
constant markup. Thus, for the typical non-traded goods firm and a Home traded
goods producing firm, we have, in a flexible price environment:
                                   Wt                              Wt
                     PNf lex
                         t = Ω              ,         f lex
                                                     PHt    =Ω
                                 αAN t Lα−1
                                        Nt                       αAHt Lα−1
                                                                       Ht

where Ω is a constant markup, depending on the elasticity of substitution between
varieties.
   We assume that firms cannot reset prices freely, but rather must follow a Calvo
price adjustment specification where the probability of the firm being allowed to
adjust its price is 1 − ζi , where i = N, F . Home firms use domestic household nominal
marginal utilities as stochastic discount factors. When prices are reset, firms set their
price so that it is equal to a discounted present value of current and anticipated future
fully flexible prices:
                                          P∞           f lex
                                          Et =t ΓN,τ PN τ
                                            τP
                             PN t     =                      ,
                                          Et ∞ τ =t ΓN,τ
                                        Et ∞           f lex
                                          P
                                             =t ΓH,τ PHτ
                                            τP
                             PHt      =
                                          Et ∞ τ =t ΓH,τ

where ΓN,t and ΓH,t represent adjusted stochastic discount factors that incorporate
the Calvo probability of a firm’s price staying constant each period. Foreign firms
price Foreign exports, PF∗ t and Foreign non-traded goods, PN∗ t , analogously.
   The countries of the Eurozone share a common monetary policy. The instrument
of monetary policy is the nominal interest rate, and we assume the central bank
follows an inflation targeting instrument rule. For simplicity, we assume the central
bank targets the inflation rate in the Foreign country:

                                        rt = ρ + σp πt∗                              (3)

                                                10
where πt∗ = p∗t − p∗t−1 is the Foreign inflation rate (and p∗t = log(Pt∗ )).6 In practice,
in simulation results, we find it makes essentially no difference if the central bank
targets the Home inflation rate, the Foreign inflation rate, or an average.
       Finally, goods market clearing conditions are given as:

                                              ∗
                                 YHt = IHt + IHt                                               (4)
                                  YF∗t = IF t + IF∗ t ,
                                 YN t = CN t + VHt + VF t ,
                                 YN∗ t = CN∗ t + VHt
                                                  ∗
                                                     + VF∗t .

Traded goods production must equal demand derived from Home and Foreign con-
sumers’ consumption of retail traded goods. Non-traded goods production is equal to
that accounted for by consumers, and that used in the distribution services of traded
goods, in each country.
       In addition, we must have labor market clearing in each country, so that:

                                       Nt = NN t + NHt                                         (5)

                                       Nt∗ = NN∗ t + NHt
                                                      ∗
                                                                                               (6)

       The definition of equilibrium is standard and we omit it to save space.

2.2       The Real Exchange Rate Decomposition
The real exchange rate in this model is determined both by structural differences
across countries and time-varying shocks specific to individual countries. Thus, our
perspective on real exchange rates requires an analysis of the determinants of both
permanent (or highly persistent) relative price differentials across countries, as well as
the movements over time in the bilateral real exchange rate for any pair of countries.
Following Engel (1999), we can write a log linear approximation of the real exchange
rate in terms of differences in the relative price of non-traded to traded goods across
countries, and differences across countries in the price indexes of traded goods.
   6
    In our empirical work, the Foreign country is the set of 15 members of the European Union,
12 of which are in the Eurozone. The assumption here that the Foreign inflation rate is targeted is
meant to capture the notion that Eurozone inflation is targeted by the European Central Bank.

                                                11
   Omitting time subscripts for ease of notation, we have:

                                   q = (1 − γ)qn + qT                                (7)

where qn ≡ (p∗N − p∗T − (pN − pT )), and qT ≡ p∗T − pT .
   The first expression on the right hand side is the difference across countries in
the relative local currency price of non-traded to traded goods. A rise in the Foreign
relative price, relative to the Home relative price, causes a Home real exchange rate
depreciation. The second expression on the right hand side is the traded goods real
exchange rate at the retail level. But in our model, due to distribution costs in retail,
this should also be affected by the relative price of non-traded goods. To see this, we
may further decompose the second expression as:
                                1−κ
                         qT =       qn + (2ω − 1)τ + p∗H − pH                        (8)
                                 κ
where τ = p∗F − p∗H = pF − pH is the terms of trade of the Home country and
p∗H − pH represents the deviation from the law of one price in Home traded goods.
This expression tells us that the traded goods real exchange rate is driven by a)
differences in relative non-traded goods prices across countries - again a rise in this
relative-relative price will cause a real exchange rate depreciation, b) the terms of
trade, when there is home bias in preferences (i.e. ω > 12 ), and c) deviations from
the law of one price - a higher Foreign price of equivalent goods relative to the Home
price is associated with a real exchange rate depreciation.
   The model of CES demand under monopolistic competition that we outlined above
does not allow for any explicit price-discrimination across countries by producers.
Hence there is no ‘pricing-to-market’ by sellers. Moreover, because our analysis is
restricted to countries within a single currency area, if prices are pre-set, they are
all done so within a single currency. This implies that the ‘law of one price’ must
apply for equivalent goods across countries. Hence PH∗ = PH (and also PF∗ = PF ).
Therefore, our model of the Eurozone allows for real exchange rates to be determined
either by movements across countries in non-traded goods prices, or by variations in
the terms of trade.


                                           12
2.3       Relative Productivity and Real Exchange Rates
The decomposition above tells us what the channels of real exchange determination
will be, but it is silent on the underlying determinants of real exchange rates. Our
empirical investigation goes beyond this and links the real exchange rate to the funda-
mental shocks introduced in the theoretical model. Here we provide a special case of
the model in order to motivate this link. The centrepiece of the mechanism driving the
real exchange rate is the presence of sectoral productivity movements. The Balassa-
Samuelson effect captures the link between relative productivity in traded to non-
traded goods sectors and the real exchange rate. The standard Balassa-Samuelson
mechanism implies that a rise in relative traded goods productivity causes a rise in
the relative price of non-traded to traded goods (when compared across countries),
leading to a real exchange rate appreciation. But when Home and Foreign goods are
not perfect substitutes there is a countervailing effect coming from the endogenous
response of the terms of trade. A rise in relative Home traded goods productivity
would be expected to generate a terms of trade deterioration. Conditional on the
relative price of non-traded goods to domestic goods in each country, the terms of
trade deterioration will lead the real exchange rate to depreciate. In addition, though,
we have introduced a labor supply shock Υ. This will also affect the real exchange
rate in our model. In fact, here we show that these types of shocks are of critical
importance in introducing a separate role for unit labor costs as distinct from sectoral
productivities as drivers of the real exchange rate.7
       To illustrate the argument, we take a special case of the model, where a) ω = 12 ,
so that there is no home bias, b) α = 1, so that output is linear in labor input and
c) ζi = 0, so that all prices are perfectly flexible. As in the previous subsection, take
a log-linear approximation around a symmetric steady state. Without home bias
into retail goods the real exchange rate is just the ratio of non-traded prices across
countries. Hence from (7) and (8) we have:

                                    q = (1 − γκ)(p∗N − pN )                                     (9)
   7
    Much of the discussion of the evolution of real exchange rates in Europe has focused on the role
of unit labor costs. Felipe and Kumar (2011) indeed document that differences in unit labor costs
in the Eurozone are highly correlated with the relative price of output (p∗F − pH above).

                                                13
where the term γκ indicates that non-traded goods prices influence the real exchange
rate both directly, through the price of consumer non-traded goods, and indirectly,
through the distribution cost of traded goods.8
       Now if prices are fully flexible, and output is linear in labor, we have pN = w −aN ,
where w is the log of the Home nominal wage, and aN is the log of Home productivity
in the non-traded sector. Since this holds equally for the Foreign country, the real
exchange rate then becomes:

                             q = (1 − γκ)(w∗ − a∗N − (w − aN ))                                (10)

Note that since labor is mobile across sectors, and profit maximization holds in the
traded goods sector, we must have w∗ − w = p∗F − pH + (aF − aH ). Thus, (10) becomes

                      q = (1 − γκ)(p∗F − pH + (a∗F − aH ) − (a∗N − aN ))                       (11)

This expression separates the real exchange rate into the components driven by rela-
tive non-traded goods productivity, relative traded goods productivity, and the terms
of trade component p∗F − pH . The classical Balassa Samuelson model assumes that
the terms of trade are constant, so the real exchange rate depends only on relative
productivity in the traded and non-traded goods sectors.
       We may substitute out the terms of trade from (11) through the use of relative
unit labor costs. We define unit labor cost for the Home country as the nominal wage
divided by output per worker. Hence we have

         ulc = w − γκ(yH − nH ) − (1 − γκ)(yN − nN ) = w − γκaH − (1 − γκ)aN

       Using the definition of production with α = 1, and again using profit maximization
in the traded goods sector, we have relative unit labor cost for Foreign to Home defined
as:
                 rulc = p∗F − pH + (1 − γκ)(a∗F − aH ) − (1 − γκ)(a∗N − aN )                   (12)

       Then substitute (12) into (11) to get

             q = (1 − γκ) rulc + (1 − γκ)γκ(a∗F − aH ) − (1 − γκ)γκ(a∗N − aN )                 (13)
   8
   For simplicity, we have assumed that the distribution share is identical across countries and for
domestic and imported goods.

                                                14
   Equation (13) represents an amended Balassa-Samuelson model of the real ex-
change rate, where the condition controls for terms of trade movements through the
use of relative unit labor costs. Conditional on relative unit labor costs, the real
exchange rate is positively related to relative (Foreign vs. Home) traded goods pro-
ductivity, and negatively to relative non-traded goods productivity. This equation
underlies our empirical specification for the real exchange rate in section 3 below. It
says that, given unit labor costs, the traditional Balassa-Samuelson mechanism will
apply. A rise in Home traded productivity should lead to real exchange rate appre-
ciation - while a rise in Home non-traded productivity should lead to real exchange
rate depreciation.
   But (13) also says that unit labor costs should appear as a separate driver of the
real exchange rate. Conditional on sectoral productivity, a rise in relative unit labor
costs in the Home country should lead to real exchange rate appreciation.
   In condition (13), relative unit labor costs are endogenous. To see how they are
related to the labor supply shocks in the model, we can take a separate but related
decomposition of (11). In the case of complete security markets and assumptions
a)-c), we can express the terms of trade in the following way (where χ ≡ log(Υ)):

                 p∗F − pH = σc + p − σc∗ − p∗ + p∗F − pH =
   w − χ − ψh − (w∗ − χ∗ − ψh∗ ) + p∗F − pH = χ∗ − χ + ψ(h∗ − h) + aH − a∗F

where the first equality uses the risk-sharing condition (2), the second equality uses
the labor supply conditions (2.1), and the third equality uses the flexible price profit
maximizing condition for each country, with symmetry. This condition says that
the Home country terms of trade under assumptions a)-c) and complete markets is
negatively related to relative labor supply shocks, and positively related both to move-
ments in relatively labor supply (or output), and relative traded good productivities.
Substituting into (11) we get:

               q = (1 − γκ)(χ∗ − χ + ψ(h∗ − h)) − (1 − γκ)(a∗N − aN )              (14)

Under these conditions, the real exchange rate depends only on relative labor supply
shocks, relative total employment, and relative non-traded goods productivity. Labor

                                          15
supply shocks push up real wages, increasing relative non-traded goods prices. A rise
in relative employment has an equivalent effect, since conditional on labor supply
shocks and non-traded productivity, it must be associated with a rise in relative
wages. A rise in non-traded goods productivity reduces relative non-traded prices
and reduces the real exchange rate.
    How does this relate to the basic Balassa-Samuelson condition? Here we see that
traded goods productivity affects the real exchange rate only in so far as it affects total
employment. If ψ = 0, so that the labor supply curve is infinitely elastic, then the
Balassa-Samuelson linkage from traded goods productivity to the real exchange rate
disappears entirely. This is a case where the endogenous adjustment of the terms of
trade to traded goods productivity completely offsets the direct effect of productivity
shocks on the real exchange rate.
    A comparison of (13) and (14) thus suggests that in the empirical specification
for the Balassa-Samuelson test of real exchange rate determination, it is important
to control for relative unit labor costs. This allows for the presence of labor supply
shocks, and acts as an implicit control for movement in the terms of trade. As we see
below, once we control for relative unit labor costs in this way, the Balassa-Samuelson
model is strongly supported in the data.
    In the more general model with sticky prices, the real exchange rate cannot be
neatly expressed in the form of (13) or (14). Nevertheless, as shown below, even
with the general specification that involves sticky prices, it is still important to allow
a separate role for unit labor costs in a quantitative account of real exchange rate
determination.


3     Data: Real Exchange Rates and Productivity
3.1    Real Exchange Rates in European Data
We describe the features of European real exchange rates based on disaggregated price
data. The data are constructed by Eurostat, as part of the Eurostat PPP project.
They are arranged in the form of ‘Price Level Indices’, or PLI’s. A PLI gives the price
of a good at a given time for a given country, relative to a reference country price.

                                            16
Hence, it is a good-specific PPP, although within the Eurozone, this measure does not
involve different currencies. The reporting frequency is annual, over 1995-2009 and
the PLI’s are available for 146 ”basic headings” of consumer goods and services. These
include food (including food away from Home), clothing, housing costs, durable goods,
transportation costs, as well as medical and educational services. They cover 100%
of the consumption basket. The full list of PLI’s for the basic headings of consumer
goods and services is contained in Table 1. For each item, the reference price is
constructed as a ratio of the European average price of each good.9 Hence the prices
are comparable in levels, so that both cross section and time series real exchange rate
variation can be examined. Our sample data contains 11 countries that entered the
Eurozone in 1999,10 and one that entered in 2001 (Greece).11 We construct aggregate
and sectoral real exchange rates from the underlying price series, using expenditure
weights. The expenditure weights are constructed using euro expenditures on every
basic heading in every country and every year. Thus, the expenditure weights are
time-varying, year by year.12 Let qit be the real exchange rate for country i at time
t, and let qiT t (qiN t ) represent the average real exchange rate for the subset of traded
(non-traded) goods. As in the model, real exchange rates are measured so that an
increase represents a depreciation.13
       Relative to other studies that have compared price levels internationally, our price
data has some distinct advantages. First, it is comprehensive, covering the entire
consumer basket. This is in contrast to important recent studies that have used
only prices from a single supermarket chain (for example, Gopinath, et. al. (2011),
   9
     The average is taken over the 15 European Union countries given by: Austria, Belgium, Den-
mark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Por-
tugal, Finland and the United Kingdom.
  10
     These are Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Austria,
Portugal, and Finland.
  11
     Note that our sample includes the period 1995-1998 before the official inception of the euro. But
intra-Eurozone exchange rate fluctuations over this period were very small, with average quarterly
standard deviations about 1 percent.
  12
     We do not explicitly incorporate VAT differences, but Berka and Devereux (2013) show that
there are only small differences in VAT across these European countries, and they change very little
over the sample.
  13
     Hence, qit represents the inverse of the average price level for country i, relative to the European
average.



                                                   17
Burstein and Jaimovich (2012)), or from a single international retailer of household
goods (Haskel and Wolf (2002) and Baxter and Landry (2012)), or from a small
number of online retailers (Cavallo, et. al. (2014).) Some studies have used a more
comprehensive selection of prices from the Economist Intelligence Unit survey (for
example, Engel and Rogers (2004) or Crucini and Shintani (2008).) However, that
data is not as comprehensive as the Eurostat data we use, but more importantly it
does not strive for the degree of comparability across countries of goods and services
that are priced. In the Appendix, we quote extensively from Eurostat-OECD PPP
manual to help to convey the care and effort that is made to make these prices
comparable. Here we mention only a few points. First, while Eurostat reports prices
for 146 basic headings, within each heading are numerous subheadings for which prices
are compared. For example, in the category other bakery products price comparisons
are made for crispbread, rusks, toasted bread, biscuits, gingerbread, wafers, waffles,
crumpets, muffins, croissants, cakes, tarts, pies, quiches and pizzas. For each of these
items, an exhaustive effort is made to insure comparability of the goods that are
priced. This project strives to price a product at the various types of outlets (for
example, department store, supermarket, specialty outlet) in proportion to the share
of national expenditure on the item that is made at each type of outlet. When prices
from various similar outlets show higher variation within a country, more products
are sampled.
   We separate goods into traded and non-traded categories using criteria reported
in the Appendix. Using these aggregate measures, some descriptive statistics are
reported in Table 2. The Table first reports the average log real exchange rate over
the sample for each country, denoted q̄, as well as the equivalent measures for the
traded goods real exchange rate q̄T , the non-traded goods real exchange rate, q̄N , and
also the relative price of non-traded goods q̄n = q̄N − q̄T .
   We see from the Table that Belgium, Germany and France have average real
exchange rates close to zero, implying they are at the European average. Ireland and
Finland have much lower real exchange rates, while Greece, Spain, Portugal and Italy,
have much higher average real exchange rates. The characteristics of the sectoral real
exchange rates, and the average relative price of non-traded goods closely mirror the

                                            18
aggregate real exchange rates. In general, we see that if for a given country i, we have
q̄i > 0, (< 0), we also have q̄T i > 0, (< 0), q̄N i > 0, (< 0), and q̄N i − q̄T i > 0, (< 0).
That is, if a country has a low (high) average price level relative to the European
average, its non-traded goods price tends to be proportionately lower (higher) than
its traded goods price, relative to the average. This offers some initially encouraging
evidence for a Balassa-Samuelson interpretation of real exchange rates, in the sense
that differences across Eurozone countries in average real exchange rates are mirrored
by differences in internal relative sectoral prices in a manner that is consistent with
Balassa-Samuelson.
       The second panel of Table 2 reports standard deviations of annual real exchange
rates. They are approximately 3 percent for most countries. We would anticipate
that the standard deviation of non-traded real exchange rates exceeds that of the
traded real exchange rates. We find this to be true for 8 of the 12 Eurozone countries.
For the other countries, the difference between the standard deviation across sectors
is too small to report.
       Table 3 reports averages across all countries and over time. For comparison pur-
poses, we also include data from the non-Eurozone floating exchange rate high income
European countries (these are Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and
the UK) and a group of emerging market, mostly Eastern European countries (these
are Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slo-
vakia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey for the RER data). The first panel
gives the average time series volatility of aggregate and sectoral real exchange rates.
The second panel reports the cross country dispersion in aggregate and sectoral real
exchange rates. The high income floating exchange rate economies have substantially
higher time series standard deviations of real exchange rates, roughly twice that of
the Eurozone countries. For the Eastern European economies, time series standard
deviations are about 3 times that of the Eurozone.14
       The cross country dispersion of aggregate real exchange rates within the Eurozone
  14
    Note that these are standard deviations of logs, rather than log differences. For the Eurozone
and the floating exchange rate high income countries, there is little apparent trend in the real
exchange rate over time. For many of the Eastern European countries, there is more of a clear trend
downwards (towards appreciation) over the sample.


                                                19
is over 11 percent, about the same as that for the floating exchange rate countries.
Table 3 suggests that the main difference between the Eurozone and the floating rate
countries of Western Europe arises from the differences in their time-series standard
deviations, which is quite intuitive. Measuring over all countries however, including
the East European countries, the dispersion of real exchange rates is much larger;
33 percent for the aggregate real exchange rate and almost 50 percent for the non-
traded real exchange rate. These high numbers in large part reflect the continuing
high gap between price levels for the high income European economies and those of
the emerging economies of Eastern Europe.
   Figure 1 illustrates some properties of real exchange rates in the Eurozone. Panel
a) shows the pattern of mean annual standard deviations of all consumer good PLI’s
for the Eurozone as a whole. If PPP held at the goods level, this would be zero
all the time. The Figure indicates that overall dispersion fell progressively over the
sample. However, panels b)-d), charting the level and time path of national aggregate
and sectoral real exchange rates, tells a somewhat different story. First, there is
considerable persistence in real exchange rate differentials over the whole sample
between the lowest and highest countries, and secondly, there is substantial movement
over time in relative positions. For instance, Germany experienced substantial real
depreciation from the beginning to the end of the sample, and Ireland and Italy
displayed large real appreciation during the same time frame.

3.2    Productivity and Unit Labor Cost data
We compute measures of total factor productivity that match our real exchange rate
sample. For this, we require TFP levels, both in the aggregate and by sector, for
the same sample period as in the real exchange rate data. We do this by combining
two sources for TFP. We construct a concordance between the sectors included in the
Groningen Growth and Development Center’s (GGDC thereafter) 1997 TFP level
database, and the sectors included in the KLEMS time-series database. These two
databases are meant to be used in conjunction, as described in Inklaar and Timmer
(2008). Then, the cross-sectional TFP database and the time-series TFP database
are linked using the constructed concordance to obtain annual sectoral panel TFP

                                         20
level data. We then use measures of the tradability of each sector and sectoral weights
to construct level and time series of TFP for traded and non-traded sectors in each
country. Following this, we organize the aggregate and sectoral TFP data so that
they can be matched to their analogous real exchange rate measures: i.e. TFP in the
EU relative to country i TFP. As a result, we obtain a panel of traded and non-traded
TFP levels which provide a match for our real exchange rate data.15 The details of
the construction are in the Appendix A.
       Table 2 and 3 report descriptive statistics for traded and non-traded goods pro-
ductivity in the same form as the real exchange rate data. These data indicate that
the Netherlands, Ireland and Finland have relatively high levels of traded goods TFP,
while Spain, Italy and Austria have relatively low levels. In general, we see also that
traded goods productivity is more volatile than non-traded goods productivity.
       Apart from productivity shocks, we have introduced labor supply shocks as a
separate driver of the real exchange rate, as measured by the variable χ above. We
do not observe this variable in the data. However, if there are country specific labor
supply related shocks, driven for instance by labor market institutions, unionization
or regulatory changes, which are independent of productivity shocks, we should see
this reflected in real wage movements that are not attributable to movements in
aggregate or sectoral TFP. We capture this possibility by including unit labor costs
as a separate variable in the regressions reported below. The theoretical justification
for relating χ to unit labor costs was discussed in Section 2 above. Unit labor costs
(ULC) are computed from the OECD Stat database, and expressed as average ULC
in the EU17 relative to ULC in country i (the same way as the sectoral productivity
and real exchange rate data). Table 2 and 3 also report descriptive statistics on unit
labor costs.
       Figure 2 illustrates the properties of traded and non-traded productivity for the
subset of countries in the categories of Figure 1 for which we have sectoral productivity
data. Recall that a rise implies a fall in relative productivity, in order to have an
  15
    The matching is not quite perfect, because only 9 of the 12 Eurozone countries in the sample
have TFP data: Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria, and
Finland. We lack TFP data for Greece, Luxembourg, and Portugal.



                                              21
equivalent comparison with real exchange rates. The Figure indicates that there are
substantial differences in both the average levels of sectoral productivity across the
countries measured, as well as strongly asymmetric trends over the sample. Spain
and Italy also deteriorate progressively over the sample period, while Finland and
Austria improve systematically.
   Figure 2c illustrates our measures of unit labor cost. Both in levels and movements
over time, this is quite different from sectoral productivity, thus justifying our use of
unit labor cost as a separate determinant of real exchange rates. At the beginning of
the sample, Italy had low unit labor costs and Germany very high unit labor costs,
but Italy’s unit labor costs increase progressively in relative terms, while Germany’s
unit labor costs fall progressively. It is notable that the trend in Germany’s unit labor
cost is a lot more pronounced than that in its sectoral productivity.

3.3    Real Exchange Rates, Relative Prices and Productivity
In this section we describe a direct empirical investigation of the Balassa-Samuelson
model using our constructs of sectoral real exchange rates, sectoral productivities,
and unit labor costs. Tables 4 and 5 report the results of panel regressions on real
exchange rates and various definitions of relative prices, as well as real exchange rates
and productivity. For each of the empirical relationships we investigate here, we
present four different approaches to handling the panel of data. In the first, we pool
the data and estimate a simple ordinary least squares regression. In the second, we
introduce a fixed effect for each country. This approach captures only the time-series
relationship among variables within each country. The fixed effects approach does not
allow us to take advantage of the fact that our unique price and productivity data
allow us to make cross-country comparisons of the levels of real exchange rates and
their explanatory variables. We consider a third approach that only takes account of
the cross-sectional relationships. We average the variables over time for each country,
and then estimate a cross-sectional OLS regression. Finally, we estimate a random
effects model. Under random effects, the intercept term for each country may differ,
but these intercept terms are assumed to be independent random variables. A well-
known property of the random effects estimator of the slope coefficients is that they

                                           22
are a weighted average of the fixed effect estimator and the cross-section estimator,
where the weight on a given estimator is higher the greater its relatively explanatory
power. As we will see, we tend to find strong support for the model using all four
approaches.
   A basic prediction of the Balassa-Samuelson model, captured also by the decom-
position in (7), is that there should be positive relationship between the aggregate
real exchange rate and the ratio of non-traded to traded goods prices. Table 4a indi-
cates that this relationship is highly robust in the data for the 12 Eurozone countries.
Moreover, this holds both for the pooled regressions, as well as the regressions with
fixed or random effects. This finding contrasts strongly with a large literature on real
exchange rates among floating exchange rate countries, where even at relatively low
frequencies it is difficult to detect any clear relationship between relative non-traded
goods prices and aggregate real exchange rates (e.g. Engel 1999).
   Table 4b explores the relationship between the traded goods real exchange rate
and the relative price of non-traded goods, captured by the expression (8). In the
presence of distribution costs in the traded goods sector (i.e. κ < 1), this relationship
should be positive. We see that this is true in the Eurozone data.
   In the third panel (Table 4c), the one-to-one relationship between the traded goods
real exchange rate and the overall real exchange rate, which is the second expression
on the right hand side of (7), is strongly supported in both time series and cross
section.
   Table 5 reports the central empirical findings of our paper the relationship be-
tween the real exchange rate and its determinants, traded and non-traded total factor
productivity and unit labor costs. Our preferred specification, which relates the real
exchange rate to all three determinants as in equation (13), looks very good under
all four empirical approaches (pooled, cross-section, fixed effects and random effects.)
In every case in this specification, traded TFP enters with the correct sign and is
significant at the 5 percent level. Unit labor costs also enter with the correct sign in
every specification, and are significant at the 5 percent level. Non-traded TFP also
takes on the correct sign under all four empirical approaches, and is significant at
the 5 percent level in three of the four cases (while marginally insignificant in the

                                           23
cross-sectional regression.) As in the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis, an increase in
traded productivity tends to increase a countrys overall consumer price level (relative
to the price level of the EU as a whole). An increase in non-traded productivity,
on the other hand, is associated with a real depreciation. Also, holding productivity
constant, an increase in unit labor costs raises the countrys relative consumer price
level.
    In the next section, we compare the magnitude of the coefficients in this regression
to those predicted by our theoretical model. To presage our findings, the match is
very close.
    Table 5 also shows that the specifications that are less complete do not perform
particularly well in accounting for real exchange rates in the Eurozone. When we
try to explain the real exchange rate using only total TFP (without distinguishing
between traded and non-traded TFP), and without controlling for unit labor costs,
we find that there is a significantly positive association between TFP and the real
exchange rate in the pooled and cross-sectional regressions, but very little association
is found in the fixed-effects or random effects regressions. When we use sectoral
(traded and non-traded) measures of productivity, but do not include unit labor costs
as an explanatory variable, the results are mixed. In the pooled and cross-section
regressions, traded productivity has the predicted sign and is significant, and in the
fixed effects and random effects regressions, non-traded productivity is significant
with the correct sign. But neither measure of productivity is significant in all the
specifications that do not include unit labor costs.
    We conclude that empirically there is support for the Balassa-Samuelson link
between traded TFP and real exchange rates, both in the cross section and time
series, but only when we control for non-traded productivity and unit labor costs
(reflecting factors that influence labor supply).




                                           24
4        Model Determined Real Exchange Rates under
         Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes
We now return to a more detailed quantitative analysis of the properties of the model
of Section 2. We solve and simulate a model-produced sample with the same di-
mensions as the data. This gives us a simulated panel of 9 countries over a 15 year
period. In each case, we employ the model to focus on a given country relative to the
EU average. Although we only have two countries in the model, we can map it into
the empirical observations by treating the Home country as the relevant EU country,
and assuming that the Foreign country represents the EU average, in each case. We
characterize the time series and cross section properties of real exchange rates and
compare the properties of the simulated real exchange rates to those we observe for
the empirical sample of Eurozone countries.

4.1       Model Calibration
Table 6 lists the calibration values. For the 9 countries used in our complete sample,
the average expenditure share on non-traded goods in the PLI data set on consumer
goods is 49.9%, so we set γ, the share of consumption spent on traded goods, equal to
0.5. The share of distribution services in consumption goods has been estimated by
Campa and Goldberg (2010) for a number of OECD countries. Their average estimate
of the share of distribution services in consumption for the 9 countries in our sample
is 41 percent. Hence, we set κ = .6 (1 − κ is the share of distribution services in
traded goods consumption.). We assume a common value of κ for both Home and
Foreign goods consumption in both countries. These parameter values together imply
that (given other parameter settings) the overall share of non-traded goods in final
consumption, including distribution services, is approximately 70 percent.
       The elasticity of substitution between Home and Foreign retail goods, λ, is set at
8, which is the estimate used in Corsetti et al. (2010) 16 . For smaller λ , real exchange
rate volatility increases. But larger values tend to make the Balassa-Samuelson effect
  16
    Corsetti et. al. (2010) show that this translates into a lower elasticity of substitution between
traded wholesale goods, due to the presence of distribution services.



                                                 25
stronger.
       Our data gives no information on ω, the weight on Home goods in the composite
consumption for traded goods. The presence of non-traded goods in consumption
and distribution services already imparts a considerable degree of Home product bias
in the overall composition of consumption. Given the presumed relative homogeneity
of Eurozone countries in terms of consumption bundles, we therefore set ω = 0.5.
                                                                                                     17
Also, we set α, the elasticity of labor in the production function, equal to one                          .
The parameter σ, the coefficient of relative risk aversion, is set to equal to 2, a
standard consensus estimate used in DSGE modelling. In addition, the standard
value employed for ψ, the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, is unity,
so we set ψ = 1. The elasticity of substitution between the physical good and the
                                            18
distribution service, φ is set to 0.25           .
       The elasticity of substitution between traded and non-traded goods, θ, is set to 0.7,
which is a standard estimate from previous literature (e.g. Benigno and Theonissen,
2008). In addition, β, the discount factor, set equal to 0.99 for quarterly data.
       We report results from three different price adjustment assumptions. In Sticky
Price Model A, we assume that prices adjust at a rate of 10 percent per quarter,
which given the time-dependent pricing mechanism in the Calvo model, implies that
the half life of a price is approximately 7 quarters. In Sticky Price model B, prices
adjust at a quarterly frequency of 20 percent, implying a half life of price of about 3.5
quarters. Finally, we solve the model with instantaneous price adjustment, so that
all nominal variables are fully flexible.
       The model has three different kinds of shocks; productivity shocks in each of the
two sectors, ait , i = H, N , and shocks to the disutility of labor χt . Since the key
contribution of the model is to facilitate a comparison of the response to the real
  17
     A linear labor technology is a standard assumption in the open macro literature, and as regards
the cross section representation of the model, linearity in labor is a long-run equilibrium property
of a model with endogenous capital accumulation and an interest rate determined by a constant
subjective rate of time preferences.
  18
     Corsetti et al. (2010) set this equal to zero. The argument for a low elasticity of substitution is
that wholesale goods have to be purchased in fixed supply to obtain a given amount of retail goods,
so there is almost no ability to substitute between the distribution services and the wholesale goods
themselves in retail production.



                                                     26
exchange rate to productivity and unit labor cost shocks in a parallel way to the
empirical estimates, we carefully follow the data in calibrating the shock processes.
Appendix B describes in detail our calibration procedure for each of the shocks. Here
we give a brief description of this procedure.
   Although the model allows for all shocks to occur in both the Home and Foreign
country, we set Foreign shocks equal to zero, and calibrate each of the Home country
shocks using data relative to the EU set of countries. Since shocks enter the model
in relative terms, this is equivalent to treating the EU12 as the Foreign country. Of
course, while Foreign shocks are set to zero, the presence of the Foreign country is
important because in equilibrium there is a general equilibrium feedback between the
Home and Foreign country.
   We produce a set of simulated shocks by generating normally distributed random
variables for 9 artificial countries that have the same moments as the data. Specifi-
cally, the artificial data have the same means, serial correlation, and covariance matrix
as the data.
   We create moments for traded and non-traded productivity from the same mea-
sures of productivity used to construct Tables 2-5. We do not have observations on
the labor supply shocks. However, in our model, since we have set the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply equal to one and assumed that asset markets are complete, the term
that represents the random part of the log of the Home relative to the log of the
Foreign disutility of labor, under complete markets, is given by:

                            χ∗t − χt = wt∗ − n∗t − (wt − nt ).

We can measure the right-hand side of this expression directly from data on wages
and employment in each of our 9 countries. This is done by calculating the log of
wages per unit of labor effort, and subtracting labor effort from this. Appendix A
describes in more detail the data sources and construction for w and n.
   Our regressions use annual data for 15 years, but we calibrate a period to be one
quarter in the model. The length of the period matters particularly when considering
the effects of price stickiness. Hence, we create artificial data for 60 quarters. We
suppose that the log of quarterly relative TFP (both traded and non-traded) as well

                                           27
as labor preference shocks follow first-order autoregressions given by:

                                  aqt − ā = ρq (aqt−1 − ā) + uqt                            (15)

where at for each of the 9 countries ā is directly estimated as in Tables 2-5. We then
aggregate the artificial data into annual data by taking quarterly averages in order
to compare the statistics generated by the model to the data. Appendix B describes
how we translate the moments of the annual data into quarterly data for the model.
In particular, ρq is computed by taking the quartic root from an AR(1) estimate on
the annual data. The variance covariance matrix over ut is estimated based on the
assumption that ut is i.i.d. at quarterly frequency. Theoretically this would make the
annual shock an MA(4). In practice, we find that an i.i.d. annual shock adequately
captures the dynamics of the annual data.
       Table 7 reports the results of the shock estimates in cross section and time series.
Table 7a reports the mean of relative TFP and labor supply shocks for each country.
For the productivity measures, this Table reflects the same information as Figures
5-7 above, except averaged over the sample.19 We see considerable variation across
the country sample in average sectoral productivities as well as the average relative
labor supply term.
       Table 7b reports the estimates of persistence and volatility of the shocks for each
country using the estimates from (15) above. We see that the traded good produc-
tivity shock is substantially more volatile and persistent than the non-traded goods
shock. This is consistent with other estimates of sectoral productivity shocks in Be-
nigno and Theonissen (2008) and Devereux and Hnatkovska (2013). The labor supply
shock is less persistent and much less volatile than either of the sectoral TFP shocks.
       Having constructed the shock processes for each of the three shocks, we draw the
shocks for the artificial data from a Normal multivariate distributions for the nine
Eurozone countries with the three variance-covariance matrices in each case calibrated
to the three variance-covariance matrices estimated from the data.
  19
     Note that the the labor supply shock is relevant for, but separate from the RULC term reported
in section 3. The RULC measure represents a combination of all shocks, including the labor supply
shock.



                                                28
4.2       Simulation Results
Tables 8 and 9 contain the main set of results from the simulated model under the two
different assumptions regarding price adjustment. We report results separately for
time series and cross section variation. Differences in the speed of price adjustment
features have negligible implications for the cross sectional comparisons, but may be
quite important in the time series comparisons.
       Table 8a illustrates the standard deviation and persistence properties of real ex-
change rates in the simulations, and provides the data equivalents for comparison. As
in the data, everything is reported at annual frequency. In the model, the time series
standard deviation varies between 3.5 and 4 percent across the different price setting
assumptions, compared with the empirical estimate of 3.3 percent. The standard de-
viation is closer to the data under the assumption of sticky prices than with flexible
prices. The flexible price model in fact produces real exchange rate volatility that ex-
ceeds that of the sample data.20 The similarity between the simulated real exchange
rates and the observed volatility is quite remarkable, since the data driving our shocks
comes from an entirely different source than the real exchange rate data. The model
produces cross section standard deviations of around 9 percent, substantially higher
than the time series standard deviation. This variation reflects the cross-country het-
erogeneity in mean sectoral TFPs and mean relative labor supply parameters. While
the simulated cross-country variation substantially exceeds the average time series
variation among the 9 countries in our sample, it still falls somewhat below the 11
percent cross-country standard deviation in the sample data.
       The annual frequency persistence in the simulated model is close to that in the
data, and particularly close for Sticky Price Model B. We again note that real ex-
change rate persistence in the model is driven by a combination of persistence in
the underlying shocks and the presence of sticky prices, which implies drawn out ad-
  20
    This represents an interesting contrast with the usual results in the open macro literature, where
the combination of sticky prices and floating exchange rates are deemed necessary to produce real
exchange rate volatility of an order of magnitude equal to that seen in the data. See for instance,
Chari et al. (2002). Here, with flexible prices, nominal price movements lead to real exchange rate
adjustment that exceeds that seen in the data, while the assumption of sticky prices has leads to a
dampening of real exchange rates, thus more accurately representing the observed volatility.



                                                 29
justment in response to all shocks. Without sticky prices, there is still considerable
persistence in the real exchange rate, but it is less than observed in the data.
   Table 9 reports the results obtained from running the same regressions of the real
exchange rate on relative prices as is done in Table 4, except on the model-simulated
data. Recall that these relationships are implied in the model by the decompositions
(7) and (8). In the simulated model, the relationships hold identically in time series
and cross section. In the data, we find a relationship of the same order of magnitude,
although larger in cross section than in time series. For the regressions of q on qn , and
qT on qn , the model produces a regression coefficient above that of the data. This is
not surprising since equations (7) and (8) ascribe all variation in real exchange rates
to variation in qn . In fact, it is quite likely that the cost of non-traded distribution
services contains a component that is not accurately measured by observed prices of
non-traded goods. If that is the case, then in the results from Table 4 the coefficient
on qn in the regression of q on qn (and similarly for the regression of qT on qn ) will
be biased downwards due to a classical measurement error problem. This point is
established more formally in Appendix B. However, the results of Tables 4 and Table
9 illustrate a clear consistency between the model and the data to the extent that
they ascribe a major role for the internal relative price of non-traded goods in driving
real exchange rate variation in these Eurozone countries.
   Table 9 also shows the results comparable with Table 4c, regressing the model
simulated relative price q on qT . Again the estimates are the same order of magnitude
but still somewhat higher than those in the data.
   Tables 10a and 10b present our main set of results of the simulation models.
These results are obtained by simulated regressions of the real exchange rate from
the model on sectoral TFP and relative unit labor cost (RULC) as implied by the
simulated model. Note that in the model, relative unit labor cost is a combination
of the three underlying shocks, as implied by (14). Table 10a contains the results
for the time series simulations, under the three different assumptions regarding price
adjustment, while Table 10b reports the cross-section results.
   Table 10a establishes a remarkable coherence between the model and the time
series data. As we already established in Table 5, the data provide strong support for

                                           30
an amended version of the basic Balassa-Samuelson model for Eurozone real exchange
rates. Conditional on relative unit labor costs, a one percent rise in traded goods
productivity leads to an 0.18 percent appreciation of the real exchange rate. A one
percent rise in non-traded goods productivity leads to a 0.36 percent depreciation of
the real exchange rate. On the other hand a one percent increase in relative unit
labor costs is associated with a 0.46 percent real exchange rate appreciation.
       In all three models, the estimated model coefficients are the same sign and the
same order of magnitude as those from the empirical regressions. Both Sticky Price
Models A and B in particular lead to simulated regression coefficients extremely close
to those in the data; in the model A a one percent rise in traded goods productivity
leads to a 0.19 percent appreciation, a one percent rise in non-traded good produc-
tivity leads to a 0.32 percent real exchange rate depreciation, and a one percent rise
in the relative unit labor cost leads to a 0.34 percent real exchange rate appreciation.
       These results establish that a very basic open economy macro model amended
to allow for labor supply shocks can provide a highly accurate representation of the
time series behaviour or Eurozone real exchange rates. Morever, both model and data
offer strong support for the traditional Balassa-Samuelson approach to real exchange
rates, amended for the presence of labor supply shocks.
       What role do sticky prices play in the explanation? As we saw in Table 8, sticky
prices help to enhance the persistence properties of the real exchange rate, bringing
the model closer to the data. But from Table 10a, we see that sticky prices play an
important role in tempering the response of the model to the different shocks. In
general, flexible price DSGE models enhance the response of real variables to ‘supply
shocks’, and lessen the response to ‘demand’ shocks. We might think of both the labor
supply shock and the traded goods productivity shock as more akin to supply shocks,
                                                                                       21
and the non-traded goods productivity shock as more of a demand shock.                      With
flexible prices, the simulated regressions produced an exaggerated real exchange rate
response to traded goods productivity shocks and to relative unit labor cost costs,
while limiting the response to the non-traded goods productivity shock. Under sticky
  21
     Shocks to traded goods productivity can be more easily smoothed out through capital markets,
while shocks to non-traded goods productivity must feed fully into domestic consumption.


                                               31
prices, the impact of the supply shocks are reduced and the response to the demand
shock is enhanced. Hence, the sticky price model gives a very accurate representation
of the time series response of the real exchange rate to all shocks.
    Table 10b reports the cross section results. Here, the difference in price adjust-
ment frequencies across the three models has much less importance. But all different
specifications lead to regression coefficients of the right sign, and in the case of the
non-traded good productivity shock, and the relative unit labor cost shock, the sim-
ulation estimates are extremely close to those in the data. In particular, the data
indicates that a country with a non-traded goods productivity one percent above the
average will have a real exchange rate about 0.3 percent below the average. The
simulated model reproduces this almost exactly. Likewise, a country with relative
unit labor costs one percent above average will have a real exchange rate 0.4 per-
cent above the average. Again, the simulated regression coefficient matches this very
closely. With respect to the traded good productivity shock, the simulated model
coefficient produces the right sign, but the implied real exchange rate response is a
bit under half that found in the data.
    Overall, these estimates are remarkable for the fact that they indicate that the re-
lationship between real exchange rates and sectoral productivity can be well accounted
for by a standard two-sector New Keynesian model, in a manner which closely re-
sembles the empirical relationship estimated from Eurozone data. Moreover, both
model and empirical estimates offer a new lease of life for an amended version of the
Balassa-Samuelson model of real exchange rate determination.


5     Conclusions
We have seen that the real exchange rates in the Eurozone closely reflect differences
in the relative prices of non-traded to traded goods across countries, and in turn
differences in the relative productivity levels in the traded versus non-traded sectors,
as well as variations in unit labor costs. Under the assumption of empirically relevant
degrees of price stickiness, the actual pattern of prices and real exchange rates closely
mirrors the pattern produced in the simulations from our model.


                                           32
   It may seem surprising that even when nominal prices are sticky, real exchange
rate behavior accords well with the Balassa-Samuelson theory, which has been until
now primarily considered a theory of long-run equilibrium real exchange rates. There
are perhaps three reasons why the theory fits well for the Eurozone data. First,
the initial accession rates in the Eurozone were set in effect to minimize deviations
in traded goods prices across countries. So in 1999, the real exchange rates within
the Eurozone were effectively initialized at levels that reflect the differences in their
non-traded goods prices and differences in distribution costs.
   Second, relative productivity shocks over time within the Eurozone simply are
not that big. That is, the equilibrium or flexible-price real exchange rate within the
Eurozone does not change very much over time. If the initial real exchange rates
are near the equilibrium level then even with no further adjustment of the actual
real exchange rates, they will not differ too much from the equilibrium rates simply
because the equilibrium rates do not stray very far from the initial levels. In a sense,
this observation merely restates the point made by Rogoff (1996) in the context of the
puzzling behavior of real exchange rates under floating nominal rates. He said that
real exchange rate volatility we observe among floating rate countries is impossible
to explain if only real productivity shocks drove real exchange rates - that monetary
and financial factors must play a role: ”existing models based on real shocks cannot
account for short-term exchange rate volatility” (p. 648). Equilibrium real exchange
rates are not very volatile, and since the currency union eliminates relative monetary
shocks, the real exchange rate under a currency union is also not very volatile.
   Third, nominal prices do adjust over time, so even in a currency union there is real
exchange rate adjustment. It is worth emphasizing that the choice of exchange rate
regime only matters for real exchange rate adjustment because nominal prices are
sticky. The speed of adjustment of real exchange rates is limited only by the speed of
adjustment of nominal prices. While the point is obvious, it still is often overlooked.
For example, it is frequently argued that the Eurozone is a poor candidate for a
currency union because labor is not very mobile within the Eurozone. But the degree
of labor mobility can only matter for the choice of exchange-rate regime if mobility
can substitute for nominal wage and price adjustment. That is, labor immobility

                                           33
may well mean that adjustment to real shocks in the Eurozone is slower than in the
U.S. where labor is more mobile. However, this refers to an equilibrium adjustment
– the problem would exist in the Eurozone even if prices and wages were flexible.
Put another way, labor mobility can substitute for nominal exchange rate adjustment
only if labor moves at higher frequencies than prices and wages adjust.
   Of course, there are other sources of shocks that may affect real exchange rates in
the Eurozone. For instance, shocks to fiscal spending can affect relative non-traded
goods prices and real exchange rates. But our data sample does not include the period
of recent major fiscal adjustments in Europe. Berka and Devereux (2013) found little
evidence for an important role for government spending to GDP as a determinant of
real exchange rate in a sample that did not include the European post-2009 crisis.
   Finally, because our empirical analysis does not include the period of the sovereign
debt crisis in Europe, our model does not consider real exchange rate adjustment in
crises situations. It might well be the case that under a crisis, the real exchange rate
adjustment that occurs under floating rates is more desirable than what occurs in
a currency union. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe’s (2013) show that the combination of
downward nominal wage rigidity and credit constraints could be very important in
the inhibiting efficient real exchange rates under fixed exchange rates during a crisis.




                                          34
References
Basu, S., J. Fernald, N. Oulton, and S. Srinivasan, NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 2003, MIT Press,

Baxter, Marianne and Anthony Landry, “IKEA: Product, Pricing, and Pass-
  Through,” Working Paper 132, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Globalization and
  Monetary Policy Institute November 2012.

Benigno, Gianluca and Christoph Thoenissen, “Consumption and real ex-
  change rates with incomplete financial markets and non-traded goods,” Journal
  of International Money and Finance, 2008, 27, 926–948.

Bergin, Paul R., Reuven Glick, and Alan M. Taylor, “Productivity, tradability,
  and the long-run price puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53, 2041–
  2066.

Berka, Martin and Michael B. Devereux, “Trends in European Real Exchange
  Rates,” Economic Policy, April 2013, 28 (74), 193–242.

Betts, Caroline and Timothy J. Kehoe, “U.S. real exchange rate fluctuations and
  relative price fluctuations.,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 33, 1297–1326.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
  Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 947–985.

Bordo, Michael M., Ehsan U. Choudhri, Giorgio Fazio, and Ronald Mac-
  Donald, “The Real Exchange Rate in the Long Run,” Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Burstein, Ariel and Nir Jaimovich, “Understanding Movements in Aggregate
  and Product-level Real Exchange Rates,” October 2009. Manuscript.

  , Joao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, “Distribution costs and real exchange rate
  dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, September 2003, 50, 1189–1214.

                                        35
  , Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real
  Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113, 742–784.

Campa, Jose Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg, “The Sensitivity of the CPI to
  Exchange Rates: Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and Trade Exposure,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2010, 92 (2), 392–407.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad Diba, “Relative
  labor productivity and the real exchange rate in the long run: evidence from a
  panel of OECD countries,” Journal of International Economics, 1996, 47, 245 –
  266.

Cavallo, Alberto, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon, “Currency Unions,
  Product Introductions and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal Eco-
  nomics, 2014, 129 (2), 529–595.

Caves, D. W., L. R. Christensen, and W. E. Diewert, “Multilateral com-
  parisons of output, input and productivity using superlative index numbers,” The
  Economic Journal, 1982, 92 (365), 73 – 86.

Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Can Sticky Price
  Models Generate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, August 2002, 69, 533–563.

Chen, Lein-Lein, Seungmook Choi, and John Devereux, “Explaining Price
  Level Differences: New Evidence on the Balassa-Samuelson effect,” Southern Eco-
  nomic Journal, forthcoming.

Chinn, Menzie and Louis Johnson, “Real exchange rate levels, productivity and
  demand shocks: evidence from a panel of 14 countries,” Working Paper 5709,
  NBER 1996.

Chong, Yangping, Òscar Jordà, and Alan M. Taylor, “The Harrod-Balassa-
  Samuelson hypothesis: real exchange rates and their long-run equilibrium,” Inter-
  national Economic Review, 2012, 53 (2), 609–633.

                                        36
Choudri, Ehsan U. and Lawrence L. Schembri, “Productivity, Commodity
  Prices and the Real Exchange Rate: The Long-Run behavior of the Canada-U.S.
  Real Exchange Rate,” International Review of Economics and Finance, 2014, 29,
  537–551.

Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti, “International Dimension of Optimal
  Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52, 281 – 305.

  , Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc, “Optimal monetary policy in open
  economies, in Handbook of Monetary Economics, eds.: Benjamin M. Friedman
  and Michael Woodford,” 2010, Volume 3, 281–305.

Crucini, Mario and Mototsugu Shintani, “Persistence in law-of-one-price de-
  viations: evidence from micro data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55,
  629–644.

  , Chris Telmer, and Marios Zachariadis, “Understanding European real ex-
  change rates,” American Economic Review, June 2005, 95 (3), 724–738.

Devereux, Michael B., “Real exchange rate trends and growth: A model of east
  Asia,” Review of International Economics, August 1999, 7 (3), 509–521.

   and Charles Engel, “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited: Ex-
  change Rate Flexibility and Price Setting Behaviour,” Review of Economic Studies,
  2003, 70, 765–783.

   and Viktoria Hnatkovska, “Borders and nominal exchange rates in risk-
  sharing,” Working Papers 2013-37, CAMA June 2013.

Engel, Charles, “Accounting for US real exchange rate changes,” Journal of Political
  Economy, June 1999, 130 (3), 507–538.

  , “Currency Misallignments and Optimal Monetary Policy,” American Economic
  Review, 2011, 101, 2796–2822.




                                        37
   and John H. Rogers, “European product market integration after the euro,”
  Economic Policy, July 2004, 39, 349–384.

Eurostat    and     OECD,      Eurostat-OECD Methodological Manual on Pur-
  chasing   Power   Parities    November     2012.    ISBN:   978-92-79-25983-8,
  http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/product_details/
  publication?p_product_code=KS-RA-12-023.

Felipe, Jesus and Ustav Kumar, “Unit labor costs in the Eurozone: the com-
  petitiveness debate again.,” 2011. Levy Economic Institute, Working paper no.
  651.

Fitzgerald, Doireann, “Terms-of-Trade Effects, Interdependence and Cross-
  Country Differences in Price Levels,” May 2003. Mimeo.

Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicolas
  Li, “International Prices, Costs and Markup Differences,” American Economic
  Review, October 2011, 101 (6), 2450–2486.

Gregorio, Jose De, Alberto Giovannini, and Holger C. Wolf, “International
  Evidence on Tradables and Nontradables Inflation,” European Economic Review,
  June 1994, 38 (6), 1225–1244.

Gubler, Matthias and Christoph Sax, “The Balassa-Samuelson effect reversed:
  new evidence from OECD countries,” Discussion Paper 09, WWZ December 2011.

Haskel, Jonathan and Holger Wolf, “The Law of One Price - A Case Study,”
  Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2002, 103, 545–558.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow, “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,”
  American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 562 – 585.

Hulten, C. R., New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Studies in Income and
  Wealth, Vol. 63, University of Chicago Press,




                                        38
Inklaar, Robert and Marcel P. Timmer, “GGDC Productivity Level Database:
  International Comparisons of Output, Inputs and Productivity at the industry
  level,” Discussion Paper GD-104, University of Groningen Growth and Develop-
  ment Centre 2008.

Jorgenson, D. W. and M. Nishmizu, “U.S. and Japanese economic growth, 1952-
  1974: An international comparison,” The Economic Journal, 1978, 88, 707–726.

  , M. S. Ho, and K. J. Stiroh, Information Technology and American Growth
  Resurgence, MIT Press, 2005.

Lee, Jaewoo and Man-Keung Tang, “Does Productivity growth lead to appreci-
  ation of the real exchange rate?,” Review of International Economics, March 2007,
  94 (1), 276–299.

Lothian, James R. and Mark P. Taylor, “Real exchange rates over the past two
  centuries: how important is the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson effect?,” The Economic
  Journal, 2008, 118, 1742–1763.

MacDonald, Ronald and Luca Antonio Ricci, “The real exchange rate and
  the Balassa-Samuelson effect: The role of distribution sector,” Pacific Economic
  Review, 2005, 10 (2), 29–48.

Mussa, Michael, “Nominal and real exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real
  exchange rates: evidence and implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
  on Public Policy, 1986, 25, 117 – 214.

O’Mahony, Mary and Marcel P. Timmer, “Output, Input and Productivity
  Measures at the Industry Level: The EU KLEMS Database,” The Economic Jour-
  nal, June 2009, 119, F374–F403.

Rogoff, Kenneth, “The purchasing power parity puzzle,” Journal of Economic Lit-
  erature, 1996, (34), 647–668.

Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe, “Pegs and Pain,” 2011. Working
  Paper, Department of Economics, Columbia University.

                                           39
Steinsson, Jon, “The Dynamic Behaviour of Real Exchange Rates in Sticky Price
  Models,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98, 519 – 33.

Tica, Josip and Ivo Družić, “The Harrod-Balassa-Saumelson effect: A Survey of
  Empirical Evidence,” Working Paper 06-7/686, University of Zagreb 2006.




                                      40
Tables


Table 1. PLI basic headings, Household expenditures
 T    Rice                                               T     Major tools and equipment
 T    Other cereals, flour and other cereal products     T     Small tools and miscellaneous accessories
 T    Bread                                              T     Non-durable household goods
 T    Other bakery products                              NT    Domestic services
 T    Pasta products                                     NT    Household services
 T    Beef and Veal                                      T     Pharmaceutical products
 T    Pork                                               T     Other medical products
 T    Lamb, mutton and goat                              T     Therapeutical appliances and equipment
 T    Poultry                                            NT    Medical Services
 T    Other meats and edible offal                       NT    Services of dentists
 T    Delicatessen and other meat preparations           NT    Paramedical services
 T    Fresh, chilled or frozen fish and seafood          NT    Hospital services
 T    Preserved or processed fish and seafood            T     Motor cars with diesel engine
 T    Fresh milk                                         T     Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of less than 1200cc
 T    Preserved milk and other milk products             T     Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of 1200cc to 1699cc
 T    Cheese                                             T     Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of 1700cc to 2999cc
 T    Eggs and egg-based products                        T     Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of 3000cc and over
 T    Butter                                             T     Motor cycles
 T    Margarine                                          T     Bicycles
 T    Other edible oils and fats                         T     Animal drawn vehicles
 T    Fresh or chilled fruit                             T     Spare parts and accessories for personal transport equipment
 T    Frozen, preserved or processed fruit               T     Fuels and lubricants for personal transport equipment
 T    Fresh or chilled vegetables other than potatoes    NT    Maintenance and repair of personal transport equipment
 T    Fresh or chilled potatoes                          NT    Other services in respect of personal transport equipment
 T    Frozen, preserved or processed vegetables          NT    Passenger transport by railway
 T    Sugar                                              NT    Passenger transport by road
 T    Jams, marmalades and honey                         NT    Passenger transport by air
 T    Confectionery, chocolate and other cocoa preps     NT    Passenger transport by sea and inland waterway
 T    Edible ice, ice cream and sorbet                   NT    Combined passenger transport
 T    Coffee, tea and cocoa                              NT    Other purchased transport services
 T    Mineral waters                                     NT    Postal services
 T    Soft drinks and concentrates                       T     Telephone and telefax equipment
 T    Fruit and vegetable juices                         NT    Telephone and telefax services
 T    Spirits                                            T     Equipment for reception, recording and reproduction of sound and pictures
 T    Wine                                               T     Photographic and cinematographic equipment and optical instruments
 T    Beer                                               T     Information processing equipment
 T    Tobacco                                            T     Pre-recorded recording media
 T    Narcotics                                          T     Unrecorded recording media
 T    Other clothing and clothing accessories            NT    Repair of audio-visual, photographic and information processing equipment
 T    Clothing materials                                 T     Major durables for outdoor recreation
 T    Men’s clothing                                     T     Musical instruments and major durables for indoor recreation
 T    Women’s clothing                                   NT    Maintenance and repair of other major durables for recreation and culture
 T    Childrens and infants clothing                     T     Games, toys and hobbies
 T    Other clothing and clothing accessories            T     Equipment for sport, camping and open-air recreation
 NT   Cleaning, repair and hire of clothing              T     Gardens, plants and flowers
 T    Men’s footwear                                     T     Pets and related products
 T    Women’s footwear                                   T     Veterinary and other services for pets
 T    Children’s and infant’s footwear                   NT    Recreational and sporting services
 NT   Repair and hire of footwear                        NT    Photographic services
 NT   Actual rentals for housing                         NT    Other cultural services
 NT   Imputed rentals for housing                        T     Games of chance
 T    Materials for maintenance and repair of dwelling   T     Books
 NT   Services for maintenance and repair of dwelling    T     Newspapers and periodicals
 NT   Water supply                                       T     Miscellaneous printed matter, stationery and drawing materials
 NT   Miscellaneous services relating to the dwelling    T     Package holidays
 T    Electricity                                        NT    Pre-primary and primary education
 T    Gas                                                NT    Secondary education
 T    Liquid fuels                                       NT    Post-secondary education
 T    Solid fuels                                        NT    Tertiary education
 T    Heat energy                                        NT    Education not definable by level
 T    Kitchen furniture                                  NT    Restaurant services whatever the type of establishment
 T    Bedroom furniture                                  NT    Pubs, bars, cafs, tea rooms and the like
 T    Living-room and dining-room furniture              NT    Canteens
 T    Other furniture and furnishings                    NT    Accommodation services
 T    Carpets and other floor coverings                  NT    Hairdressing salons and personal grooming establishments
 NT   Repair of furniture, furnishings and floors        T     Electric appliances for personal care
 T    Household textiles                                 T     Other appliances, articles and products for personal care
 T    Major household appliances electric or not         NT    Prostitution
 T    Small electric household appliances                T     Jewellery, clocks and watches
 NT   Repair of household appliances                     T     Other personal effects
 T    Glassware, tableware and household utensils        NT    Social protection
                                                         NT    Insurance
                                                         NT    Other financial services n.e.c.
                                                         NT    Other services n.e.c.




                                                              41
     Table 2. Country summary statistics
      country      q      qT     qN       qn    std(q)   std(qT )   std(qN )   std(qn)    aT      aN     aT − aN   std(aT )   std(aN )   std(aT − aN )    ulc    std(ulc)
      BE        -0.00   0.01    -0.01   -0.02    0.03      0.02       0.03       0.02    -0.05   -0.03     -0.03     0.04       0.04          0.02       -0.07     0.01
      GER       -0.01    0.02   -0.04   -0.06    0.04      0.02       0.07       0.07    -0.02   -0.08      0.06     0.01       0.01          0.02       -0.12     0.07
      GRE        0.20    0.16    0.25    0.09    0.03      0.03       0.05       0.03    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.03      0.09
      SPA        0.17    0.16    0.17    0.01    0.02      0.02       0.03       0.03    0.12    -0.02     0.14      0.10       0.05          0.05       0.04      0.07
      FRA       -0.03    0.02   -0.08   -0.10    0.03      0.03       0.03       0.02    -0.01   -0.07      0.06     0.02       0.02          0.02       -0.06     0.01
      IRE       -0.11   -0.09   -0.12   -0.04    0.08      0.05       0.10       0.05    -0.25   -0.03     -0.22     0.05       0.02          0.05       0.21      0.12
      ITA        0.05    0.02    0.09    0.07    0.04      0.04       0.04       0.02    0.03     0.10     -0.08     0.10       0.04          0.07       -0.02     0.04
      LUX       -0.01    0.08   -0.13   -0.21    0.04      0.03       0.06       0.06    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.16      0.05
      NET        0.02    0.03   -0.00   -0.03    0.02      0.02       0.03       0.03    -0.13   -0.23      0.09     0.02       0.03          0.05       -0.03     0.04
      AUS        0.02   -0.00    0.03    0.04    0.03      0.03       0.04       0.01    0.05    -0.01     0.06      0.06       0.02          0.04       -0.10     0.04
      POR        0.20    0.11    0.33    0.21    0.01      0.02       0.02       0.03    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        -0.01     0.07
      FIN       -0.16   -0.12   -0.19   -0.07    0.03      0.03       0.03       0.01    -0.20   -0.16     -0.05     0.08       0.04          0.05       -0.01     0.02
      SWE       -0.13   -0.10   -0.16   -0.06    0.07      0.05       0.10       0.06    -0.09   -0.05     -0.04     0.11       0.02          0.09       -0.08     0.06
      DEN       -0.24   -0.24   -0.24    0.00    0.03      0.02       0.04       0.04    0.08    -0.18     0.25      0.08       0.02          0.07       -0.06     0.06
      UK        -0.00   -0.01    0.00    0.01    0.09      0.09       0.10       0.03    0.00    -0.03     0.04      0.04       0.02          0.05       -0.03     0.13
      ICE       -0.21   -0.23   -0.19    0.04    0.12      0.12       0.14       0.07    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        NaN       NaN
      NOR       -0.26   -0.30   -0.21    0.09    0.04      0.04       0.05       0.02    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.24      0.12
      SWI       -0.27   -0.12   -0.36   -0.25    0.06      0.05       0.07       0.03    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        NaN       NaN
      CYP       0.14    0.05     0.24    0.19    0.01      0.02       0.02       0.03    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.03      0.05
      CZE        0.57    0.36    0.87    0.51    0.13      0.12       0.15       0.05    0.17     0.24     -0.07     0.05       0.05          0.06       0.12      0.15
      EST        0.45    0.33    0.64    0.31    0.10      0.07       0.15       0.09    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.11      0.18
      HUN        0.54    0.37    0.81    0.44    0.11      0.10       0.13       0.04    0.15     0.26     -0.11     0.07       0.06          0.02       0.10      0.13
      LAT        0.54    0.37    0.81    0.44    0.11      0.09       0.16       0.08    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.07      0.20
      LIT        0.56    0.41    0.95    0.53    0.09      0.08       0.14       0.06    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.15      0.13
      MAL        0.28    0.13    0.45    0.32    0.03      0.03       0.05       0.05    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        NaN       NaN
      POL        0.56    0.41    0.78    0.37    0.08      0.09       0.09       0.06    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.09      0.10




42
      SVK        0.65    0.42    1.01    0.58    0.18      0.17       0.23       0.06    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.27      0.06
      SVN        0.30    0.19    0.45    0.26    0.03      0.03       0.05       0.03    0.16     0.28     -0.12     0.05       0.03          0.07       -0.07     0.08
      BUL        0.86    0.58    1.23    0.64    0.12      0.12       0.11       0.03    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        NaN       NaN
      ROM        0.74    0.57    1.06    0.49    0.16      0.17       0.18       0.05    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        0.21      0.20
      TUR        0.57    0.38    0.89    0.52    0.11      0.10       0.21       0.13    NaN     NaN       NaN       NaN        NaN           NaN        NaN       NaN
     All real exchange rate variables (q, qT , qN , qn ) are expressed as EU15 average relative to home country. q is the expenditure-weighted log real exchange rate (an
     increase is a depreciation). qT (qN ) is the real exchange rate for traded (nontraded) goods only, both relative to EU15 average (an increase is a depreciation).
     qn ≡ qN − qT . s(.) denotes standard deviation. RER sample is 1995 - 2009 (annual), except for the countries of Southern and Eastern Europe (from Cyprus
     onwards), where the sample begins in 1999. aT (aN ) is a logarithm of traded (nontraded) TFP of EU12 relative to home country. Traded is an aggregate of
     1-digit sector’s TFP levels aggregated using sectoral gross outputs as weights. TFP sample is 1995 - 2007 for all countries with data. ulc is a logarithm of Unit
     Labour Costs of EU17 relative to home country.
Table 3. Standard deviations
                        mean(stdi (.))                        std(meani (.))
 variable       All      EZ    Float        East      All      EZ    Float       East
 q             0.067    0.033 0.070         0.098    0.328    0.113 0.103        0.193
 qT            0.061    0.028 0.060         0.091    0.238    0.087 0.109        0.154
 qN            0.088    0.044 0.084         0.129    0.471    0.158 0.120        0.275
 qn            0.045    0.032 0.043         0.059    0.253    0.107 0.119        0.133
 aT            0.059    0.055 0.075         0.055    0.129    0.121 0.083        0.014
 aN            0.031    0.031 0.019         0.045    0.155    0.093 0.078        0.017
 aT − aN       0.049    0.040 0.070         0.052    0.119    0.111 0.151        0.027
 ulc           0.088    0.053 0.092         0.128    0.113    0.097 0.151        0.093
All real exchange rate variables are expressed relative to EU15 average (=0 each year).
q is the expenditure-weighted log real exchange rate (increase is a depreciation). qT
(qN ) is the same real exchange rate but for traded (nontraded) goods only, both relative
to EU15 average (increase is a depreciation)qn ≡ qN − qT . RER sample is 1995 - 2009,
except for the countries of Southern and Eastern Europe, where the sample begins in
1999. aT (aN ) is a logarithm of traded (nontraded) TFP relative to EU12. Traded
constitutes an aggregate of 1-digit sector’s TFP levels aggregated using sectoral gross
outputs as weights. TFP sample is 1995 - 2007 for all countries with data (see previous
Table). ulc is a logarithm of Unit Labour Costs of EU17 relative to home country (the
sample period is 1995 - 2009, except for Southern and East European countries).
The left panel reports average time series standard deviation (stdi (.), where i indexes
countries). The right panel reports the standard deviation of average real exchange
rates (meani (.), where i indexes countries).




                                           43
Table 4. Price regressions
  Table 4a: Regression of q on the qn
              1         2            3                    4
           Pool       FE           RE                   XS
  qn 0.70∗∗∗ 0.60∗∗∗          0.61∗∗∗               0.71∗∗
        (0.058) (0.076)         (0.07)              (0.247)
    2
  R        0.44      0.93         0.36                 0.40
   N        180       180          180                   12
  HT          –         – not reject                      –

  Table 4b new: Regression of qT on qn
              5        6            7        8
           Pool      FE           RE       XS
  qn 0.26∗∗∗        0.11        0.12∗ 0.89∗∗∗
        (0.057) (0.076)        (0.07)   (0.12)
    2
  R        0.10     0.89         0.02     0.70
   N        180      180          180       12
  HT          –        – not reject          –

  Table 4c: Regression of the q on qT
               9       10           11                   12
           Pool       FE           RE                   XS
  qT 1.19∗∗∗ 1.08∗∗∗           1.09∗∗∗             1.20∗∗∗
        (0.038) (0.053)        (0.048)               (0.11)
    2
  R         0.84     0.98         0.77                 0.83
   N         180      180          180                   12
  HT           –        – not reject                      –

Real exchange rate q is expressed as the logarithm of expenditure-weighted real
exchange rate EU15 average relative to country i (an increase is a depreciation).
qT is the logarithm of the expenditure-weighted real exchange rate of tradables in
EU15 on average, relative to country i (an increase is a depreciation). qn is the
log of the relative price of nontraded to traded goods (all expenditure-weighted)
in EU15 on average, relative to country i (qn ≡ qN − qT ). The sample period for
all variables is 1995-2009. P ool is a pooled regression with all countries and years
sharing the same estimate of a constant and a slope. F E is a fixed-effects panel
regression with countries as cross sections. RE is a random effects regression
with countries as cross sections. XS is a cross-sectional regression which uses
time-average values of variables in each country. All standard errors are computed
using a panel adjustment robust to serial correlation (except for XS, where
Newey-West adjustment is used).        Standard errors are in parentheses.             The
estimate of the constant is not reported. A   ∗   denotes a 10%,   ∗∗   5% and   ∗∗∗   1%
significance. Eurozone countries in our sample are: Austria, Belgium, Germany,
Greece, France, Finland, Italy, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal,
and Spain. Rejection of the null at 5% in Hausman test (HT) implies no difference
between FE and RE, viewed as a preference for FE.

                                        44
     Table 5. RER - TFP regression
                             Pool                           Fixed effects                 Random effects                  Cross-section
                      1a       1b               1c        2a       2b          2c         3a       3b           3c       4a        4b         4c
        T F P 0.43∗∗∗            –               –     -0.10        –            –     -0.04        –            – 0.51∗∗           –          –
                 (0.067)                              (0.11)                        (0.094)                          (0.21)
       T F PT           – 0.50∗∗∗         0.76∗∗∗          –    0.003    0.18∗∗            –     0.05    0.26∗∗∗          – 0.67∗∗∗ 0.93∗∗∗
                             (0.059)      (0.062)              (0.11) (0.090)                  (0.09)     (0.079)             (0.145)     (0.19)
       T F PN           –       -0.09 -0.29∗∗∗             – -0.36∗ -0.36∗∗                – -0.29∗ -0.36∗∗∗              –     -0.05      -0.27
                               (0.08)     (0.078)              (0.22)     (0.18)              (0.164)       (0.13)            (0.184)     (0.22)
        U LC            –           –     0.42∗∗∗          –        – 0.46∗∗∗              –        –    0.46∗∗∗          –         –    0.43∗∗
                                          (0.079)                       (0.072)                           (0.077)                         (0.20)
             2
           R        0.25         0.41         0.57      0.84     0.85        0.90    -0.007      0.02         0.32     0.28      0.62       0.76
            N        117          117          117       117      117         117        117      117          117        9         9          9
          HT            –           –            –         –        –            –    reject   reject       reject
     Dependant variable: log real exchange rate (expenditure-weighted) expressed as EU15 average relative to country i
     (an increase is a depreciation). T F Pi is the log of TFP level of traded relative to non-traded sector in EU12
     (log(T F PT,EU 12,t /T F PN,EU 12,t )) relative to country i. T F PT,i,t is an aggregation of 1-digit sectoral TFP of traded sectors




45
     (agriculture is excluded due to issues caused by Common Agricultural Policy) using sectoral outputs as weights. U LCit
     comes from OECD.Stat database and is defined as a ratio of nominal Total Labor Costs for the economy relative to real
     output (2005 base year). We convert U LCit to euro for all countries. ULC in EU 17 (provided by OECD) relative to
     country i (an increase is a depreciation) is used in regressions. The data sample for RER and ULC data is 1995-2009. The
     TFP data sample is 1995-2007. ”Pool” is a pooled regression with all countries and periods sharing the same estimate
     of a constant and a slope. ”Fixed effects” is a panel regression with countries as cross-sections. ”Random effects” is a
     random effects panel with countries as cross sections. ”Cross-section” is a regression which uses the time-average value for
     each country and runs a cross sectional regression. All standard errors (except in Cross − section) are computed using a
     Panel corrected standard errors method (Beck and Katz, 1995) under the assumption of period correlation (cross-sectional
     clustering). The standard errors in Cross − section are Newey-West standard errors. Standard errors are in parentheses.
     The estimate of the constant is not reported. A ∗ denotes a 10%, ∗∗ 5% and ∗∗∗ 1% significance. Included Eurozone
     members are: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Finland, France, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain. Rejection of the
     null in Hausman test (HT) implies no difference between FE and RE, viewed as a preference for FE.
     Table 6. Calibration
                                               Households
      Share of C on traded goods                    γ        0.5
      Share of wholesale traded goods in CT         κ        0.6
      E.O.S. between H and F retail Traded goods λ            8             Corsetti et al. (2010)
      E.O.S. between traded good and retail service φ        0.25
      E.O.S. between traded and nontraded goods     θ        0.7
      Weight on H goods in CT                       ω        0.5            No home bias
      Coefficient of relative risk aversion         σ         2
      Frisch elasticity of labor supply             ψ         1
      Discount factor                               β        0.99

                                               Firms
      Elasticity of labor in Y                    α             1




46
      Speed of Calvo price adjustment                  0.10, 0.20/quarter   Bils and Klenow (2004)

                                          Monetary policy
      Weight on inflation targeting              σp            2            Steinsson (2008)
Table 7a. Cross-sectional properties of
relative TFP and Labor Supply shocks
                   mean values
               āT      āN        χ̄
 BEL        0.054     0.028    0.218
 GER        0.019     0.078    0.026
 SPA       -0.119     0.025 -0.308
 FRA        0.009     0.069    0.093
 IRE        0.251     0.028    0.133
 ITA       -0.028 -0.103 -0.301
 NET        0.131     0.225    0.057
 AUS       -0.049     0.014 -0.002
 FIN        0.202     0.156    0.027
 AVG        0.052     0.058 -0.006
Table 7a reports, for each country, the sample average level of
the of TFP and Labor supply shock as described by Appendix
A.1. and A.7., respectively. The last line (”AVG”) reports the
average value across 9 countries.


Table 7b. Time-series properties of rela-
tive TFP and Labor Supply shocks
           AR(1) coefficients       standard deviations
           ρaT   ρaN      ρχ        σaT   σaN      σχ
 BEL       0.99 0.95 0.82           1.11 0.82     0.17
 GER       0.94 0.90 0.93           1.75 0.62     0.12
 SPA       0.99 0.97 0.95           1.65 0.86     0.16
 FRA       0.89 0.91 0.92           1.24 1.18     0.11
 IRE       0.89 0.69 0.99           3.69 1.79     0.29
 ITA       0.99 0.98 0.73           0.91 1.14     0.14
 NET       0.92 0.99 0.90           1.43 1.03     0.23
 AUS       0.98 0.96 0.86           2.02 0.95     0.13
 FIN       0.99 0.97 0.89           1.34 1.24     0.19
 AVG       0.95 0.92 0.89           1.68 1.07     0.17
Table 7b reports, for each country, the first-order autocorrelation
coefficient, and the standard deviation of the residual series, for
TFP and Labor supply shocks, as described by Appendix A.1.
and A.7., respectively. The last line (”AVG”) reports the average
value across 9 countries.




                               47
Table 8. Properties of model Real Exchange Rates
                 Sticky price A Sticky price B Flexible price                           Data
                        1               2              4                                  5
      STD             0.035           0.037          0.042                              0.033
  (Time Series)   (0.029,0.041)   (0.032,0.044)  (0.036,0.048)
      STD             0.085           0.087          0.088                               0.113
 (Cross Section)  (0.058,0.124)   (0.061,0.126)  (0.059,0.129)
     Serial           0.724           0.685          0.604                               0.670
   Correlation    (0.642,0.798)   (0.597,0.777)  (0.506,0.690)
Results in the ”Data” column repeat those from Table 5. Results in the other columns are based
on regressions with simulated data (500 simulations of the DGP, as described in Appendix B, with
κ = 0.6 and γ = 0.5). As in our data, panels of synthetic data are generated for 15-year (60-
quarter) periods. 10% standard errors are reported in the parentheses. The calibration in column
”Sticky price A” assumes a 10% price adjustment per quarter. ”Sticky price B” assumes a 20%
price adjustment per quarter.



TABLE 9. Model price regressions

                          Table 9a: Time Series Regressions
                       Sticky price A Sticky price B Flexible price                                Data
                              1               2               3                                      4
  Regression of             1.167           1.167           1.169                                  0.60
       q on qn          (1.149,1.189)   (1.150,1.192)   (1.153,1.192)
  Regression of             0.665           0.665           0.666                                   0.11
      qT on qn          (0.647,0.681)   (0.648,0.681)   (0.649,0.682)
  Regression of             1.752           1.757           1.756                                   1.08
       q on qT          (1.722,1.794)   (1.720,1.790)   (1.722,1.789)

                        Table 9b: Cross Section Regressions
                       Sticky price A Sticky price B Flexible price                                Data
                              5               6              7                                       8
  Regression of             1.160           1.162          1.163                                   0.71
       q on qn          (1.125,1.203)   (1.127,1.200)  (1.127,1.201)
  Regression of             0.660           0.662          0.662                                    0.89
      qT on qn          (0.629,0.692)   (0.632,0.689)  (0.633,0.689)
  Regression of             1.757           1.757          1.757                                    1.20
       q on qT          (1.722,1.794)   (1.720,1.790)  (1.732,1.785)

Results in the ”Data” column repeat those from Table 5. Results in the other columns are based on regressions
with simulated data (500 simulations of the DGP, as described in Appendix B, with κ = 0.6 and γ = 0.5). As
in our data, panels of synthetic data are generated for 15-year (60-quarter) periods. 10% standard errors are
reported in the parentheses. The calibration in column ”Sticky price A” assumes a 10% price adjustment per
quarter. ”Sticky price B” assumes a 20% price adjustment per quarter.


                                                   48
Table 10a. Time Series Regression Results
                Sticky price A Sticky price B                      Flexible price       Data
                         1                2                                4             5
  Traded TFP          0.191             0.206                           0.216           0.18
                  (0.094,0.276)    (0.132,0.276)                    (0.194,0.241)
 Nontraded TFP        -0.322           -0.292                           -0.223          -0.36
                 (-0.444,-0.197)  (-0.393,-0.171)                  (-0.249,-0.204)
      ULC             0.341             0.437                           0.698            0.46
                  (0.301,0.444)    (0.401,0.486)                    (0.682,0.710)

 Table 10b. Cross Section Regression Results
                Sticky price A Sticky price B                      Flexible price       Data
                         6                7                                9             10
  Traded TFP          0.351             0.350                           0.354           0.93
                  (0.252,0.448)    (0.260,0.455)                    (0.245,0.481)
 Nontraded TFP        -0.271           -0.263                           -0.259          -0.27
                 (-0.371,-0.149)  (-0.377,-0.136)                  (-0.380,-0.129)
      ULC             0.437             0.457                           0.471            0.43
                  (0.364,0.539)    (0.359,0.566)                    (0.363,0.578)
Results in the ”Data” column repeat those from Table 5. Results in the other columns are based
on regressions with simulated data (500 simulations of the DGP, as described in Appendix B, with
κ = 0.6 and γ = 0.5). As in our data, panels of synthetic data are generated for 15-year (60-
quarter) periods. 10% standard errors are reported in the parentheses. The calibration in column
”Sticky price A” assumes a 10% price adjustment per quarter. ”Sticky price B” assumes a 20% price
adjustment per quarter.




                                                  49
                Figure 1: Dispersion in price differences in EU12          Figure 2: Aggregate Real Exchange Rates (defined as EU15 relative to Home country)
      0.22                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                          BE
     0.215                                                                        0.15                                                                    GER
                                                                                                                                                                Figures
      0.21                                                                                                                                                SPA
                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                          FRA
     0.205                                                                        0.05                                                                    IRE
       0.2                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                          NET
     0.195                                                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                 −0.05
      0.19                                                                                                                                                FIN
                                                                                  −0.1
     0.185
                                                                                −0.15
      0.18
                                                                                 −0.2
     0.175
         1995              2000                 2005                2010                 1996   1998    2000    2002    2004     2006    2008




50
        Figure 3: Traded RER (defined as EU15 relative to Home country)           Figure 4: Nontraded RER (defined as EU15 relative to Home country)
       0.2                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                       BE
                                                                                  0.15                                                                 GER
      0.15
                                                                                                                                                       SPA
                                                                                   0.1
       0.1                                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                  0.05                                                                 IRE
      0.05                                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                       NET
        0                                                                       −0.05                                                                  AUS
     −0.05                                                                       −0.1                                                                  FIN

      −0.1                                                                      −0.15

                                                                                 −0.2
     −0.15
                                                                                −0.25
             1996   1998     2000    2002     2004     2006     2008                     1996   1998    2000    2002    2004     2006    2008
       Figure 5: Traded TFP (defined as EU12 relative to Home country)             Figure 6: Nontraded TFP (defined as EU12 relative to Home country)

                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                        BE
      0.2                                                                      0.15                                                                     GER
                                                                                                                                                        SPA
                                                                                   0.1
      0.1                                                                                                                                               FRA
                                                                               0.05                                                                     IRE
                                                                                                                                                        ITA
       0                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                        NET
                                                                              −0.05                                                                     AUS
     −0.1
                                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                               −0.1
     −0.2                                                                     −0.15

                                                                               −0.2
     −0.3
            1996      1998      2000     2002      2004      2006                        1996     1998      2000      2002      2004     2006




51
     Figure 7: Unit Labor Costs (defined as EU12 relative to Home country)

      0.3                                                                    BE
                                                                             GER
      0.2                                                                    SPA
                                                                             FRA
                                                                             IRE
      0.1
                                                                             ITA
                                                                             NET
       0                                                                     AUS
                                                                             FIN
     −0.1


     −0.2

            1996      1998      2000     2002      2004      2006
A         Data Appendix
A.1        Construction of the panel of sectoral TFP levels across
           Europe
This section documents the construction of the TFP level panel dataset at sectoral
level. The reason for the construction of this dataset to provide the perfect match
to the level data of real exchange rates across Europe. To construct the dataset,
we construct a concordance between the sectors included in the Groningen Growth
and Development Center’s (GGDC thereafter) 1997 TFP level database, and the
sectors included in the KLEMS time-series database. These two databases are meant
to be used in conjunction, as outlined in Inklaar and Timmer (2008). Then, the
cross-sectional TFP database and the time-series TFP database are linked using the
constructed concordance to obtain annual sectoral panel TFP level data.
       Table A1 lists the sectors included in the TFP 1997 level database and Table A2
the sectors in the TFP time-series sectoral growth rate database. Table A3 shows
the concordance between the two, the names of the 21 overlapping sectors, and their
tradability descriptor.

A.1.1       1997 TFP levels

The construction of the 1997 GDDC TFP level database22 is described in Inklaar and
Timmer (2008) (IT thereafter). The database is constructed for 30 OECD countries
using an improved version of the methodology of Jorgenson and Nishmizu (1978)23 .
We use the output-based measure of TFP which IT argue better reflects technology
differences than the two other value-added measures (see IT pp. 23).
   TFP 1997 level estimates are constructed vis-à-vis the U.S. levels in two stages.
First, symmetric Input-Output Tables and input PPPs are constructed for 45 sub-
industries. The second stage consists of two steps. First, PPPs for capital, labor and
intermediate inputs for 29 industries (based on 45 sub-industries) are constructed
using a price-variant of index number approach in Caves et al. (1982) known as the
CCD method. These are used to implicitly derive quantities of all inputs and outputs.
  22
    See http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/ggdc-productivity-level-database.
  23
    The improvements include the use of sectoral IO measures that exclude intra-industry flows, the
application of multilateral indices at the industry level, and the use of relative output prices from
the production side and the use of the exogenous approach to capital measurement.



                                                         52
The second step, known as primal level accounting, sees industry comparative pro-
ductivity levels constructed on the basis of input and output quantities in a bilateral
Tornqvist model as in Jorgenson and Nishimizu (1978). Specifically, for sector i in
country j in 1997, IT estimate the level of sectoral TFP as:

                            SO
                                     QSO
                                       i,j        QKi,j      QLi,j       QII
                                                                           i,j
       ln Ai,j ≡   ln T F Pi,j   = ln SO − ν̂K ln K − ν̂L ln L − ν̂II ln II                               (16)
                                     Qi,U S      Qi,U S     Qi,U S      Qi,U S

where QK                                               L
         j is a quantity index of capital services, Qc is a quantity index of labor
services and QII
               j is a quantity index of intermediate input services. ν̂K is the share of
capital services in total costs averaged over the two countries: ν̂K = 0.5(νjK + νjU S )
                       VjK
where νjK ≡        Vj +VjL +VjII
                     K             and VjK is the nominal value of capital services. In order
                                                                           VjSO
to facilitate quantity measure comparisons, QSO
                                             j  =                         P P PjSO
                                                                                     where VjSO is the nominal
value of output in country j. Similarly for intermediate inputs QIIj . For labor input
QLj , the same ratio measure is justified by the need to aggregate various labor types
(high- vs. low-skill), and the construction of P P PjL which is constructed based on
                                                              ṼjK
relative wages. For capital input, QK
                                    j =                     P P PjK
                                                                      where ṼjK is the ex-ante nominal
compensation of capital ṼjK = VjK − VjR where VjR is ”supra-normal profits” (see IT
section 4.1 for a detailed discussion).

A.1.2      TFP time series

A European Commission-funded project, EU KLEMS data contains annual observa-
tions for 25 European countries, Japan and the US from 1970 onwards. The data is
described in detail in O’Mahony and Timmer (2009, OT thereafter). We use KLEMS’
Total factor productivity growth March 2011 update to the November 2009 release24 .
The TFP is estimated in the growth accounting approach as a measure of disembodied
technological change25 . The growth accounting in KLEMS proceeds under standard
neoclassical assumptions of constant returns to scale and perfect competition26 allows
a full decomposition of industry i output:

               ∆ ln Yit = ν̄itX ω̄itE ∆ ln XitE + ν̄itX ω̄itM ∆ ln XitM + ν̄itX ω̄itS ∆ ln XitS
                                   +ν̄itK ω̄itICT ∆ ln KitICT + ν̄itK ω̄itN ∆ ln KitN                     (17)
  24
      See http://www.euklems.net/euk09ii.shtml.
  25
      Technical change embodied in new capital goods is excluded from TFP due to the KLEMS’ use
of quality-adjusted prices.
   26
      Consequently, negative TFP growth can be observed in some service industries, which OT is
a consequence of well-known measurement issues surrounding corporate reorganization and institu-
tional changes (see Basu et al. 2004 and Hulten, 2001).


                                                                     53
                             +ν̄itL ∆ ln LCit + ν̄itL ∆ ln Hit + ∆ ln BitY

where Y is output, K is an index of capital service flows, L is an index of labor
service flows, X is an index of intermediate inputs, H is hours worked, LC is labor
composition27 and B is an index of disembodied (Hicks-neutral) technological change.
Intermediate inputs are further split into energy (E), materials (M ) and services (S),
each with a respective period-average share ω̄ in total input costs. Each of the inputs
K, L, X E , X M , X S is constructed as a Törnqvist quantity index of individual sub-
                    P I
types (∆ ln Iit = l ω̄l,it ∆ ln Il,it ). ν̄ are two-period average shares of each input in
the nominal output.

A.1.3     Construction of the TFP level sectoral panel dataset

The construction of TFP level sectoral panel dataset proceeds in four steps. First, the
sectors in the 1997 cross-section dataset are matched to the sectors in the TFP growth-
rate dataset. Second, a level TFP series is constructed for each sector and country.
Third, TFP level is expressed relative to EU12 average, to match the construction
of the real exchange rate dataset as closely as possible28 . Fourth, the sectors are
aggregated into Traded and Nontraded aggregates using sectoral output data.
   Let Aij be the 1997 GDDC sectoral-output and PPP based TFP of sector i in
country j, relative to the US. Let Bijt be the EU KLEMS sectoral-output and PPP
based TFP index of sector i in country j and year t, re-scaled so that Bi,j,1997 =
100 ∀i, j. Both A and B are synchronized to the 21 sectors as in Table A3. Let also
Bi,U S,t be the TFP index for each sector in the US, also with the base of 100 in 1997.
Then, sectoral TFP level Cijt is constructed as:

                                                      Aij Bijt
                                          Cijt =                                                 (18)
                                                      Bi,U S,t

and similarly for the EU15 aggregate:
                                                  Ai,EU 12 Bi,EU 12,t
                                  Ci,EU 12,t =                                                   (19)
                                                      Bi,U S,t

The TFP level index expressed vis-a-vis EU12. It is the ratio of (3) and (4):
                                           Cijt               Aij Bijt
                            T F Pijt =                =                                          (20)
                                         Ci,EU 12,t       Ai,EU 12 Bi,EU 12,t
  27
      Labor composition is growth literature’s measure of ”labor quality” (see Jorgenson et al. 2005).
It consists of labor characteristics such as educational attainment, age and gender.
   28
      Only 12 of the EU15 countries have TFP data: Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy,
the Netherlands, Austria, Finland, Sweden, Denmark and the United Kingdom.

                                                             54
       The aggregate traded and nontraded TFP levels are computed as follows:
                                           P
                                              i∈T γij,T Cijt
                        T F PT,j,t = 1 P          P                                         (21)
                                     12  j∈EU 12 (  i∈T γi,j,T Ci,j,t )
                                           P
                                              i∈N γij,N Cijt
                       T F PN,j,t = 1 P           P                                         (22)
                                     12  j∈EU 12 (  i∈N γi,j,N Ci,j,t )

where γij,T (γij,N ) is a 1997 sectoral output weight of sector i in traded (nontraded)
                              P
output of country j (s.t.,      i γij = 1 ∀j). The agriculture sector is omitted from
the analysis because of the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy’s distortion of many
assumption used to calculate sectoral TFP measures.
       Consequently, the relative productivity measure in Traded to Nontraded sectors
is constructed as a ratio of (5) and (6). In our empirical analysis we always work with
the logarithms of these constructed productivity measures.

A.2        Real Exchange Rates
We use a dataset on price levels from the Eurostat-OECD PPP Programme29 . The
dataset covers most European countries over the 1995-2009 period. The data are
annual Price Level Indices, or PLI’s. They give the price of the good category at
a given time and for a given country, relative to the price in the reference country.
The reference country is the EU 15 area30 . PLI’s are available for 146 consumer
expenditure headings on goods and services. These are listed in Table 1. At any
point of time t, PLI for good i in country j tells us how much more (or less) expensive
good i is in country j than in the EU15.
   Table 1 also illustrates the breakdown of goods between the categories ”Traded”
and ”Non-traded”. The criterion of this breakdown follows the categorization of goods
into traded and non-traded in Table A2 of Crucini, et al. (2005). All goods with a
positive trade share are categorized as ”traded”, and those with a zero trade share
as ”non-traded”. Our data contains two types of services that are not in Crucini,
et al. (2005): education (at different levels), and prostitution. While some some
tertiary education engages international trade, the nature of price setting in this
sector suggests that the trade has at most a negligible influence on the price of tertiary
education. We categorize both as non-traded.
  29
     Methodological manuals describing the dataset are available at: http://epp.eurostat.
ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/product_details/publication?p_product_code=
KS-RA-12-023 and http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-BE-06-002/
EN/KS-BE-06-002-EN.PDF
  30
     That is, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Portugal, Finland, and the United Kingdom.

                                                       55
   Composition of the consumption baskets differs across goods, countries, and time.
We construct expenditure weights for each good, country, and year, using the expen-
diture data provided in the same Eurostat-OECD Programme. Specifically, for good
                                                                   expi,j,t
i, country j and year t, we construct a weight γi,j,t =          P146
                                                                      expi,j,t
                                                                                 where exp is the
                                                                  i
local expenditure. We then construct an expenditure-weighted PLI’s for all countries
using γi,j,t .
   Denoting pi,j,t as the log of a PLI, in year t, for a good i in EU15 relative to
country j, we calculate the log of the real exchange rate of country j, qj,t , as the
expenditure-weighted arithmetic average:
                                           146
                                           X
                                  qj,t =         γi,j,t pi,j,t
                                           i=1

Note that, in line with the literature, this measure is expressed such that an increase
in qj,t is a real depreciation.

A.3       Gross wages
Database: Eurostat, National Accounts by 6 branches - aggregates at current prices
Series name: nama nace06 c
Indicator: D11, Gross wages and salaries. Millions or Euro. Total: all NACE activi-
ties.
Link: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=nama_nace06_
c&lang=en

A.4       Unit Labor Costs
Database: OECD.Stat, Unit labour costs Annual indicators
Series name: ULC ANN
Sector: Total Economy
Measure: Level, ratio, or national currency
Link: http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ULC_ANN
Unit Labor Costs are expressed relative to EU17 average, as provided by OECD.Stat.

A.5       Weekly hours
Database: Eurostat, Average number of usual weekly hours of work in main job, by
sex, professional status, full-time/part-time and economic activity (NACE Rev. 1.1)
- hours

                                                         56
Series names: lfsa ewhuna for 1983-2008, and lfsa eqhuna2 for 2008 onwards
Indicator: Series selected for Total sex, Total worktime, Works status: Employed
persons, NACE: All NACE activities
Link: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=lfsa_ewhuna&
lang=en

A.6     Population
Database: Eurostat, Population and employment - annual data
Series name: nama aux pem
Indicator: Total population. Unit: 1000 persons.
Link: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?wai=true&dataset=
nama_aux_pem

A.7     Construction of the labor supply shock
As Appendix B explains, we use the difference between the hourly wage and the
normalized employment to construct the labor supply shocks. For each country, w −n
is constructed as follows: w is the log of the hourly wage. n is the log of employment.
Because our model assumes that countries are of the same size, we normalize n by
each country’s population. The hourly wage w is constructed as overall gross wages
(millions of Euro) divided by total weekly hours worked. Weekly hours worked are
constructed as a product of average weekly hours worked (annual panel) and the total
employment. Employment n is constructed in the same fashion. The EU12 value for
w∗ − n∗ is constructed by calculating the log EU12 hourly wage and subtracting from
it the log EU12 employment.


B     Appendix: Model simulations
The model has three different kinds of shocks in the Home country: productivity
shocks in each of the two sectors, Ai,t , i = H, N , and shocks to the disutility of labor,
χt . There is also a Foreign country. We set Foreign shocks equal to zero, and then
calibrate each of the Home country shocks using data relative to the EU12 set of
countries. Shocks enter the model in relative terms, so this is equivalent to treating
the EU12 as the Foreign country. Note that even though Foreign shocks are set to
zero, Foreign variables are not constant because in equilibrium there is feedback from
the Home to the Foreign country.


                                                   57
    We calibrate the model by generating normally distributed random variables for
nine artificial countries that have the same moments as the data. Specifically, the
artificial data have the same means, serial correlation, and covariance matrix as the
data.
    The data used to create the moments for traded and nontraded productivity are
the same as the data used in our empirical work. There is no direct measure of labor
supply shocks. However, in our model, under the calibration that the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply is equal to one, the term that represents the random part of the log of
the Home relative to the log of the Foreign disutility of labor, under complete markets,
is given by: χ∗t − χt = wt∗ − n∗t − (wt − nt ). Note that the terms on the right side of
the equation are not wages per unit of labor effort: wt and wt∗ have that dimension.
Instead, a term like wt − nt is the log of wage per unit of labor effort squared. Again,
this is the appropriate measure implied by the equilibrium conditions of the model
when the Frisch elasticity equals one.
  wt is the log of the hourly wage constructed as overall gross wage (millions of
euros) divided by weekly hours worked per person. Weekly hours are constructed
from Eurostat as the product of average weekly hours times total employment divided
by population. Total employment is divided by total population to give a measure
of total employment per person. Our model assumes the population of Home and
Foreign is each one, but for different sized countries, total employment must be scaled
by population to give employment per person. wt − nt is the log of gross wage divided
by the square of weekly hours worked per person.
   Our regressions use annual data for 15 years, but we calibrate a period to be one
quarter in the model. The length of the period matters particularly when considering
the effects of price stickiness on the economy. Hence, we create artificial data for 60
quarters. We then aggregate the artificial data into annual data by taking quarterly
averages in order to compare the statistics generated by the model to the data.
    Here is how we translate the moments of the annual data into quarterly data for
the model.
    We suppose that the log of quarterly TFP (both traded and nontraded) as well
as labor preference shocks follow first-order autoregressions:

                                  aqt − ā = ρq (aqt−1 − ā) + uqt .

Annual productivity is the average of quarterly productivity: Aat = 14 (Aqt + Aqt−1 +
Aqt−2 +Aqt−3 ). To a first-order approximation, around the point E(exp(aat )) = E(exp(aqt )) =
exp(ā), we have aat = 14 (aqt + aqt−1 + aqt−2 + aqt−3 ).

                                                            58
     If we had quarterly observations on annual average data, we would find then that
the annual data follow a process of:

                                 aat − ā = ρq (aat−1 − ā) + et ,

where et = 14 (uqt + uqt−1 + uqt−2 + uqt−3 ). In fact, we have annual observations on annual
data, which follow the process:

                                 aat − ā = ρa (aat−4 − ā) + uat ,

where ρa ≡ (ρq )4 and uat ≡ 41 (et + ρq et−1 + (ρq )2 et−2 + (ρq )3 et−3 ).
     We then calculate the serial correlation of the artificial quarterly data using
ρ = (ρa )0.25 . In a couple of cases, the estimated serial correlation coefficient for
 q

the productivity data was above 1.0. Our numerical model assumes stationary pro-
ductivity, so in those cases we set ρq = 0.99. The unconditional mean of the quarterly
process is taken to be the same as the unconditional mean of the annual process.
   Calibrating the variance of the quarterly shocks is more difficult. If the quarterly
data followed an AR(1) with uncorrelated shocks, then the annual data should follow
an ARMA(1,4) process, but we find that an AR(1) with serially uncorrelated shocks
adequately captures the dynamics of the annual data. Hence, we treat the et as
being serially uncorrelated. When ρq is close to one, it implies we should then set
var(uqt ) = var(uat ).
     We calibrate the AR(1) coefficient and unconditional mean for each exogenous
random variable (for logs of traded and nontraded productivity and for logs of labor
supply shocks) as above from the annual data. We draw the shocks for the artificial
data from a Normal multivariate distributions (for each of the three exogenous random
variables) for the nine Eurozone countries with the three variance-covariance matrices
calibrated as described above to the three variance-covariance matrices estimated from
the data.

B.1      The role of measurement error in the the regression of
         q on qn .
In section 3, we noted that the coefficient on qn in the regression of q on qn in Table
4a was lower than that which comes out of the simulated regressions in Table 9a.
This may be due to the fact that non-traded distribution services are not accurately
measured by the observed price of non-traded goods. To see this, take the following
example.


                                                         59
    Let us use the notation pS and p∗S for the true prices of non-traded distribution
services. Assume that pS = pN + u, where u is some exogenous disturbance that
makes the price of distribution services different from the general price of non-traded
goods and services. Assume that pN and u are uncorrelated. Then (9) becomes

                      q = (1 − γκ)(p∗N − pN ) + γ(1 − κ)(u∗ − u)                         (23)

In addition, using the same conditions, we have

            qn = (p∗N − p∗T − (pN − pT )) = κ(p∗N − pN ) − (1 − κ)(u∗ − u)               (24)

Using (24) in (23) we arrive at the ‘true’ relationship between q and qn given by:
                               (1 − γκ)      (1 − κ) ∗
                          q=            qn +        (u − u)                              (25)
                                   κ            κ
Hence, using (24) and (25), our estimate of the slope coefficient in the regression of q
on qn will be
                     cov(q, qn )   (1 − γκ) (1 − κ)2 var(u∗ − u)
                                 =         −
                      var(qn )         κ       κ       var(qn )
                                                       1−γκ
The coefficient estimate is biased downwards from        κ
                                                            .   The bias is larger, the larger
is the share of the non-traded distribution service.


C      Further discussion of Eurostat data procedures
Here we quote extensively, but selectively, from the Eurostat-OECD PPP manual,
Chapter 4, to convey a sense of the efforts that are put in to make the price data
comparable across countries. We say that our quotations are ’selective’ because the
manual itself is over 400 pages long, covering far too many issues for us to mention
here. The data on prices comes from 6-monthly survey. The first set of prices is
collected in April to May, and the second set in October to November each year.
    The composition of a basket of goods within each basic heading (e.g., ”rice”) is
”defined as one that accounts for a significant share of a country’s expenditure within
a basic heading because this means that its price level will be close to country’s
average price level for all products in the basic heading.”.
    The manual argues this data is specifically designed for inter-national comparisons,
and is better suited for that purpose than CPI data (section 4.9 on page 63).
   ”Faced with such an array [.. of goods within each basic heading ...], selecting a
subset of products for a basic heading that can be priced over a number of countries
is clearly going to be difficult, much more difficult than it is to select the products

                                                  60
to be priced at the elementary level of a consumer price index (CPI) within a single
country. There, within broad guiding parameters, the selection can be left to the price
collector whose choice may differ from outlet to outlet providing it does not change
over time. This initiative cannot be allowed to price collectors collecting prices for
Eurostat and OECD comparisons because they are spatial comparisons.”
    Regarding the ’representativeness’ of prices that are surveyed:
    ”Equal representativity or ’equi-representativity’ - does not require all participat-
ing country to price the same number of representative products for a basic heading.
As explained in Chapter 7, the method used by Eurostat and the OECD to calcu-
late the PPPs for a basic heading ensures that any imbalance between countries in
the number of representative products priced does not produce biased price relatives.
The method requires that each participating country price at least one representative
product per basic heading. This is a necessary condition to calculate unbiased PPPs,
but it is not a sufficient condition to obtain reliable PPPs. For this, each participating
country should price that number of representative products which is commensurate
with the heterogeneity of the products and price levels within the basic heading and
with the importance of its own expenditure on the basic heading.”
    The manual has this to say about products included in the survey:
    ”For a product to be included on the product list at least one other country,
besides the proposing country, has to agree to price it. This is a minimum condition.
It is preferable that more than one country agrees to price it. ... Not all proposals
made by countries will be accepted.”
  Much effort is made to insure goods that are priced are comparable across coun-
tries:
    ”At the start, each country group makes its product selection independently of
the other groups and the same products will not necessarily be selected by all groups.
Eurostat and the OECD cover all participating countries in a single comparison ir-
respective of group. It is necessary to make sure before prices are collected that
countries can be compared not only with countries in their group but also with coun-
tries in the other groups. This is achieved with overlap products - that is, products
that are common to more than one group. Overlap products are identified and in-
cluded after the group product lists have been finalized. The process is described
later in the chapter.”
   ”The issue of heterogeneity raised earlier is partly eased by the way basic headings
are defined in the Eurostat-OECD expenditure classification. Definitions list the
products covered by the basic headings. For example, ’other bakery products’ include


                                                   61
’crispbread, rusks, toasted bread, biscuits, gingerbread, wafers, waffles, crumpets,
muffins, croissants, cakes, tarts, pies, quiches and pizzas’. The lists are not exhaustive,
but they are sufficiently extensive to allow the more heterogeneous basic headings
to be subdivided into smaller and more homogeneous product groups. Breaking
a basic heading down into a more manageable framework facilitates both product
selection and coverage. In anticipation of this, the lists for the more heterogeneous
basic headings arrange products in sets. For example, the list for the basic headings
covering clothing identifies four sets or subgroups:

   • capes, overcoats, raincoats, anoraks, parkas, blousons, jackets, trousers, waist-
      coats, suits, costumes, dresses, skirts, etc.;

   • shirts, blouses, pullovers, sweaters, cardigans, shorts, swimsuits, tracksuits, jog-
      ging suits, sweatshirts, T-shirts, leotards, etc.;

   • vests, underpants, socks, stockings, tights, petticoats, brassires, knickers, slips,
      girdles, corsets, body stockings, etc.;

   • pyjamas, night-shirts, night dresses, housecoats, dressing gowns, bathrobes,
     etc.”

   Following the selection of representative baskets (after Eurostat agrees on the
proposals, following negotiations), individual countries collect the actual prices.
   ”Price collection is the responsibility of the participating countries. On receipt of
the final product list for their group, countries are required to price it at a sample of
outlets which, even if selected purposively, reflects the purchasing patterns of house-
holds. They are expected to price as many items on the product list as comparability
and availability allow. After the price survey, countries are required to edit the prices
collected for outliers using the software supplied by Eurostat. After making the nec-
essary corrections, they report the individual price observations, the average survey
prices and a report on the survey to their group leader. The country reports on the
survey, together with the individual price observations, assist the group leader with
the editing of the average survey prices.
   The goods and services to be priced may differ from survey to survey, but all the
surveys share a common objective namely, that each participating country prices
a set of internationally comparable products across a representative sample of out-
lets. Clearly, if this objective is to be met, the price surveys need to be carefully
planned and prepared by their national organizers. Before starting price collection,
participating countries are expected to carry out a number of tasks. These involve:

                                                       62
   • selecting the outlets that are to be visited by price collectors and contacting the
      outlets selected to explain why they are to be visited;

   • preparing pricing materials and other documentation for price collectors (prod-
      uct specifications, survey guidelines, price reporting forms, outlet codes and
      co-ordinates, schedule of visits, identification and letters of introduction, etc.),
      including the translation of product specifications and survey guidelines into
      the national language if necessary;

   • identifying which specifications on the final group product list are to be priced
      and, in the case of generic specifications, which brands are to be priced (if these
      tasks are not left for the price collectors to do themselves);

   • holding a meeting with price collectors to clarify the pricing and supporting
      materials prepared and issues such as how many items per basic heading, how
      many prices per item, etc.

   The tasks are important because they avoid nonresponse and reduce non-sampling
error.”
   On outlet selection:
   ”CPIs measure price changes over time by repeatedly pricing the same product
at the same outlet, thereby keeping the service element constant. For practical rea-
sons this approach has not been followed in international comparisons of GDP. The
’potato is a potato’ rule is applied instead. Each product specified is treated as being
homogeneous regardless of where it is priced. If, when averaging the prices collected
for the product, no account is taken of the different service elements of the outlets at
which they were observed, the average price is likely to be too high or too low. To
avoid this, countries participating in Eurostat and OECD comparisons are required
to select outlets so that the selection mirrors consumer purchasing patterns at vari-
ous outlet types for the products being priced. If consumers buy 50 per cent of their
clothing from departmental stores, 30 per cent from supermarkets and 20 per cent
from specialist shops, then a sample of ten outlets would include five departmental
stores, three supermarkets and two specialist shops.”
   On the number of price observations for each good in each survey:
   ”The number of prices to be collected for each product could be decided using
random sampling techniques. Providing the price variation (CV ) of the product
is known and the desired degree of accuracy (SE) is specified, sample size (N ) is
determined by [t2 CV 2 /SE 2 ], where t is Student’s t and which is here assumed to equal

                                                   63
2 at 0.95 probability. For example, if it is known from the last time the price survey
was conducted that the coefficient of variation for the average price of a product is
20 per cent and the level of precision sought in the forthcoming survey is 10 per cent,
the sample size should be 16. With the same price variation and a precision level of 5
per cent, the sample size should be 64. In other words, a twofold increase in accuracy
requires a fourfold increase in sample size. ... A coefficient of variation of 20 per cent
is high. A coefficient of variation higher than 20 per cent indicates that either the
product description was too broad or that the price collection was faulty. In general,
price differences for a product within a country should not be more than 10 to 50 per
cent, a coefficient of variation of approximately 5 to 15 per cent. Tight specifications
usually have a lower coefficient of variation than loose specifications. On this basis,
rough upper limits can be assigned to the coefficients of variation for specifications
that are brand specific (10 per cent), specifications that cover well-known brands
(15 per cent) and specifications that are brandless (20 per cent). Assuming a level
of precision of 10 per cent, which is both reasonable and acceptable, application
of [t2 CV 2 /SE 2 ] gives sample sizes of around 5 for brand specific specifications, of
around 10 for well-known brand specifications and between 15 to 20 for brandless
specifications.”
   The prices are usually collected in the capital city (for most countries). Conse-
quently, countries need to provide a ”spatial adjustment factor” that helps to convert
those prices to the ”national average price”.
   There is a temporal adjustment to get an annual price uses CPI monthly data.
This is done with ”temporal adjustment factors”, extracted from CPI:
   ”Participating countries extract the temporal adjustment factors from their CPI
data base. COICOP38 is the classification underlying the CPIs of most participating
countries. And, as explained in Chapter 3, it is as well the classification underlying
the breakdown of individual consumption expenditure by households in the Eurostat-
OECD classification of final expenditure on GDP. The correspondence between CPI
sub-indices and basic headings is therefore generally high. But when there is no exact
match, participating countries are expected to select a sub-index, or an aggregation of
subindices, that closely approximates the basic heading in question. CPI sub-indices
are usually more detailed than basic headings and often they can be aggregated
specifically for a basic heading.”




                                                   64
Table A1. Sectors in the GGDC 1997 TFP level database

  1   TOTAL INDUSTRIES
  2   MARKET ECONOMY
  3   ELECTRICAL MACHINERY, POST AND COMMUNICATION SERVICES
  4   Electrical and optical equipment
  5   Post and telecommunications
  6   GOODS PRODUCING, EXCLUDING ELECTRICAL MACHINERY
  7   TOTAL MANUFACTURING, EXCLUDING ELECTRICAL
  8   Consumer manufacturing
  9   Food products, beverages and tobacco
 10   Textiles, textile products, leather and footwear
 11   Manufacturing nec; recycling
 12   Intermediate manufacturing
 13   Wood and products of wood and cork
 14   Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and publishing
 15   Coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel
 16   Chemicals and chemical products
 17   Rubber and plastics products
 18   Other non-metallic mineral products
 19   Basic metals and fabricated metal products
 20   Investment goods, excluding hightech
 21   Machinery, nec.
 22   Transport equipment
 23   OTHER PRODUCTION
 24   Mining and quarrying
 25   Electricity, gas and water supply
 26   Construction
 27   Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing
 28   MARKET SERVICES, EXCLUDING POST AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
 29   DISTRIBUTION
 30   Trade
 31   Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles; retail sale of fuel
 32   Wholesale trade and commission trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles
 33   Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles; repair of household goods
 34   Transport and storage
 35   FINANCE AND BUSINESS, EXCEPT REAL ESTATE
 36   Financial intermediation
 37   Renting of m. eq. and other business activities
 38   PERSONAL SERVICES
 39   Hotels and restaurants
 40   Other community, social and personal services
 41   Private households with employed persons
 42   NON-MARKET SERVICES
 43   Public admin, education and health
 44   Public admin and defence; compulsory social security
 45   Education
 46   Health and social work
 47   Real estate activities
http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/ggdc-productivity-level-database




                                                        65
Table A2. Sectors in the March 2009 edition of the KLEMS TFP time-series
database

  1   TOTAL INDUSTRIES
  2   AGRICULTURE, HUNTING, FORESTRY AND FISHING
  3   MINING AND QUARRYING
  4   TOTAL MANUFACTURING
  5   FOOD , BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO
  6   TEXTILES, TEXTILE , LEATHER AND FOOTWEAR
  7   WOOD AND OF WOOD AND CORK
  8   PULP, PAPER, PAPER , PRINTING AND PUBLISHING
  9   CHEMICAL, RUBBER, PLASTICS AND FUEL
 10   Coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel
 11   Chemicals and chemical
 12   Rubber and plastics
 13   OTHER NON-METALLIC MINERAL
 14   BASIC METALS AND FABRICATED METAL
 15   MACHINERY, NEC
 16   ELECTRICAL AND OPTICAL EQUIPMENT
 17   TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT
 18   MANUFACTURING NEC; RECYCLING
 19   ELECTRICITY, GAS AND WATER SUPPLY
 20   CONSTRUCTION
 21   WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TRADE
 22   Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles; retail sale of fuel
 23   Wholesale trade and commission trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles
 24   Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles; repair of household goods
 25   HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS
 26   TRANSPORT AND STORAGE AND COMMUNICATION
 27   TRANSPORT AND STORAGE
 28   POST AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
 29   FINANCE, INSURANCE, REAL ESTATE AND BUSINESS SERVICES
 30   FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION
 31   REAL ESTATE, RENTING AND BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
 32   Real estate activities
 33   Renting of m. eq. and other business activities
 34   COMMUNITY SOCIAL AND PERSONAL SERVICES
 35   PUBLIC ADMIN AND DEFENCE; COMPULSORY SOCIAL SECURITY
 36   EDUCATION
 37   HEALTH AND SOCIAL WORK
 38   OTHER COMMUNITY, SOCIAL AND PERSONAL SERVICES
 39   PRIVATE HOUSEHOLDS WITH EMPLOYED PERSONS
 40   EXTRA-TERRITORIAL ORGANIZATIONS AND BODIES
http://www.euklems.net/euk09ii.shtml




                                                        66
Table A3. Sectoral concordance

      GGDC       KLEMS       Tradability   Names of sectors
     sector ID   sector ID
 1      27          2            T         Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing
 2      24          3            T         Mining and quarrying
 3       9          5            T         Food , beverages and tobacco
 4      10          6            T         Textiles, textile , leather and footwear
 5      13          7            T         Wood and of wood and cork
 6      14          8            T         Pulp, paper, paper , printing and publishing
 7      16          9            T         Chemical, rubber, plastics and fuel
 8      18          13           T         Other non-metallic mineral
 9      19          14           T         Basic metals and fabricated metal
10      21          15           T         Machinery, nec
11       4          16           T         Electrical and optical equipment
12      22          17           T         Transport equipment
13      11          18           T         Manufacturing nec; recycling
14      25          19           N         Electricity, gas and water supply
15      26          20           N         Construction
16      29          21           N         Wholesale and retail trade
17      39          25           N         Hotels and restaurants
18      34          27           N         Transport and storage
19       5          28           N         Post and telecommunications
20      36          30           N         Financial intermediation
21      37          31           N         Real estate, renting and business activities




                                                 67
