NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCUMBENCY ADVANTAGE IN NON-DEMOCRACIES
Georgy Egorov
Konstantin Sonin
Working Paper 20519
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20519
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Alberto Alesina, Alex Debs, Scott Gehlbach, Mike Golosov, John Londregan,
Santiago Oliveros, Carlo Prato, Alvaro Sandroni, Mehdi Shadmehr, participants of Harvard-MIT Positive
Political Theory seminar, MOVE Workshop on Selection of Politicians in Barcelona and MPSA 2011,
NASM of the Econometric Society 2011, EEA/ESEM 2012, BCEP confererence on institutions and
political conflict, and AEA and IEA 2014 conferences for helpful comments and suggestions, and
Egor Abramov and Pavel Andreyanov for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Incumbency Advantage in Non-Democracies
Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 20519
September 2014
JEL No. D72,D82,H00
ABSTRACT
In elections that take place in a less-than-perfect democracy, incumbency advantages are different
from those in mature democracies. The incumbent can prevent credible challengers from running,
organize vote fraud, or even physically eliminate his main opponents. At the same time, formally winning
the election does not guarantee staying in power. We present a unified model of elections and mass
protests where the purpose of competitive elections is to reveal information about the relative popularity
of the incumbent and the opposition. Citizens are heterogenous in their attitudes toward the dictator,
and these individual preferences serve as private signals about the aggregate distribution of preferences;
this ensures a unique equilibrium for any information the incumbent may reveal. We show that the
most competent or popular dictators run in competitive elections, mediocre ones prevent credible
opponents from running or cancel elections, and the least competent ones use outright repressions.
A strong opposition makes competitive elections more likely but also increases the probability of
repression. A totalitarian regime, where repression is cheaper, will have more repression, but even
in the absence of repression, competitive elections will be rarer. A crueler, say, military, regime, where
protesting is costly, makes repression less likely and, surprisingly, competitive elections more likely.
Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Konstantin Sonin
Higher School of Economics
20 Myasnitskaya ul.
Moscow, 101000, Russia
ksonin@hse.ru

1

Introduction

In 1987, 1993, and 1999, Hosni Mubarak, the president of Egypt, held ‘elections’in which no other
candidate was allowed to run. In 2005, Mubarak agreed to allow other candidates to be on the
ballot, but the election was still marred with an uneven playing …eld, extensive fraud, and jailing of
his opponents. In early 2011, Mubarak faced mass protests, was abandoned by his key supporters,
and ended up under house arrest on corruption charges. In Europe, Alexander Lukashenko, the
president of Belarus, held elections in 2001 and 2006 which were not recognized by the international
community as free and fair. In 2010, he allowed multiple opposition candidates to be on the ballot
yet had most of them jailed on the election night. Following the events in Tunisia and Egypt in late
2010-early 2011, Nursultan Nazarbayev, Kazakhstan’s ruler since independence in 1991, suddenly
announced that he will stand for re-election even though his term from the previous election in 2005
would expire in 2012. On April 3, 2011, with no opposition candidates on the ballot, Nazarbayev
was reported the winner with 95.5 percent of the vote.
The above examples allow us to make several important observations. In a non-democratic
regime, having an election or not, allowing a serious opponent to take part or forbidding opposition
leaders from running, and choosing the extent to which the population is informed about the
outcome are all parts of the incumbent’s strategy set. At the same time, unlike in democratic
countries, winning an election does not guarantee staying in power: the dictator may still be
vulnerable to mass protests, as the example of Hosni Mubarak or a more recent case of Viktor
Yanukovich in Ukraine in 2014 demonstrate. Not every non-democratic election is just a staged
spectacle, however. In Azerbaijan in 2003, the opposition leader Isa Qambar, a former speaker of
the parliament and acting president, was allowed to run against Ilham Aliyev, heir apparent and
son of the outgoing president Heydar Aliyev, and …nished with 15 percent of the vote to Aliyev’s
75 percent.1 In Yugoslavia in 2000, the incumbent Slobodan Milosevic …nished second in the …rst
round with 39 percent, losing to the opposition leader Vojislav Kostunica with 49 percent. He
resigned following the mass protests before the scheduled run-o¤.
In this paper, we study an environment where the incumbent is able to use strategies which are
not available in democratic regimes, such as eliminating opposition leaders physically, imprisoning
them, preventing them from running, and using vote fraud to get the desired result. In our model,
the dictator faces possible mass protests and tries to minimize their scope so as to maximize
his chances of staying in power. He chooses his actions, such as allowing the opposition leader
1

The election was more competitive than the …nal tally may suggest; see Cornell and Ismailzade (2004) for details.

1

to participate in fair or semi-fair elections, or, on the contrary, killing him, with this goal in
mind.2 We thus contribute to the literature on nondemocratic politics by modeling elections as
means of communication with citizens while facing potential anti-government protests. In doing
so, we distinguish between competitive elections, which, even if not perfectly fair and fraudless,
are informative about the relative popularity of the dictator and the oppositions, and uncontested
elections, the results of which are predetermined and uninformative.
Our baseline model is simple: the dictator faces a threat of mass protests against him and his
goal is to make these protests as limited and contained as possible. There is an opposition leader,
who is the single most credible alternative to the incumbent. The incumbent is able to eliminate
this challenger; we model this as an e¤ective yet costly option because of the need to buy military
support or of possible international rebuke. Alternatively, he can challenge him in a free and fair
election (we introduce the possibility of fraud as an extension in Section 4) or prevent him from
running.
Individual citizens have heterogenous preferences for the challenger vis-a-vis the incumbent and
are more likely to protest if they hate the dictator more or if they are more sure of the chance of
success. Importantly, these individual preferences also serve as private signals about the aggregate
distribution of other citizens’preferences, whereas the dictator’s actions whether to repress, whether
to have elections, as well as the vote tally, are all public signals about this distribution. The dictator
has an informational advantage (e.g., he is able to observe economic performance and deduce the
aggregate), and while he cannot directly manipulate citizens’attitude towards him (at least in the
short run), he is able to manipulate citizens’ beliefs about his popularity through public signals.
Our model of protests, where private signals come from individuals’preferences and are not erased
by revelation of public information, di¤erentiates our model from alternatives that use global games.
In particular, we get a unique equilibrium for any public signal that the dictator may make available.
We show that the most popular dictators will choose competitive elections, dictators with
intermediate popularity will do nothing (this may take the form of no elections, or phoney elections,
depending on the historic context), and the least popular dictators will repress the opposition.
These thresholds for competitive election and for repression depend on the parameters of the
model in simple and intuitive ways. For example, consider a totalitarian regime, where repression
is particularly easy, or an oil-rich regime, where staying in power is very attractive because of
2

For models of incumbency advantage in democracies, see, e.g., Ashworth (2005) and Ashworth and E. Bueno de

Mesquita (2008).

2

high rents from o¢ ce. Not surprisingly, these regimes will repress more often because it is cheaper
relative to the bene…ts. Our model predicts that even when repression is not used, competitive
elections are less likely, and this is precisely because repression is cheaper; if such regime does
not use repression, citizens infer that the incumbent is sure of his popularity, which makes them
more skeptical of the chances to overthrow him and limits the scope of protests in the absence of
further information. Thus, it is not surprising that the incumbent would not want to provide this
information by participating in a competitive election.
Alternatively, consider a regime where protesting on the streets is particularly costly, say a
military regime where the army is an active participant of protests and riots. These regimes will,
not surprisingly, use less repression against the opposition, because protests are expected to be
limited. Competitive elections will be more likely, however: with fewer protesters, the marginal
protester is more averse to the regime, and it takes better public information to dissuade him from
protesting. Thus, our model predicts that totalitarian regimes and military regimes will be polar
opposites in terms of using repression and competitive elections, even though we do not model
them explicitly as such.
Extending our model, we demonstrate that a challenger may want to pass on an opportunity
to participate in a competitive election since such an election is organized by the incumbent when
it bene…ts him more than the challenger. This gives rise to further interesting comparative statics results. Suppose, for example, that a country had democratic traditions before falling into
dictatorship, so the challenger is expected to run in an election rather than ignore it and try to
come to power through mass protests. He could similarly face competition for the position of the
opposition’s leader. He will then be more likely to run, but the incumbent will also be more likely
to organize competitive elections because failure to do so will be interpreted as a signal of his
weakness. Thus, unambiguously, countries which previously had a strong democratic tradition are
more likely to keep having competitive elections when a dictator is in control. But they are also
more likely to have repression of opposition leaders: as we show, if the dictator fails to organize
a competitive election, he will be perceived as even weaker, and thus more dictators will resort to
repression if the country had democracy before.
There is a substantial literature in political science that strives to explain elections held by
autocrats (see, e.g., Miller, 2010, for a recent survey). The two most common explanations are: …rst,
information-gathering on national and local issues;3 second, sending a signal about the strength of
3

In Londregan and Vindigni (2006), election outcome is a signal that helps to arrange a stable agreement with the

3

the incumbent to deter entry (Geddes, 2009).4 Przeworski (2009) describes ‘plebiscitary elections,’
which the regime uses to demonstrate that it can “force everyone to appear in a particular place
on a particular day and perform the act of throwing a piece of paper into a designated box.”
(See Geddes, 2006; both Blaydes, 2006, and Magaloni, 2006 …nd evidence of this motive in their
respective countries of study.) Howard and Roessler (2006) provide a classi…cation of regimes
based on their decisions to have elections and to allow opposition to participate. Fearon (2011)
allows democratically elected leaders to ban further elections and analyzes when democracy is selfenforcing. Other models, e.g., Shadmehr and Bernhardt (2013) do not consider elections explicitly
but rather emphasize the dictator’s ability to control availability of information, e.g., through media
censorship (see also Egorov, Guriev, and Sonin, 2009, for empirical evidence on media freedom in
nondemocracies). For a broader treatment of strategies of political survival see, e.g., B. Bueno de
Mesquita et al. (2003), Myerson (2008), and Svolik (2008).
Mass protests, one of the main causes of loss of power by dictators, are studied in a number of
recent contributions. Acemoglu and Robinson (2001, 2006) assume that from time to time potential
dissidents (‘the poor’) are able to overcome collective action problem and coordinate on protests,
while Acemoglu, Robinson, and Verdier (2004) model protests as a coordination game between two
groups of citizens modeled as unitary actors. Shadmehr and Bernhardt (2011) model protests as
a coordination game in which participants are uncertain about the relative payo¤s of a successful
revolution and the status-quo. Limiting the amount of information available to citizens might
increase the likelihood of protests as each individual citizen is forced to rely on others’information
to a larger extent. In Persson and Tabellini (2009), citizens’ decisions to defend democracy by
protesting against a potential coup are modeled using a global game.
Several papers study dynamics of mass protest and the role of information. In Fearon (2001),
citizens protest each period, and the number of current protesters contains useful information for
future protesters. In E. Bueno de Mesquita (2010), protests are modeled as a coordination game
dictators’opponents. In Gandhi and Przeworski (2006), Magaloni (2010), Boix and Svolik (2011), and Miller (2010)
power-sharing arrangements are based on signals provided by election outcomes. Martinez-Bravo et al. (2014) show
that local elections on the village level in China mattered for economic outcomes (see also Brandt and Turner, 2007),
while Lorentzen (2013) describes how, in the absence of elections on the provincial level, China uses local riots to
gather information about corruption of local o¢ cials.
4
In an important case study of Mexican party dictatorship, Magaloni (2006) analyses both motives. Blaydes
(2006, 2008) focuses on Egypt to demonstrate how local elections are used as a monitoring device to identify optimal,
from the dictator’s standpoint, allocation of o¢ ces and distribution of patronage. Gandhi and Lust-Okar (2009) …nd
similar patterns in Jordan.

4

with multiple equilibria, and the vanguard of revolution provides information to other potential
protesters, thus altering the focal point (see also Shadmehr and Bernhardt, 2014, and Kricheli et
al., 2011). Of particular interest are the papers that link mass protests to elections, both theoretical
and empirical. Simpser (2013) collects evidence of electoral manipulation around the world and
suggests that fraud may be used to signal strength of the regime. Little (2013) studies electoral
fraud with rational voters; in his paper, however, the dictator does not possess superior information
and his decisions do not have informational value to the citizens (see also Little, 2012). Kuhn (2011)
presents a model where both fraud and protests are decisions made by unitary actors; he argues that
protests are only possible if the election is won by the incumbent by a narrow margin and there is
evidence of fraud. In Little, Tucker, and LaGatta (2013), the resuls of an election convey the same
information to the dictator and the citizens, and the main question is whether the dictator will agree
to step down voluntarily after losing. Gehlbach and Simpser (2014) study dictators’incentives to
manipulate election results in a two-person ‘sender-receiver’model (see also Rozenas, 2013). Our
paper contributes to the literature on mass protests by introducing a simple and tractable model
of protests with a unique equilibrium for any public information made available, which makes it
particularly suitable for models involving manipulation of information.
Our paper is also related to the literature on violence and political repressions in nondemocracies
(see Wintrobe, 1990, 1998 for early models). Acemoglu, Robinson, and Verdier (2004) and Padró i
Miquel (2007) show how the use of force and fear helps to extract rents. (See Acemoglu, Golosov,
and Tsyvinski, 2008, for a general theory of political incentives; Padró i Miquel and Yared, 2012,
analyze politics of indirect control under the threat of using violence.) In Egorov and Sonin (2005)
and Debs (2010), the winner of a power contest decides the fate of the loser and may execute
the latter in order to prevent him from challenging his position again. In Acemoglu, Egorov, and
Sonin (2008) powerful coalitions are able to eliminate political opponents until a stable coalition is
formed. In this paper, we simultaneously study the use of repression and communication strategies
by the incumbent dictator.5
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a formal model. Section 3
analyzes this model. We …rst study the citizens’decisions to protest, then their voting decisions,
5

Other formal models of nondemocratic regimes look speci…cally at economic performance of these regimes; see,

e.g., Gehlbach and Keefer (2011) on investment, Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2010) and Egorov and Sonin (2011) on
selection of members of the government, Besley and Kudamatsu (2010) and Svolik (2009) on autocrat’s accountability
to a narrow selectorate.

5

and then the dictator’s incentives to use elections and to repress. In Section 4, we endogenize the
opposition’s decision to participate in elections, explore the possibility of electoral fraud, and argue
that our results are robust. Section 5 concludes.

2

Model

We study a simple two-period model of political selection where citizens decide whether to keep
the incumbent dictator (D) or bring the challenger (C) to power after the …rst period. There is no
discounting, and each of the politicians gets utility A every period he is in o¢ ce. Unlike models of
democratic politics, election is not the only way the o¢ ce-holder may change; transition of power
may also be the result of mass protests.
Both politicians are characterized by their abilities, aD and aC , which are drawn from the same
normal distribution N a0 ;

2
a

,6 and neither is observed by the citizens. However, citizens observe

their economic well-being, which is a signal about the incumbent leader’s ability: if in some period
j 2 f1; 2g politician P 2 fD; Cg is in o¢ ce, citizen i gets a payo¤
riP = aP +

P
i .

(1)

This speci…cation captures several important points. First, citizens observe their own well-being,
but not that of their fellow citizens. Thus, by the end of the …rst period, they hold heterogenous
beliefs about the dictator’s ability aD .7 Second, they expect their utility to remain the same as
long as the incumbent stays in o¢ ce: for each citizen, the individual shock
politician in power, but not on the period;8 all
as N 0;

2

P
i

P
i

depends on the

are assumed to be independent and distributed

. Third, citizens do not get any extra information about the challenger’s ability aC by

the end of the …rst period, and expect it to be a0 .
Let us denote the expected net gain of citizen i from regime change by bi :
bi = EaC
6

riD = a0

aD

D
i .

(2)

The assumption that they are drawn from the same distribution is not important and is done to save on notation.

All the results would go through if aD N D ; 2D and aC N C ; 2C .
7
In a more realistic model, citizens would observe the well-being of their friends and neighbors, but not of those
living far away. Our results go through as long as citizens are heterogenous in their preferences.
8
This assumption captures the idea that each politician pursues some speci…c policies which create winners and
losers in the society. In the model, this creates con‡ict of interest, which will guide citizens’ voting and protesting
behavior (see also E.Bueno de Mesquita, 2010). All the results will go through if instead of holding heterogenous
expectations about their payo¤s should the incumbent stay in power, citizens received heterogenous taste shocks
which would a¤ect their decisions to vote and to protest.

6

The citizen bene…ts if the dictator is replaced with the challenger if bi > 0, and is worse o¤ otherwise.
The dictator can lose power to the challenger in two ways: either by running against him in an
election and losing it or, even if he runs unopposed and wins, he may still lose power as a result of
mass protests. We follow Persson and Tabellini (2009) in assuming that the probability of dictator
leaving the o¢ ce, , equals the share of population protesting. Each individual in the society makes
the decision to protest independently and simultaneously. A citizen who decided to protest gets
a disutility of

c (where c > 0), which accounts for the probability of being shot, wounded, …red

from the job, etc.; we expect c to be higher in more cruel regimes. At the same time, a citizen gets
an extra “warm glow”utility, which re‡ects personal satisfaction from protesting against the hated
regime and personally contributing to the dictator’s departure.9 We make the simple assumption
that the warm glow utility of citizen i is proportional to his economic dissatisfaction with the regime
bi introduced in (2). More precisely, if citizen i protests and the dictator leaves, i gets an extra
utility of

bi . Citizen i gets some part of this warm glow, bi with

<

, even if he protested

unsuccessfully; this captures the possibility that a su¢ ciently dissatis…ed citizen may protest even if
he does not expect the protest to bring him immediate bene…ts (e.g., the “Arab Spring”in Tunisia
started with a young merchant self-immolating; there were similar episodes following the failure
of the Prague Spring).10 Clearly, these preferences and intuitions are reversed for a person who
strongly supports the dictator (i.e., if bi is negative and large in absolute value); such a person
would never protest as there is no bene…t from protesting, only cost.
The payo¤s from protesting are summarized in the following matrix:
Dictator leaves Dictator stays
Citizen protests

bi

Citizen stays home

c

0

bi

c

(3)

0

We summarize our assumptions on the payo¤ matrix (3) here:
9

Persson and Tabellini (2009) introduced this parameter to capture the “warm glow”that an individual may expe-

rience from (successfully) defending the idea he/she …rmly believes in, such as defending democracy or overthrowing
a much-hated dictator. In this paper, we assume that some “warm glow” from protests may be experienced even if
the uprising ultimately fails ( bi in the top-right cell). This is in line with the recent (and growing literature) about
ethical actions and warm glow in voting (e.g., Cherepanov, Feddersen, and Sandroni, 2013; see Feddersen, Gailmard,
and Sandroni, 2009, for experimental evidence).
10
Kricheli, Magaloni, and Livne (2011) build a two-period model of protests, where protests in the …rst period serve
as a signal for other citizens to participate in the second period. There, a citizen who dislikes the dictator enough
will protest so as to make his discontent with the dictator public information.

7

Assumption 1 c > 0,
The assumption that

>

> 0.

> 0 is important: it implies that there is always an agent who protests

(notice that for bi high enough, protesting is a dominant strategy). The last assumption,

> ,

captures the increasing di¤erences intuition: If a citizen wants the dictator to leave (bi > 0), his
propensity to protest is higher if the dictator leaves than if the dictator stays. Indeed, this is
equivalent to
bi
which simpli…es to

c > bi

c,

(4)

> .

We also maintain the following simple assumption, which ensures the existence and uniqueness of
an equilibrium, throughout the paper . The assumption provides that there is a su¢ cient variation
in citizens’idiosyncratic payo¤s from the incumbent’s rule. In other words, an individual’s attitude
toward the dictator, bi , is not a too good predictor of other citizens’attitudes.
Assumption 2 The variance of individual shocks is su¢ ciently large:
1
c(
> p
2 2 ln 2

)
2

.

(5)

The dictator knows his own competence, and thus the actual distribution of people’s attitudes.
He has several strategies to choose from in order to maximize the chance of staying in power. One
decision he has to make is whether or not to have elections with the challenger on the ballot. If the
incumbent decides to have such elections, each citizen votes either for him or for the challenger,
and the incumbent wins if the share of votes he gets, , is at least ~ 2 (0; 1).
In the main model, we assume that once the challenger is on the ballot, votes are counted
fairly; in an extension in Section 4, we consider the case where the dictator cannot commit to fair
counting and show that our results are robust. But to have competitive elections, the incumbent
needs some cooperation from the challenger; at least, the challenger must agree to run. There are
various reasons why a potential challenger might prefer not to run: e.g., he might not believe that
votes are going to be counted fairly or that the voting outcome will show that the opposition is not
popular; we endogenize the challenger’s decision to participate in Section 4. For now, we assume
that there is an exogenous probability

2 (0; 1) that no credible opponent participates in elections

even if the dictator tries to organize them. What is critical is that the voters do not observe the
reason why the challenger does not participate in elections: they either see him on the ballot and

8

decide that the outcome is informative, or they do not, in which case the outcome of the election
is not informative, but absence of the challenger on the ballot is.
Another option in the incumbent’s arsenal is to repress the challenger; in the real world, it
might be imprisonment, exile, or even assassination. This option is costly; using it costs some
k > 0. Without a challenger, not only fair elections are impossible, but citizens become more
averse to protests: the citizen’s expectation of the next leader’s competence is a0

where

and thus the bene…t of citizen i from removing the dictator from power is bi = bi
simplicity, we focus on the extreme case

> 0,
. For

= +1, which says that if the challenger is repressed,

the opposition is e¤ectively decapitated and there are no credible alternatives left; as a result,
nobody protests against the dictator and he is certain to stay in power. In other words, we assume
that at cost k, the dictator is able to ensure his tenure in the near future.11
To summarize, the timing of the game is as follows.
1. The competences of the incumbent and challenger, aD and aC , are realized.
2. Each citizen i gets utility riD ; the incumbent leader learns his competence aD .
3. The incumbent decides whether or not to repress. If he represses, the game goes to Step 7.
4. If there was no repression, the incumbent decides whether to have competitive elections; he
succeeds in doing so with probability , which is exogenous in Section 3 and is endogenized
in Section 4.
5. Each citizen votes, the votes are counted, and the tally is announced . If

< ~, the dictator

is removed from o¢ ce, and the game moves to Step 7 with the challenger in power for the
second period.
6. Each citizen decides whether or not to protest with their payo¤s given by (3).With probability
, where

is the share of those who protest, the challenger becomes the new leader, and with

probability 1

, the incumbent stays in power.

7. Each citizen i gets their second-period utility riP , the dictator gets A if he stays in power
(A

k if he repressed), and the game ends.

We use the Perfect Bayesian equilibria in pure strategies for the equilibrium concept, so both
politicians and citizens act fully rationally. We restrict ourselves to equilibria where citizens vote
11

Shadmehr (2013) considers repressions that provoke more, rather than less, protests.

9

sincerely (we discuss below why such strategies are natural in this game where votes serve as a
signal relevant for protests). Throughout the paper, F and f are the c.d.f. and p.d.f. of a standard
normal distribution.

3

Analysis

Our analysis proceeds as follows. First, we study citizens’decisions to revolt for any public information they may have and show that under Assumption 2 there exists a unique equilibrium which
takes the threshold form: citizens with low bi do not protest, and citizens with high bi protest. This
is true both in the case where citizens know the value of b and when they only know its distribution,
regardless of what this distribution is. Second, we study citizens’ voting decisions and show that
sincere voting is an equilibrium. Third, we analyze the incumbent’s decision to have competitive
elections. We …nd that there is a unique threshold such that less popular dictators do not have
competitive elections and more popular dictators try to do so. Finally, we introduce the strategic
decision to repress and complete the analysis of the model.

3.1

Decisions to protest

We start with characterizing individuals’decisions to protest. Denote b = a0

aD and

i

=

D
i ;

with this notation,
bi = b +
where

i

is distributed as N 0;

2

i,

(6)

. This represents bi , which is known to citizen i, as a sum of

the common component b and a zero-mean idiosyncratic shock

i.

Suppose that by the time of

protests (Stage 6), after taking all public information into account, i.e., whether or not there was
repression, competitive election, and the outcome of the election , b is believed to be taken from
some distribution G. (This G will depend on all the prior actions by the dictator, but we keep the
notation simple for now.) Thus, we study the decision of citizen i to protest if he thinks that b is
taken from distribution G and he also observes his bi . One can think about bi as a signal about b,
which is relevant to citizen i because it will determine the distribution of signals of other citizens,
on which they base their decisions to protest; this, in turn, will determine the probability of success,
and this is valuable information for citizen i making the decision.12
12

The protesting game has a lot in common with global games (Carlsson and van Damme, 1993), which are often

used to get unique equilibria in games with strategic complementarities such as currency attacks or mass protests. In

10

Each citizen i, knowing bi , updates her priors on the distribution of b, thus getting distribution
Gbi = G j bi .13 Because of the simple equation (6) that links b and bi , we can prove that Gx
…rst-order stochastically dominares Gy whenever x > y: for any

2 R such that 0 < G ( ) < 1, we

have Gx ( ) < Gy ( ).
In a pure-strategy equilibrium, each individual i decides whether or not to protest. Consider
the set of protesters: let RG denote the set of x 2 R such that a citizen who got bi = x decides
to protest. It is natural to expect (see Appendix for the full proof) that this set takes a form
RG = [zG ; +1), where individual i with bi = zG is indi¤erent.14 If so, the share of protesters, and
thus the chance of the incumbent losing o¢ ce, is equal to
^ G = ^ G (b) = Pr (b +

i

> zG ) = 1

F

zG

b

.

(7)

However, someone who does not know b (e.g., citizen i with bi = x) needs to integrate over all
possible values of b; for this person, the perceived probability of success is
Z +1
zG b
F
dGx (b) .
Gx = Pr (b + j > zG j b + i = x) = 1

(8)

1

In what follows, we will occasionally abuse notation and write
implies that

x

x

instead of

Gx .

Lemma 5

is increasing in x, and so citizens who got a higher bi become more optimistic about

the size of protests, even though they are aware of a …xed threshold strategy that other citizens
use. Intuitively, a high bi serves as a signal of their individual (low) utility under the incumbent
regime, and since it is also a signal of the aggregate, such citizen believes that many other people
feel bad about the incumbent as well. Thus, more of them fall above the protest cuto¤ zG , and
therefore the share of protesters and the chance of success is higher.
For any individual i with bi = x, the expected continuation utilities from protesting and staying
this paper, we make a departure from the standard approach. Technically, we assume that bi is not merely a signal
about the aggregate variable b; it is also a parameter that enters the payo¤ of citizen i directly. There are two reasons
for this approach. First, we believe that citizens have heterogenous bene…t from removing the dictator; their con‡ict
of interests would not vanish if they met together and aggregated their signals, and thus it is realistic to think of bi
as a preference parameter which just happens to be informative of the whole distribution. Second, we are interested
in a unique equilibrium even if there is no uncertainty about the underlying variable b, because in our model, the
dictator has the ability to reveal b by organizing fair competitive elections.
13
More precisely, Gx is the probability distribution of b conditional on b +
Pr (b
14

y jb+

i

= x) =

Ry

1f
R +1
1 f

x

dG( )

x

dG( )

i

= x, given by Gx (y) =

.

An open interval RG = (zG ; +1) is also possible, but we can just assume that the indi¤erent individuals protest

without any loss of generality.

11

at home are equal to
EUp (x) =

x

EUs (x) = [

x + (1

x a0

x)

+ (1

x

c+[

x a0

+ (1

x ) x] ,

x ) x] ,

(9)
(10)

respectively. The terms in brackets re‡ect the second-period utility and are the same in both cases,
as no single individual may a¤ect the chance of success. The threshold citizen with bi = zG must
be indi¤erent between protesting and not. Consequently, the cuto¤ zG must satisfy
zG =

c
)

(

zG

+

.

(11)

Taking into account (8), which must hold for x = zG , we conclude that the equilibrium threshold
zG is de…ned by the following equation:
zG =
(

)

Z

c
+1

F

.

b zG

(12)

dGzG (b) +

1

In the Appendix, we prove that for any distribution G of b, the threshold zG exists, is unique, and
satis…es (12).15
Proposition 1 For any posterior distribution G of beliefs about the di¤ erence between politicians’
competences, b = a0

aD , that is obtained by the time of protests using publicly available informa-

tion, there exists a unique protest equilibrium. It is characterized by threshold z = zG given by (12)
that determines which citizens (those with bi

zG ) participate in the protest.

While the detailed proof is relegated to the Appendix, it is instructive to see some detail in
the special case when the di¤erence in abilities b is public information, and thus the posterior
distribution G is an atom at b. This corresponds to the case where citizens have learnt the truth
about dictator’s competence, for example, by aggregating the results of an election. Equation (12)
then becomes
c

zb =
(

)F

b zb

,

(13)

+

where we abused notation and wrote zb instead of zG (likewise, we will use ^ b instead of ^ G ).
Existence follows, since as left-hand side varies from
15

1 to +1, the right-hand side increases

Notice that the threshold zG is known to both politicians and citizens, since function G is common knowledge.

The probability of success, however, is in the eye of the beholder. The dictator D knows the true value of b and thus
the true distribution of fbj g, whereas citizens have heterogenous beliefs, except for the case where G is degenerate
and b is common knowledge.

12

from

c

to c . Uniqueness is less obvious as the right-hand side is also increasing in z. Intuitively, as

the protest threshold z becomes higher, the success of protests become less likely, and thus fewer
citizens are willing to protest. As a result, a citizen must hate the dictator very much to be willing
to protest, which also raises the threshold. Thus, there is a potential for multiple thresholds, due
to the following strategic complementarity: more citizens protesting makes the success of a revolt
more likely, and this encourages even more people to protest. However, uniqueness follows from
Assumption 2; it ensures that the derivative of the right-hand side with respect to z is less than 1.
The same Assumption 2 guarantees that there are no non-threshold equilibria.
If b is not known, then (12) exhibits an additional e¤ect in the right-hand side as Gz becomes
a di¤erent distribution as z changes. However, we show that this e¤ect does not hurt uniqueness.
Intuitively, a higher z implies that the threshold citizen updates on the distribution of b and becomes
more con…dent in the success of the protests. This mitigates the e¤ect that F

b zG

is decreasing

in the threshold z, and thus the derivative of the right-hand side of (12) cannot exceed 1 in this
case as well. In other words, a decrease of the threshold not only makes citizens more enthusiastic
about the probability of success; it also has the opposite e¤ect: the threshold citizen is more
sceptical about the overall negative attitude towards the dictator as compared to the challenger,
b. This decreases the strategic complementarity e¤ect described earlier, and makes uniqueness of
equilibrium easier to obtain. Notice that we have not made any assumptions about the distribution
G.
Proposition 1, coupled with equation (12), allow us to obtain the following comparative statics
result.
Proposition 2 For any distribution of b conditional on public information, G, the participation
threshold zG is increasing in c, the cost of protests, and decreasing in

and , the utilities that a

citizen receives from participating in successful and unsuccessful protests, respectively. Moreover,
if distribution G1 …rst-order stochastically dominates G2 , then zG1 < zG2 . In particular, if the
average attitude b is publicly known, then the participation threshold zb is decreasing in b.
The comparative statics is very intuitive. The threshold is lower, and thus the probability
of success is higher, if protests are less costly (c is low), because for any …xed chance of success
more people are willing to protest. Similarly, if a person who dislikes the dictator has a stronger
incentive to protest (either

or

is higher), more people will protest. Now, if for two distributions

G1 and G2 , the former dominates the latter, then the chance of success if all citizens above a certain

13

threshold protest is higher under G1 than under G2 ; this, in turn, makes more people willing to
protest in the former case. This last part has general implications: A dictator who is perceived to be
incompetent or who faces an opponent believed to be competent will experience a lower threshold
zG and thus larger-scale protests.
To understand the decision to have a competitive election which would reveal the dictator’s
true popularity, consider the perception of the threshold citizen with bi = zG about the size of the
protests. He believes that the share of protesters and the probability of success equal
may be less than

G,

the objective probability of success, or greater than that. If

zG

zG ,

which

< ^ G , the

dictator expects larger-scale protests than the threshold citizen. For such dictator, revealing the
true value b to citizens would be dangerous: in this case, all citizens, including the threshold one,
will update their beliefs and think that for the same protesting strategies (with threshold zG ), the
share of protesters would be higher: ^ G >

zG .

But in this case, the citizen who got bi = zG

would no longer be indi¤erent; he would strictly prefer to protest, as would citizens with slightly
lower signals. This would make protests even bigger and overall, the threshold would decrease,
endangering the dictator further. In case

zG

> ^ G , the logic is the opposite. Here, the threshold

citizen zG is too optimistic about the chances to oust the dictator. Revealing true b would make
him more skeptical, and he would then strictly prefer to stay at home. Thus, fewer people would
protest, thus increasing the chance that the dictator survives. Consequently, we have the following
result about the dictator’s incentives to reveal the information he has on b in face of protests.
Lemma 1 For any distribution G without atoms, there is a unique threshold bG such that if the
average attitude toward the dictator b < bG , the protest threshold is lower than the protest threshold
conditional on b being public: zG < zb , and thus the dictator is better o¤ by revealing b. Moreover,
zG

> ^ G (b) > ^ b , so the chance of success perceived by the threshold citizen with bi = zG is higher

than that perceived by dictator, which is in turn higher than the chance of success if b were revealed.
For b > bG , the situation is reversed: zG > zb , and the dictator is better o¤ not revealing the average
attitude to him (in this case,

zG

< ^ G (b) < ^ b ). This threshold bG satis…es G (bG ) 2 (0; 1), i.e.,

there is a positive mass of b on both sides of bG .
Before studying equilibrium decision to have competitive elections, we …rst study voting strategies.

14

3.2

Voting

Consider citizens’voting behavior. Their preferences are simple: a citizen i with bi < 0 wants the
dictator to stay in o¢ ce, while citizen with bi > 0 wants to see him replaced. Thus, sincere voting
strategies prescribe individuals to vote for the incumbent if and only if bi < 0. This is indeed an
equilibrium, for the simple reason that each citizen is in…nitesimal. This also involves no dominated
strategies; however, the standard reasoning for such voting behavior is not su¢ cient. In this game,
not only the voting outcome matters, but also the protests that may follow, and the share of votes
that the dictator gets will serve as a signal about b, which will a¤ect zb , the protest threshold.
Fortunately, voting and signaling incentives of citizens are aligned. Suppose, for the sake of
the argument, that citizen i controls a small but positive mass " of votes, and other citizens vote
sincerely. Suppose that he wants the dictator to stay (bi < 0). If he deviated and voted against
the dictator, it would have two e¤ects. First, the dictator would lose elections with at least as
high probability. Second, for any voting pro…le of other citizens, the dictator’s share of votes will
decrease. Consequently, other citizens would believe that the share of those with bi > 0 is higher,
so b is higher than it actually is. This would decrease the protest threshold and increase the chance
that the dictator loses the o¢ ce, which is unambiguously bad for citizen i (regardless of whether he
protests or not). Hence, such a citizen would not want to deviate. Similarly, a citizen with bi > 0
would not deviate because a deviation would increase the chance of the dictator winning elections,
and also lead to smaller-scale protests. Hence, we have the following result.
Lemma 2 Sincere voting strategies, where citizens with bi

0 vote for the incumbent dictator D

and those with bi > 0 vote for the challenger C, constitute a voting equilibrium in undominated
strategies.
In this equilibrium, the share of votes obtained by the dictator is
(b) = F

b

.

(14)

We cannot, however, claim that sincere voting is the only equilibrium in undominated strategies.
Indeed, consider the opposite strategies: vote for the dictator if and only if bi > 0, i.e., only if person
i wants the dictator to lose elections. If such a person with bi > 0 deviated and voted against the
dictator (suppose again, for the sake of the argument, that he controls a small positive mass of
votes), there would be two e¤ects. First, the chance that the dictator loses elections would be
higher. Second, in case he wins, he would get fewer votes. However, since the voting strategies in
15

this candidate equilibrium are reversed, the change in vote tally would be interpreted by Bayesian
citizens as more support for the dictator, not less, and this would reduce the share of protesters (see
Proposition 2). Citizen i wants the dictator to leave and thus wants protests to be more massive.
Thus, if he believes that he is unlikely to be pivotal (which must be true if the dictator dared to
have competitive elections), then deviation to sincere voting is not pro…table because of signaling
value that this vote carries. Such voting strategies will deliver the same results as sincere voting as
everyone will update correctly, but they are not reasonable. For this reason, we focus on equilibria
where voting is sincere.

3.3

Elections

Our next step is to analyze the dictator’s incentives to allow competitive elections. Let us hold his
decision to repress …xed, and suppose that conditional on not repressing, the distribution of b is G.
Ideally, the dictator would have elections if and only if b < bG (this follows from Lemma 1). But
he faces two problems. First, it is possible that the share of votes that the dictator receives,
satis…es

(b),

(bG ) < ~, so there are dictators who would want to have fair elections because of their

signaling value, but are afraid of losing. But even when this is not a constraint, there is a second
problem. If the citizens expect the challenger to get on the ballot provided that the dictator did
not forbid him ( > 0), then citizens would know that a dictator who does not run against the
contender comes with b taken not from G, but from another distribution G0 , given by
8
>
< (1 )G(x)
if x < bG
1 G(bG )
G0 (x) =
G(x) G(bG )
>
:
if x bG
1 G(bG )

This distribution …rst-order stochastically dominates G, and thus the protest threshold under G0
would be zG0 < zG = zbG , and since the inequality is strict, zG0 < zb for some b > bG . If so, the
dictator would be better o¤ revealing such value of b. This argument suggests unraveling: Since
dictators with su¢ ciently low b have elections, those who do not are believed to know that b is
high, and the borderline ones have to have elections to reveal that b is not too high.
However, there is a limit to this unraveling, even if the constraint

(b)

~ is not binding. To

see why, notice …rst that for any belief H about the distribution of b for dictators who failed to
have competitive elections, the dictator’s best response must follow a threshold rule: have elections

16

Figure 1: The distribution Hy for y = bE . Conditional on not repressing (b

bR ), the dictator

wants to participate in competitive election if b < bE , and is able to do so with probability .
if and only if b

bE . Now, for any threshold y, de…ne
8
< (1 )G(x)
1 G(y)
Hy (x) =
: G(x) G(y)
1

G(y)

if x < y
if x

.

(15)

y

Notice that this distribution converges to G in distribution both when y !

1 and when y ! +1,

but G …rst-order stochastically dominates Hy for any …nite y, implying zHy < zG . Thus, if y is very
low, so elections are almost never held, then some types of dictators would be willing to reveal b.
On the other hand, if y is su¢ ciently high, so almost every dictator allows competitive elections
whenever he can, then failure to do so would not be held against the dictator, and in particular
would not be a signal about b. In this case, su¢ ciently unpopular dictators would not want to run
against the challenger. Ultimately, there is a threshold y = bE , and it is unique; this threshold
satis…es the condition zHy = zy . The distribution Hy for y = bE is depicted on Figure 1.
Lemma 3 There is a unique threshold bE such that the dictator attempts to hold elections if and
only if b

bE . The threshold satis…es

(bE )

y = bE is the unique minimand of zHy over

~, but does not depend on ~ otherwise. Moreover,
1; ~b \(support of G) and it satis…es 0 < G (bE ) < 1.

In other words, there are positive probabilities that the dictator will have competitive elections
and that he will choose not to. Quite interestingly, the equilibrium bE satis…es the following
property: of all possible thresholds for having elections, the equilibrium one makes the dictators
who fail to run against the challenger worse o¤; they are going to face protests of the largest size. In
the Appendix, we show that function zHy is strictly quasiconvex, and its lowest point corresponds
precisely to the equilibrium.16
16

Ostaszewski and Gietzmann (2008) prove as similar result in the context of a model of (non-)disclosure of

17

Let us now consider comparative statics. Suppose …rst that the dictator has almost full discretion, i.e., the challenger is sure to agree, and so

is high. In this case, the citizens know that

absence of a challenger on the ballot is likely a signal that the dictator is unpopular, rather than
that the challenger decided not to run. In this case, zHy is lower, so without competitive elections
protests will be larger, which is more dangerous for the dictator. As a result, the threshold bE
increases in . There only limit for this increase is ~b =
high enough,

1 (~ ),

as bE can never exceed it. For

(bE ) = ~, and the dictator tries to run in every competitive election that he can

win.
One may wonder about the impact of the cost of protesting, c, as well as of parameters

and

, on the choice to have competitive elections. Here, the e¤ect is more subtle. Indeed, a higher cost
of protests c raises both the threshold zb for the case where citizens know b and the threshold zHy
if citizens only know its distribution in case there are no competitive elections (this follows from
Proposition 2). Similarly, a higher

or

make citizens more likely to protest for any information

they may know. Yet we get an unambiguous prediction.
Proposition 3 The threshold bE is (weakly) increasing in , the probability that the dictator is
able to organize competitive elections (strictly if
(bE )

~ is binding; for

(bE ) > ~). For

high enough, the condition

low enough, bE converges to bG . A higher cost of protests c makes

elections more likely (threshold bE increases). The e¤ ects of increases in

or

are the opposite

(bE decreases).
Despite its subtleness, the result follows naturally from the following intuition.

higher c

discourages protesting both after fair elections and when there were no fair elections. However,
there is an additional e¤ect: lower level of participation also makes citizens more pessimistic about
the success of an uprising, which further decreases participation. The …rst e¤ect is similar in
size in both cases, but the second e¤ect is more pronounced if citizens are better informed about
b. Intuitively, when citizens know b, the borderline citizen, who is indi¤erent between protesting
and not protesting, interprets his increased scepticism (higher bi ) as a sign that fewer people will
protest, not as a sign that b is actually high. In contrast, when citizens only know a distribution of
b, the e¤ect is mitigated by that this citizen also updates on b: the fact that he hates the dictator
more makes him more optimistic about the success of the uprising. Consequently, a higher cost of
protests c is more likely to deter citizens who know the true value of b, and this makes the dictator
information in Dye (1985), and Shadmehr and Bernhardt (2013) do so in a model of state censorship.

18

choose elections for a larger set of values of b. Overall, there is the following pattern: if it is
more costly for citizens to protest, only the most convicted, and thus disproportionately optimistic
protesters, remain, and the dictator will want to reveal information to moderate their optimism.
The intuitions for changes in

and

are very similar.

The comparative static results above were obtained for a …xed repression strategy. As we will
see below, these results continue to hold if the dictator’s repression strategy is endogenous and
adjusts to the changes in parameter values.

3.4

Repression

Let us now analyze the decision to repress. Our question is when the dictator will use this option,
and how this will a¤ect his choice about having competitive elections if he decides not to repress.
We have already shown that for every repression strategy and thus for any distribution G if
the dictator decided not to repress, there is a threshold bE such that the dictator has competitive
elections if and only if b

bE . As a result, the e¤ective (equilibrium) threshold of citizens’protests

depends on b in the following way: it equals z~ (b) = zb for b

bE and it is z~ (b) = zbE for b > bE ,

i.e., z~ (b) = zminfb;bE g . Our next goal is to show that the repression strategy also takes the form
of a threshold, which depends on threshold bE : We then analyze how these thresholds a¤ect one
another, and this allows us to establish both the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium, as well
all the comparative statics results.
For an arbitrary value of bE = y, consider the dictator’s decision to repress, if in case he does
not repress, citizens protest if and only if bi

z~y (b), where

z~y (b) = zminfb;yg .

(16)

Then the expected utility of a dictator who does not repress is
Z z~y (b)
x
y
VD (b) = A (1 ^ ) = A
f
= A

Z

z~y (b) b

f

x

b

dx

1

dx.

1

Since z~y (b) is nonincreasing in b for any given y, we have that VDy (b) is strictly decreasing in b.
If the dictator represses, he gets A

k. Consequently, the dictator will never repress if k

A,

whereas for A < k, the dictator’s decision to repress takes the form of a threshold; he will repress
if b > R (y), where the function R is given by
Z +1

f

z~y (R(y)) R(y)

19

x

dx =

k
.
A

(17)

Figure 2: The reaction functions E ( ) and R ( ).
This function R (y) is nonincreasing in y, because z~y (b) b is decreasing (strictly) in b and (weakly)
in y. This admits a simple intuition: a higher y means that citizens protest in weakly higher
numbers for any b, which is worse for the dictator, and he is more likely to repress. In equilibrium,
the thresholds bR (for repression) and bE must satisfy bR = R (bE ).
At the same time, every repression threshold bR = r de…nes a posterior distribution of b if the
dictator does not repress:
r

G (b) =

8
<
:

Rb

1f

x
b

dx =
1

Rr

1f

x
b

dx

if b

r

.

if b > r

This, in turn, de…nes a unique equilibrium threshold for elections bE = E (r), which is an nondecreasing function of r (it is increasing if bE < ~b and has a ‡at part above ~b). Indeed, the distribution
0

Gr …rst order stochastically dominates Gr if r0 > r, and this implies that E (r0 )

E (r). Intuitively,

a higher repression threshold implies that a dictator who did not use repression is, on average, less
popular (has a higher b), so the citizens are more optimisic about the success of protests, and the
dictator sees more internal pressure to reveal his true popularity. These two reactions functions are
depicted in Figure 2.
In equilibrium, we must have bE = E (bR ) and bR = R (bE ), and these two equations simultaneously determine the two equilibrium thresholds bE and bR . We have the following result.
20

Lemma 4 If the cost of repression k is high (k

A), there are no repressions (bR = +1), and

there is a unique equilibrium value of bE . If k < A, there is a unique equilibrium given by a
pair of thresholds bE and bR satisfying bE < bR : for b > bR , the dictator represses at cost k; for
bE < b
b

bR , the dictator does not repress, but does not allow competitive elections either; for

bE he does not repress and tries to organize a competitive election.
The characterization of equilibrium in terms of reaction functions E ( ) and R ( ) facilitates

obtaining the comparative statics results. For example, if either A increases or k decreases, i.e., the
cost of repression as a fraction of utility from having o¢ ce becomes lower, R (y) decreases for any
given y. The function bE = E (bR ) is preserved (the election threshold does not depend on A or k
directly), and it is easy to see from Figure 2 that both equilibrium thresholds bR and bE decrease.
The intuition for bR is straightforward; as repression becomes cheaper, the dictator will use it more
often. This, however, has the following spillover: a dictator who does not use repression when it is
relatively cheap signals that he is su¢ ciently strong (has low b), and this makes citizens less willing
to protest, absent further information. Not surprisingly, in this case, the dictator is less willing
to provide this further information, so he prefers to have elections less often, and this results in a
lower bE .
A similar e¤ect is present if we vary . By Proposition 3, E (r) increases for any r, because
citizens interpret absence of competitive elections as incumbent’s weakness, and this prompts him
to elections for more parameter values. However, if this is the case, then protests in the case of
absence of competitive elections become larger, the dictator’s expected utility if he does not repress
goes down, and he is more likely to repress. Thus, bE increases and bR decreases, while the response
function bR = R (bE ) is preserved. These, and other results are summarized in the next proposition.
Proposition 4 An increase in the bene…ts of being in o¢ ce, A, or a decrease in the cost of repressions, k, decreases thresholds bE (strictly if bE < ~b) and bR , making repression more likely and
competitive elections less likely. An increase in , the probability that the challenger runs if given a
chance, increases bE and decreases bR (strictly in both cases if bE < ~b), making both repression and
competitive elections more likely at the expense of uncontested elections. In addition, an increase
in c, the personal cost of protest, or a decrease in

or , the utilities that a citizen receives from

participating in successful and unsuccessful protests, respectively, make competitive elections more
likely (bE increases), and repression less likely (bR increases).
The comparative statics results on the regime’s cruelty c, or the warm glow parameters
21

and ,

is not that straightforward, because they a¤ect both R (y) and E (r). As shown above in Proposition
3, an increase in c or a decrease in

or

increase bE and thus make competitive elections more

likely. Thus, E (r) increases for any given r. At the same time, these changes decrease the scale
of protests for any given beliefs about b that citizens may have, and this makes the dictator less
willing to repress, thereby increasing the threshold bR = R (y) for any election threshold y. Thus,
the e¤ect of these changes on bE is unambiguous: it increases, making competitive elections more
likely, and this con…rms that Proposition 3 holds even if the decision to repress is endogenized. The
e¤ect on bR is apriori ambiguous: while the direct e¤ect leads to a higher bR and fewer repressions,
there is another, indirect e¤ect: When bE increases, then, as in the case of an increase in , citizens
believe that a dictator who failed to have competitive elections is unpopular, which makes them
protest in large numbers, and which makes the dictator more willing to repress. In the Appendix
we show that the direct e¤ect always dominates, and bR increases. All comparative statics results
are summarized in the table below.

4

Extensions

In this section, we consider extensions of the model that show robustness of our main results and
highlight additional e¤ects that we did not cover in the main body of the paper. First, we endogenize
the opposition’s willingness to participate in an election organized by the dictator. Then, we analyze
what happens if the dictator is able to commit fraud and, in particular, win elections that he would
lose without fraud.

4.1

Endogenous Decision to Run

So far, we assumed that the challenger runs with probability

< 1 if he is given this option. We

now endogenize his decision to run. We will see that not running is not only possible (which would

22

justify our assumption

< 1); in fact, not participating in elections is a more attractive option for

the challenger who wants to come to power, unless he has other reasons to be on the ballot.
Consider the following modi…cation of our basic game. The dictator …rst decides whether or
not to repress the opposition and, if not, whether or not to allow competitive elections. If he
allows competitive elections, the challenger decides whether to participate or not. If he decides to
participate, competitive elections take place, and if he does not, then citizens observe absence of
competitive elections and of repression; still, citizens cannot observe whether it is the challenger
who decided to pass or the dictator who put enough obstacles to keep the challenger o¤ the ballot.
(Notice that the decisions by the dictator and the challenger may be made in a di¤erent order or
simultaneously: the dictator’s decision to have a competitive election matters only if the challenger
agrees to run, and vice versa.)
We assume the following payo¤s for the challenger. If he comes to power, either through
an election or mass protests, he gets a bene…t A from being in power, similar to the incumbent
dictator. Let us assume that participating in a competitive election gives the challenger utility w,
which may be positive (e.g., nonpecuniary bene…ts of political participation) or negative (e.g., the
opportunity cost of a campaign), and this utility is realized regardless of the outcome, in particular
if he loses (the dictator will organize only such elections in our model). This utility is drawn from
some distribution with c.d.f.

(w), which has full support on ( 1; +1). The realization of w is

observed by the challenger at the time of making the decision whether or not to run. We do not
introduce notation for the challenger’s disutility from being repressed because he decides whether
or not to run after he knows he is not repressed. The question we are asking is for what values of
w the challenger will decide to participate in the election.
Naturally, the challenger will participate in the election if and only if w

w
~ for some threshold

w.
~ Naive intuition may suggest that w
~ < 0, meaning the challenger runs in all elections which give
him a nonnegative utility, plus perhaps some more, because of the chance of winning and getting
A in the next period. However, because in this game elections are organized by the dictator who
has superior information about his popularity, the result is going to be di¤erent. Indeed, suppose
that w = 0, so the challenger does not get any immediate bene…ts nor bears costs from elections
per se. The dictator organizes a competitive election if and only if b

bE , consequently, if b > bE ,

the challenger’s decision to run does not have payo¤ consequences. If b < bE , then deciding to run
leads to the following: the election is competitive, the dictator gets share of votes

(b) given by

(14) and wins, the true value of b gets revealed, and protests follow, with threshold zb depending

23

on b. If, however, the challenger does not run, the election is not competitive, b is not revealed,
the citizens’posterior distribution of b is given by HbE given by (15), and the subsequent protests
zb for all b

will have threshold zHbE . However, we know that zHbE

bE , and for b < bE the

inequality is strict. In other words, if the election is not competitive, the citizens will protest in
larger numbers. Given that, not participating in the election is a best response for the challenger
for any value of b. This means that he will not participate even if w is small but positive, in other
words, we must have w
~ > 0, contrary to the naive intuition above.
What determines the equilibrium value of w?
~ For any given w,
~ from the perspective of the
dictator, the challenger participates with probability , where
=1

is now endogenously given by

(w)
~ .

Now suppose that w
~ decreases to w
~0 < w
~ ( increases to

0

> ), so the challenger is more likely to

participate. Proposition 4 implies that in this case, competitive elections will be used more often,
so bE increases (at least up to the point where the constraint bE

~b starts binding). In equilibrium,

bE is chosen such that the protest threshold in case of no elections is equal to the threshold zbE ,
which is the threshold if a competitive election is held for b = bE . This implies the following: as
increases to

0,

the threshold bE increases to b0E > bE . The consequences for protest thresholds

are the following. If the challenger runs, the threshold will remain at zb for b < bE , it will decrease
from zbE to zb for bE < b < b0E (there were no elections before the change, but there are elections
after), and it will decrease from zbE to zb0E for b > b0E . If the challenger does not run, the threshold
will decrease from zbE to zb0E for all b. This means that every value of b, the marginal decrease in
the protest threshold is larger if the challenger does not run than if he runs, which makes him less
willing to participate in the election.
We thus have shown that there is the following strategic interaction. The more likely the
challenger is to run, the more willing the dictator is to allow competitive elections. But this,
in turn, prompts the challenger to avoid running in elections, because uncontested elections will
cast even more doubt on the popularity of the dictator. This suggests that even if the challenger
makes his decision to run strategically, there is a unique equilibrium, and in this equilibrium, some
challengers run and some do not.
Suppose that the bene…t from participating in election increases, so the distribution
to

0,

changes

which …rst order stochastically dominates . This may happen, for example, if the challenger

is more compelled to run in elections, e.g., if there is a democratic tradition that gives him disutility
if he does not participate in an election, or if his position as the leader of the opposition is not secure
24

and he will be sidelined in the future if he fails to participate now. This makes

higher for any

…xed threshold w.
~ As a result, the equilibrium will change in the following way: the dictator will
be more likely to allow competitive elections and also more likely to repress, while the challenger
will be more likely to run, even though the threshold w
~ will increase as well. This suggests that
if the country had a democratic tradition earlier, or if there is competition for the position of the
opposition leader, then the country will see more competitive elections, but more repressions as
well.
This subsection suggests that our results are robust to endogenizing the challenger’s decision
to participate in elections. More importantly, these results suggest that studying the behavior of
the opposition and the dictator in an environment where the dictator possesses special incumbency
advantages is tractable within our framework, and this may be an interesting avenue for future
research.

4.2

Electoral Fraud

Our analysis so far assumed that in a competitive election there is no fraud, the vote tally is reported
truthfully, and citizens are thus able to infer the dictator’s true popularity, which is precisely the
reason the dictator organized this election. The possibility of fraud could prevent the citizens from
making this inference: consider, for instance, a dictator who always reports that he won with 99.9%
(as was typical in the Soviet Union), and failure to do so is interpreted as extreme unpopularity
and leads to major protests. We take the view that such elections with such unconstrained fraud
may not be viewed as competitive, and in our classi…cation this scenario would fall under ‘absence
of competitive elections’.
In many cases, however, technological or political constraints prevent reporting arbitrarily high
numbers. For example, the presence of observers from opposition parties or using automated voting
or counting systems may limit or even prevent fraud in some precincts. (Enikolopov et al., 2013,
use a …eld experiment to show that the presence of trained observers in select precincts in Moscow
lowered the vote share of the ruling party, United Russia, in the election to the Russian parliament
in 2012, by at least 11 percentage points, from 47 to 36 percent on average.) In this Subsection,
we argue that the possibility of fraud does not change our main results as long as the vote tally
is informative about the dictator’s true support. The possibility of fraud may make the dictator
more likely to have competitive elections and also more likely to repress.
Consider a very simple model of electoral fraud. Suppose that if the incumbent gets share of

25

votes

in the election, he is able to report any result up to q ( ), where q ( ) is a strictly increasing

function and q ( )

. For example, this function q may take a simple linear form: if share

of

precincts report truthfully whereas the dictator has full control in the rest, the maximum he can
report is
q( ) =

+ (1

).

If so, in equilibrium, the dictator will report ^ = q ( ), the citizens will observe the value of ^ and
infer

=q

1 (^ ),

and thus b =

F

1

q

1 (^ )

. Thus, with such fraud, the voters are still able

to make a perfect inference about the dictator’s popularity. We see that even dictators who are
sure to win may use fraud; the reason is that if they do not, citizens will believe that they are less
popular and used fraud anyway (see also Simpser, 2013).
To understand the impact of fraud, suppose that we start with a scenario where fraud is impossible, and then introduce fraud. If in equilibrium the condition bE

~b was not binding, then

after fraud is introduced, all types of the dictator that have competitive elections will engage in
fraud, but this will not change the voters’posterior beliefs about b, and thus it will not change the
incentives to have elections, because every type of the dictator made an optimal choice to reveal b or
not. In the opposite case, where the conditon bE

~b was binding, there are types of dictators with

b > ~b who wanted to reveal their type b in equilibrium, but could not do so through competitive
elections because they would lose. Once fraud becomes possible, some of these dictators with b
close to ~b, i.e., those who would lose by a narrow margin, are now able to use fraud to win elections. This implies that introducing fraud will enable more dictators to have competitive elections.
But this also implies that those dictators who opt against having elections would be perceived as
even weaker, and would face larger protests (this follows from the fact that the threshold zHy is
quasiconvex in threshold y for any given level of repressions, as we show in the proof of Lemma 3
in the Appendix). Now, the repression threshold bR will not remain constant; since dictators with
b close to bR now face larger protests if they fail to repress, their incentives to repress go up, and
therefore bR goes down in equilibrium.
We have thus shown that the possibility of fraud has no consequences for the incumbent’s strategy to have elections or to repress in the case where all dictators who wanted to have competitive
elections could do so. If, however, there are dictators who choose not to have competitive elections
only because they are afraid of losing, then the possibility of fraud relaxes this constraint, thus enabling more competitive (though, needless to say, fraudulent) elections. On the ‡ip side, a country
where fraud is possible will also see more repressions.
26

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we considered a leader who wants to dissuade citizens from protesting by communicating that he has a su¢ cient number of supporters who prefer to keep him in power and that any
protests are unlikely to succeed. We showed that competitive election which are at least somewhat
fair and thus informative about the dictator’s true popularity may be used for this purpose. Similarly, refraining from costly repression is also a signal of con…dence. We studied how the use of
these strategies, to run in competitive elections and to repress opposition, interact with each other,
and we obtained rich comparative statics results which provide testable implications for empirical
studies of non-democratic regimes.
In particular, we show that competitive elections are more likely if the incumbent does not value
o¢ ce too much, if protesting is costly for citizens, or if opposition has incentives to challenge the
dictator in elections. They are less likely to take place if the dictator values o¢ ce signi…cantly or
repression is relatively cheap or easy to organize. For example, we expect countries rich in natural
resources such as oil or totalitarian regimes to ban competitive elections and countries which are
ruled by the military or which had a democratic tradition before falling into dictatorship to allow
competitive elections more often. The countries where dictators do not allow competitive elections
are also likely to be the countries where the opposition is repressed. One notable exception to this
pattern are countries with a democratic tradition and/or competitive and well-organized opposition,
so an opposition leader is compelled to run: in these countries, opposition is unlikely to be ignored
by the incumbent, and we expect to see more competitive elections on the one hand and more
repressions on the other.
Our model is simple and tractable but not without limitations. Most importantly, in our view,
the interaction between the incumbent and the opposition is one-shot. It would be interesting to
analyze how the incumbent’s use of his strategies of staying in power changes throughout his tenure,
how opposition leaders are selected, and what strategies they are likely to use after coming to power.
Answering these questions requires studying a dynamic multiperiod model, and we believe this to
be a promising direction for future research.

27

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2008) “Coalition Formation in NonDemocracies,” Review of Economic Studies, 75( 4), 987-1010.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2010) “Political Selection and and Persistence of Bad Governments”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(4): 1511-1575.
Acemoglu, Daron, Mikhail Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2008) “Political Economy of Mechanisms”
Econometrica, 76(3): 619-641.
Acemoglu, Daron and Robinson, James (2001). “A Theory of Political Transitions,” American
Economic Review, 91, 938-963.
Acemoglu, Daron and Robinson, James (2006). Political Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
MIT Press.
Acemoglu, Daron, James Robinson, and Thierry Verdier, (2004) “Kleptocracy and Divide-andRule: A Model of Personal Rule”, Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and
Proceedings, April–May 2004, Vol. 2, 162–192.
Ashworth, Scott (2005) “Reputational Dynamics and Political Careers”Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization 21 (2): 441–66.
Ashworth, Scott and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita (2008) “Electoral Selection, Strategic Challenger
Entry, and the Incumbency Advantage” Journal of Politics 70(4): 1006-1025.
Besley, Timothy and Masayuki Kudamatsu, “Making Autocracy Work,” in Institutions and Economic Performance, ed. Elhanan Helpman (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).
Blaydes, Lisa (2006) Who Votes in Authoritarian Elections and Why? Determinants of Voter
Turnout in Contemporary Egypt, mimeo.
Blaydes, Lisa (2008) Authoritarian Elections and Elite Management: Theory and Evidence from
Egypt, mimeo.
Boix, Carles and Milan Svolik (2011), “The Foundations of Limited Authoritarian Government:
Institutions and Power-sharing in Dictatorships,” mimeo.
Brandt, Loren and Matthew Turner (2007) “The Usefulness of Imperfect Elections: The Case of
Village Elections in Rural China,” Economics and Politics, 19(3): 453-480
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Smith, Alastair, Silverson, Randolph, and Morrow, James (2003) The
Logic of Political Survival, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan (2010) “Regime Change and Revolutionary Entrepreneurs,” American
Political Science Review 104(3): 446-466.
28

Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme (1993) “Global Games and Equilibrium Selection,” Econometrica 61: 989-1018.
Cornell, Svante E., and Fariz Ismailzade (2004) “Azerbaijan”, in Freedom House (eds) Nations
in Transit 2004: Democratization in East Central Europe and Eurasia. Rowman & Little…eld
Publishers, Inc: Oxford, UK.
Cherepanov, Vadim, Timothy Feddersen, and Alvaro Sandroni (2013) Revealed Preferences and
Aspirations in Warm Glow Theory, Economic Theory 54(3): 501-535.
Debs, Alexandre (2010) Living by the Sword and Dying by the Sword? Leadership Transitions In
and Out of Dictatorships, mimeo.
Dye, Ronald A. (1985) “Disclosure of Nonproprietary Information,”Journal of Accounting Research
23(1): 123-145.
Egorov, Georgy, Sergei Guriev, and Konstantin Sonin (2009) “Why Resource-Poor Dictators Allow
Freer Media: A Theory and Evidence from Panel Data,”American Political Science Review, 103(4):
645-668.
Egorov, Georgy, and Konstantin Sonin (2005) The Killing Game: A Theory of Non-Democratic
Succession, mimeo.
Egorov, Georgy, and Konstantin Sonin (2011) Dictators and Their Viziers: Loyalty-vs.-Competence
Trade-o¤, Journal of European Economic Association, 9(5): 903-930.
Enikolopov, Ruben, Vassily Korovkin, Maria Petrova, Konstantin Sonin, and Alexei Zakharov
(2013) Field Experiment Evidence of Electoral Fraud in Russian Parliamentary Elections, Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 110(2):448-52.
Fearon, James (2011) “Self-Enforcing Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 1661–
1708.
Feddersen, Timothy, Sean Gailmard, and Alvaro Sandroni (2009) Moral Bias in Large Elections:
Theory and Experimental Evidence, American Political Science Review 103(2): 175-192.
Gandhi, Jennifer and Ellen Lust-Okar (2009) “Elections under Authoritarianism,” Annual Review
of Political Science, 12: 403–22.
Gandhi, Jennifer, and Adam Przeworski (2007) “Authoritarian Institutions and the Survival of
Autocrat”, Comparative Political Studies.
Geddes, Barbara (2006) Why Parties and Elections in Authoritarian Regimes?, mimeo
Geddes, Barbara (2009) How Autocrats Defend Themselves against Armed Rivals, mimeo.
Gehlbach, Scott and Paul Keefer (2011) “Investment Without Democracy: Ruling-Party Institu-

29

tionalization and Credible Commitment in Autocracies,” Journal of Comparative Economics 39
123–139.
Gehlbach, Scott and Alberto Simpser (2014) “Electoral Manipulation as a Bureaucratic Control",
American Journal of Political Science, forthcoming.
Howard, Marc and Philip Roessler (2006) “Liberalizing Electoral Outcomes in Competitive Authoritarian Regimes.” American Journal of Political Science 50.2 : 362-378.
Kricheli, Ruth, Beatriz Magaloni, and Yair Livne (2011) “Taking to the Streets: Theory and
Evidence on Protests under Authoritarianism,” mimeo.
Kuhn, Patrick M. (2010) “Fraud, Coordination Problems, and Successful Post-Electoral Protests
in Competitive Electoral Autocracies,” MPSA 2010 Annual Meeting Paper.
Little, Andrew (2012) Fraud and Monitoring in Noncompetitive Elections, mimeo.
Little, Andrew (2013) Rational Expectations and Electoral Fraud, Quarterly Journal of Political
Science, 7: 249–283.
Little, Andrew, Joshua Tucker, and Tom LaGatta (2013) Elections, Protest, and Alternation of
Power, mimeo.
Londregan, John and Andrea Vindigni (2006) “Voting as a Credible Threat,” mimeo.
Lorentzen, Peter L. (2013) Regularizing Rioting: Permitting Public Protest in an Authoritarian
Regime, Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 8: 127-158.
Magaloni, Beatriz (2006) Voting for Autocracy: Hegemonic Party Survival and Its Demise in Mexico
(2006) New York: Cambridge University Press.
Magaloni, Beatriz (2010) “The Game of Electoral Fraud and the Ousting of Authoritarian Rule”
American Journal of Political Science, 54(3): 751-65.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Gerard Padró i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao (2014) “Political
Reform in China: Elections, Public Goods and Income Distribution,” mimeo.
Miller, Michael (2010) Information Revelation and Policy Responsiveness in Electoral Authoritarian
Regimes, mimeo.
Myerson, Roger (2008) “The Autocrat’s Credibility Problem and the Foundations of the Constitutional State,”American Political Science Review, 102: 125–139.
Ostaszewski, Adam J., and Miles B. Gietzmann (2008) “Value Creation with Dye’s Disclosure
Option: Optimal Risk-shielding with an Upper Tailed Disclosure Strategy,”Review of Quantitative
Finance and Accounting, 31(1): 1-27.
Padró i Miquel, Gerard (2007) “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics of

30

Fear,” Review of Economic Studies 74(4): 1259-1274.
Padró i Miquel, Gerard and Pierre Yared (2012) The Political Economy of Indirect Control, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(2): 947-1015, May 2012.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
MIT Press: Cambridge.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2009) Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and Economic Change, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(2):88-126.
Przeworski, Adam, Michael E. Alvarez, José Antonio Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi (2000)
Democracy and development: Political institutions and well-being in the world, Cambridge Studies
in the Theory of Democracy, Cambridge Univ. Press.
Przeworski, Adam (2009) Constraints and Choices: Electoral Participation in Historical Perspective,
Comparative Political Studies, 42(4): 4-30.
Rozenas, Arturas (2013) Forcing Consent: Information and Power in Non-Democratic Elections,
mimeo.
Shadmehr, Mehdi (2013) Repression Back…re, mimeo.
Shadmehr, Mehdi, and Dan Bernhardt (2011) “Collective Action with Uncertain Payo¤s: Coordination, Public Signals and Punishment Dilemmas” American Political Science Review, 105 (4):
829-51.
Shadmehr, Mehdi, and Dan Bernhardt (2013) State Censorship, American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, forthcoming.
Shadmehr, Mehdi, and Dan Bernhardt (2014) Vanguards in Revolution: Sacri…ce, Radicalism, and
Coercion, mimeo.
Simpser, Alberto (2013) More than Winning: Why Parties and Governments Manipulate Elections,
Cambridge Univ. Press.
Svolik, Milan (2008) Authoritarian Reversals and Democratic Consolidation, American Political
Science Review, 102(2): 153-168.
Svolik, Milan (2009) Power-sharing and Leadership Dynamics in Authoritarian Regimes, American
Journal of Political Science, 53(2): 477-494.
Wintrobe, Ronald (1990) The Tinpot and the Totalitarian: An Economic Theory of Dictatorship.
American Political Science Review, Vol. 84, No. 3, September 1990, 849–872.
Wintrobe, Ronald (1998) The Political Economy of Dictatorship, Cambridge Univ. Press.

31

Appendix
Lemma 5 Suppose agent i got bi = x and agent j got bj = y, and x > y. Then Gx …rst-order
stochastically dominates Gy : For any

2 R such that 0 < G ( ) < 1, we have Gx ( ) < Gy ( ).

Proof. Let us prove that for two values of bi , x and y such that x > y, Gx …rst-order stochastically
dominates Gy (wherever G (z) 2 (0; 1)).
We need to prove that Gx (z) is decreasing in x for any …xed z 2 R such that G (z) 2 (0; 1).
We have

Rz

1
1

Gx (z) = R
+1

1

1

x

f

dG ( )

x

f

1

=
dG ( )

This is decreasing in x if and only if
Z +1
1
1 = ln
f
ln
Gx (z)
z

x

1+

dG ( )

R +1
z
Rz

ln

1

Z

f

x

dG( )

f

x

dG( )

z

.

x

f

dG ( )

1

is increasing in x (for 0 < Gx (z) < 1 the left-hand side is well-de…ned). Di¤erentiating with respect
to x, we get
@
ln
@x

1
Gx (z)

1

x z

f

x z

R +1

if

x

z

dG ( )

x

z

f

dG ( )

Rz

0

x

1f

x

1f

Rz

R +1

x

f0
x

f

Rz

dG ( )

Rz

dG ( )

increasing in a, thus

f0

x

f

x

1
1

>

x

f0

dG ( )
.

x

1f

f0

x z

f

x z

dG ( )
if

> z and

f0

x

f

x

<

< z, and therefore

f0

R +1

=

f 0 (a)
f (a)

1

z

z

But for normal distribution,
f0

R +1

z

=

=

Rz

R +1

1f

1
Gx (z)

x

f
z

dG ( )

dG ( )
h
@
This proves that @x
ln

R +1

f

x

f0

x

f

x

dG ( )

z

>

x

dG ( )
f0

x

f

x

x

f

R +1
z

dG ( )
<

Rz

R +1
Rz

1f

f

f0

x z

f

x z

=

x

x

dG ( )

dG ( )

f0

x z

f

x z

dG ( )
=

Rz
x
x
dG ( )
dG ( )
1f
1f
i
1 > 0, and thus Gx (z) is decreasing in x for any z.

Lemma 6 Suppose that it is public information that b
bi 2 R, where R satis…es the following: If x >

c

f0

x z

f

x z

f0

x z

f

x z

,

.

G, and citizens i protests if and only if

, then x 2 R; if x <

c

, then x 2
= R. Then the

probability of success as perceived by citizen i with bi = x,
Gx

= Pr (b +

j

2Rjb+
32

i

= x) ,

(18)

is increasing in x (strictly if G is not degenerate).
Proof. Consider the probability of success for a …xed and known value of b:
Z
1
x b
dx:
^ R (b) = Pr (b + j 2 R) =
f

(19)

x2R

Take two citizens with values bi equal to x and y with x > y; we have
Z +1
^ G (b) dGx (b)
Gx =
1

and, similarly, for y. By Lemma 5, Gx …rst-order stochastically dominates Gy . Therefore, to prove
that

Gy ,

Gx

with strict inequality if G is not degenerate, it su¢ ces to prove that ^ G (b) is

increasing in b.
To do this, consider the following cases. Suppose …rst b < c . We can rewrite (19) as
!
Z
c
b
1
x b
+
f
dx.
^ R (b) = 1 F
x2R; c <x< c

Since b <

c

, then x > b in the integral, thus f

x b

is decreasing in its argument and thus

increasing in b, and so ^ R (b) is increasing in b.
Second, consider the case b > c . Let us rewrite (19) as
Z
1
x b
^ R (b) = 1
f
dx
x2R
=
Z
c
b
1
= 1 F

<x<
x2R;
=

x b

Here, x < b in the integral, so f

x

f

c

b

dx.

c

is increasing in its argument, and thus decreasing in b;

consequently, ^ G is increasing in b in this case as well.
Finally, consider the case

c

c

<b<

. In this case, di¤erentiating with respect to b under the

integral (this is a valid operation here) yields
!
Z
c
b
d^ R (b)
d
1
=
1 F
+
f
db
db
x2R; c <x< c
! Z
c
b
1
1 0 x
=
f
f
=
>
=

1
1
1

c

f
c

f
c

f

b
b
b

!
!
!

x
b

b

dx

x2R; c <x< c

Z

1
c

f0

x

x2R; <x<b

Z

b

1

c

c

+f

f

0

b

x

b

dx
!

b
!

f (0) .

33

dx

dx
!
Z

!

x2R;b<x<

1
c

f0

x

b

dx

!

The last term is obviously positive for b =

c

and b =

c

, It is also positive for b =

Assumption 2. Indeed, for such b, the last term is positive if and only if 2f
is equivalent to

>

p1
c
2 2 ln 2

1

1

=

c(

p1
2 2 ln 2

)

. Since

c

1
2

+

c

by

c

c

> f (0), which

2

> , this follows from Assumption

2.

c

It remains to show that the last term in positive for b 2

; 21

c

+

c

w, consider the function h (x) = f (x

c

1

is symmetric). Let w =

c

2

and x =

c

1
2

c

1
2

1

+

c

+

;
c

c

(the case b 2
b . For a …xed

w) + f (x + w). In terms of function h, we know that

h (0) > f (0) and h (w) > f (0), and we need to show that h (x) > f (0) for x 2 (0; w).
To do this, it su¢ ces to show that h is quasiconcave on (0; +1) for any w. We have
d
h (x) =
dx
d2
h (x) =
dx2
The derivative

d
dx h (x)

1
p
2
1
p
2

(w
(w

x) e

(x w)2
2

x)2

x
w.

If w

(x w)2
2

1 e

(x+w)2
2

;

+ (w + x)2

1 e

(x+w)2
2

.

equals zero if and only if
1 t
1+t

where t =

(w + x) e

2w2 t

e

= 0;

(20)

1, the equation (20) has a unique solution t = 0, so x = 0 is a global maximum

and h is quasiconcave. If w > 1, (20) has two nonnegative solutions: t = 0 corresponds to a local
minimum x = 0 and another root t = t , to a global maximum x = x = wt ; this proves the
quasiconcavity of h on (0; +1) in this case as well.17
We have thus shown that h (x) > f (0) for x 2 (0; w), since this is true for x = 0 and x = w.
This …nishes the proof that

d^ R (b)
db

c

> 0 for b 2

;

c

. Therefore, ^ R (b) is strictly increasing in b

on b 2 ( 1; +1), and this completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 1. Let us …rst consider the case of a degenerate distribution G, so assume
b is known. In this case, citizens know ^ G , which equals
17

Gx

for any x. Thus, EUp (bi )

EUs (bi )

Indeed (20) becomes 0 for t = 0 for any w. Di¤erentiating the left-hand side yields
d
dt

which equals zero if and only if 1 + t =
root if w > 1. This proves that for w

1 t
1+t
1 w2 t
e ;
w

e

2w2 t

=

2
+ 2w2 e
(1 + t)2

2w2 t

,

thus, the derivative has no positive roots if w

1 and a unique positive

1, (20) is a monotone function, and it is decreasing rather than increasing,

because it is negative if t is large. This also proves that for w > 1, (20) has a unique positive root. Indeed, it has root
because the left-hand side is positive for small t (if w > 1) and is negative for large t. If it had two roots 0 < t1 < t2 ,
then the derivative would have to equal zero at some points t3 2 (0; t1 ) and t4 2 (t1 ; t2 ), but we just showed that it
has only one root. Thus, the root t is unique, and the function changes its sign from positive to negative, i.e., it is
a global maximum on (0; +1).

34

if and only if bi

(

that citizens with bi

c
)^ G +

. Therefore, there must exist a threshold z = zb 2 ( 1; +1) such

zb protest and those with bi < zb do not.

Since ^ G is given by (7), this threshold z = zb constitutes an equilibrium if and only if Q (z) = 0,
where
c

Q (z) = z
(
By the Assumptions 1 and 2,
dQ (z)
=1
dz
because

p

dQ(z)
dz

F

.

z b

(21)

+

> 0, and thus Q (z) is an increasing function of z. Indeed,

c(

1

) 1

(

z b

)f

) 1

z b

F

p
2 > 2 2 ln 2. Moreover, limz!

2

+

1 Q (z)

=

1 c(

>1

) 1
p > 0,
2

2

1 and limz!+1 Q (z) = +1. This means

that there is exactly one value of z = zb such that Q (z) = 0. This proves that there exists a unique
equilibrium.
Now consider the case where b is not an atom and is distributed with c.d.f. G. Let us show
that the equilibrium must take the form of a threshold. Suppose that the set of values bi such that
citizens with these realizations protest in equilibrium is RG . Citizen i protests if and only if
x

c
)

(

Gx

+

.

(22)

c
must protest and citizens with bi < c must not (these
o
n
o
n
c
c
RG and x : x >
\ RG = ?. Therefore,
types have a dominant strategy), thus x : x >

Since

Gx

2 [0; 1], citizens with bi >

Lemma 6 is applicable, which implies that

is increasing in x. Since the left-hand side of (22)

Gx

is increasing in x and its right-hand side is decreasing in x, it must be that a citizen i protests if
and only if bi

zG for some zG .

It remains to show that the equilibrium threshold exists and is unique. The threshold z = zG
~ (z) = 0, where
must satisfy Q
~ (z) = z
Q
(
Let us prove that
d
dz

Z

) 1

+1

c

.

+1
z b

F

1

=

Z

b

+1

Gz (b)

(23)

dGz (b) +

1

1
.
2
1
Notice that the following identity holds, due to integration by parts:
Z +1
Z +1
b=+1
z b
z b
1
F
dGz (b) = F
Gz (b)
+
Gz (b) f
F

z

Z

dGz (b) < p

1

1

35

1

b= 1

f

z

b

db.

(24)

z

b

db

Using this last formula to di¤erentiate with respect to the second inclusion of z (in Gz (b)), we have
Z +1
Z +1
Z +1
d
z b
1
@
z b
1
z b
F
dGz (b) =
dGz (b) +
db
f
Gz (b)
f
dz 1
@z
1
1
1
1 1
p +0= p
,
<
2
2
where we used the fact that Gz (b) is decreasing in b, as proved in Lemma 5. This proves (24),
which we now use to substitute the numeraire in
Z +1
d
F z b dGz (b)
c(
) dz
~ (z)
dQ
1
=1
Z +1
dz
(
) 1
F z b dGz (b) +

2

1 c(

>1

2

) 1
p > 0.
2

1

~ (z) is strictly increasing in z and the equilibrium threshold z = zG is unique.
This shows that Q
~

Its existence follows, as before, from that limz!

1 Q (z)

~ (z) = +1. Con1 and limz!+1 Q

=

sequently, there is a unique equilibrium threshold zG for any distribution G.
Proof of Proposition 2. If b is …xed, then treating Q (from (21)) as a function of z; c; ; ; b, we
get
@Q
@c
@Q
@
@Q
@
@Q
db

1

=
(

) 1

< 0,

z b

F

+

z b

c 1

F

) 1

F

=
(

z b

+

=
) 1

1

=

(

F

z b

cf

z b

) 1

F

+

z b
@Q
@z

Moreover, we know from the proof of Proposition 1 that
@zb
@

> 0,

@zb
@b

> 0,

2

> 0,

z b

cF
(

2

+

2

> 0.

> 0. Consequently,

@zb
@c

> 0,

@zb
@

< 0,

< 0. If b is not known but is distributed as G, the same comparative statics with

respect to c; ;

~ (from (23))with respect to these variables (this is
follows by di¤erentiating Q

analogous) and using

~
@Q
dz

> 0, also established in the proof of Proposition 1.

Finally, consider two distributions of b, G1 and G2 , such that G1 …rst-order stochastically
dominates G2 . Then we have
Z +1
Z
z b
1
F
d (G1 )z (b) =
1

>

Z

+1

1

F

1

F

1
+1
1

36

z

b

z

b

d (G1 )z (b)
d (G2 )z (b) = 1

Z

+1

F
1

z

b

d (G2 )z (b) ,

because 1

~ (z1 ; G2 ) <
is a monotonically increasing function of b. We thus have Q

z b

F

~ (z1 ; G1 ) = 0. But Q
~ (z2 ; G2 ) = 0 > Q
~ (z1 ; G2 ), and this implies z2 > z1 .
Q
Proof of Lemma 1. As shown in the proof of Proposition 1, the distribution G uniquely determines
the threshold zG and the probability of success ^ G , as well as perceived probabilities of success for
all citizens,

Gx

for bi = x. Let us show that there is a unique value b such that zb = zG . We

~ (zG ) = 0 and zb solves Q (zb ) = 0; so zG does not depend on b whereas
know that zG solves Q
zb is decreasing in b by Proposition 2. Therefore, the is at most one value b such that zb = zG .
Moreover,

c

< zG <

and those with bi >

c

c

: indeed, we have

c

c

zG

because citizens with bi <

c

never protest

always protest, since both parts contain a positive mass of citizens, it must

be that 0 < ^ Gb < 1 for any b, but this means that citizens with bi =

c

and bi =

c

are no longer

indi¤erent and the inequalities are strict. From (21) it is easy to see that the function mapping b
c

to solution zb maps ( 1; +1) onto the entire interval

;

c

, and thus there exists a unique b

such that zb = zG . Denote this value bG . In what follows, we let Q (z; b) be the value of function
Q (z) for a given value of b; by de…nition of bG , Q (zG ; bG ) = 0.
For b = bG , we have ^ G (bG ) = ^ bG (bG )

^ bG ; this follows immediately follows from (7).

~ (zG ), and from (21) and (23) it follows that
Furthermore, Q (zG ; bG ) = 0 = Q
Z +1
zG bG
zG
F
dGzG ( ) = F
.

(25)

1

Therefore, from (7) and (8), we have
^ G (bG ) = ^ bG = 1
so

zG

F

zG

bG

Z

=1

+1

zG

F

dGzG ( ) =

zG ,

1

= ^ G (bG ); in other words, the objective probabilities of success ^ G (bG ) = ^ bG indeed

coincide with the belief of a citizen with bi = zG if b were not revealed.
Take b < bG . For such values of b, zb > zG , because zb is decreasing in b. We then have
^ G (b) = 1

F

zG

b

>1

F

zb

b

= ^b.

This means that for such b, the dictator would be better o¤ if b is revealed. It remains to prove
that

zG

> ^ G (b). Notice that Q (zG ; bG ) = 0 and b < bG imply Q (zG ; b) < 0 (this follows from

~ (zG ) = 0, we have
the proof of Proposition 2); since Q
Z +1
zG
F
dGzG ( ) > F

zG

b

1

and thus
^ G (b) = 1

F

zG

b

<1

Z
37

+1

F
1

zG

dGzG ( ) =

zG ,

so

zG

> ^ G (b).

If b > bG , then, analogously, we get that zb < zG and ^ G (b) < ^ b , so the dictator is better o¤
concealing b, and

zG

< ^ G (b).

It remains to prove that G (bG ) 2 (0; 1). Suppose not; consider the case G (bG ) = 0 (the case
G (bG ) = 1 is analogous). This means that b

bG in the support of the distribution G and thus in

the support of the conditional distribution GzG , and consequently,
Z +1
Z +1
zG bG
zG
F
dGzG ( ) <
dGzG ( ) = F
F

zG

bG

1

1

(the inequality is strict, because G is assumed to have no atoms and is therefore nondegenerate).
But this contradicts (25), and the contradiction completes the proof.
Proof of Lemma 2. If such strategies are followed, then the share of votes that the dictator gets
is given by (14). Consider a citizen with bi < 0 who in equilibrium votes for the dictator, and
suppose that he deviates to voting for C. For a citizen with an in…nitesimal share of votes ", this
deviation will result in the dictator getting
conclusing that the value of b is b0 =

F

0

= (b)

1 ( 0)

" votes, and other citizens observing

0

and

> b. As a result, the dictator gets fewer votes and

this weakly decreases his chance of winning elections (weakly because he could, in principle, only
have elections where he would win by a wide margin, and if citizens knew that this is his strategy,
then a deviation by an in…nitesimalo citizen had zero chance to prevent him from winning). At
the same time, all citizens except for the one who deviated choose strategies based on the cuto¤
zb0 rather than zb . Since b0 > b, zb > zb0 , and hence strictly more people participate in protests
as a result of this deviation. Consequently, such a deviation by a citizen with bi < 0 increases the
chance that the dictator will leave o¢ ce. It also does not a¤ect this citizen’s payo¤ from protesting,
because he would not protest in any case. Hence, such deviation is not pro…table.
If we consider a citizen with bi

0, we can similarly show that his deviation to voting for the

dictator may only help the dictator win, and if the dictator wins, it makes citizen believe that b
equals to b0 < b rather than the true value. Thus, fewer citizens protest, and this also reduces
the likelihood that the dictator is removed from o¢ ce. The deviating citizen may only switch from
protesting to staying home, but not the other way around. In any case, this deviation is not
pro…table. Hence, this is an equilibrium.
Since in all cases except bi = 0 a deviation made the citizen strictly worse o¤, and for bi = 0,
the citizen is indi¤erent, this equilibrium is in undominated strategies.
Proof of Lemma 3. Suppose that without competitive elections, b is distributed according to
38

some distribution H . Then there is a protest threshold zH 2
dictator would prefer to have elections if and only if b satis…es zb

c

;

c

and, by Lemma 1, the

zH , i.e., when b

y for some

y. Consequently, the equilibrium decision to have elections must take the form of a threshold.
Moreover, this threshold y must satisfy
dictators with b satisfying

(y)

~, because the opposite would imply that some

(b) < ~ have competitive elections and lose; this cannot happen in

equilibrium because canceling elections yields strictly higher utility.
Consider the distribution Hy (x) given by (15) for di¤erent y. Clearly, as y !

1 or y ! +1,

Hy (x) pointwisely converges to the same distribution G (x). Consider the function sy = zHy ; this
function maps [ 1; +1] to

c

;

c

and is continuous, therefore, its image is compact. In what

follows, we show that it is strictly quasiconvex on the support of G and has a unique minimum
which is interior.
It is straightforward to see that y such that

(y)

~ is an equilibrium threshold if and only if

zy = zHy : su¢ ciency follows from Lemma 1 and necessity follows immediately from continuity of
c

all functions involved. Since the function y 7! zy maps ( 1; +1) onto

;

, we have zy < sy

for y high enough and zy > sy for y low enough. Therefore, there exists y for which zy = sy = zHy ,
therefore, there is an equilibrium (provided that there is such y satisfying
y,

(y) < ~, then ~b satisfying

(y)

~). If for all such

~b = ~ is an equilibrium, because for all b

~b, zy > sy = zH ,
y

and thus the dictator prefers to have elections. Therefore, an equilibrium exists, and moreover, in
the latter case, it is unique.
Take some value y for which zy = sy , and let us prove that sy is quasiconvex with minimum
achieved at y. First, take y 0 > y, and consider the distribution H 0 given by
8
>
>
0
if x y
>
<
G(x) G(y)
H 0 (x) =
y0 :
G(y 0 ) G(y) if y < x
>
>
>
:
1
if x > y 0

It is straightforward to verify that Hy

pH 0 + (1

p)Hy0 , where p = (G (y 0 )

G (y)) = (1

G (y)),

and since y 0 > y, p 2 (0; 1). Now, we know that zHy = zy . Now, the distribution H 0 …rstorder stochastically dominates the degenerate distribution concentrated in y, and by Proposition
2, zH 0 < zy . From this it follows that zHy0 > zy . Indeed, suppose, to obtain a contradiction,
that zHy0

~ (z) de…ned by 23, we have Q
~ (zy ; Hy ) = 0, and also
zy . Then using the function Q

~ zH 0 ; Hy0 = 0 and Q
~ (zH 0 ; H 0 ) = 0, and thus Q
~ zy ; Hy 0
Q
y
that from the standpoint of person with signal zy , (H 0 )
y zy

39

~ (zy ; H 0 ) > 0. This implies
0 and Q
(Hy )zy

and

(H 0 )zy

>

(Hy )zy .

At the

same time, for a given threshold zy ,
function, and thus satis…es

(Hy )zy

Gzy

=p

=1

(H 0 )zy

In the case y 0 < y, let H 00 be given by
8
>
>
>
<
00
H (x) =
>
>
>
:

It is straightforward to verify that Hy0

Z

+1

F
1

+ (1

zy

dGzy ( ) is linear in the distribution

p) (H 0 ) , a contradiction. Thus, zHy0 > zy .
y zy

0

if x

G(x) G(y 0 )
G(y) G(y 0 )

if y 0 < x

1

y0
y :

if x > y

pH 00 + (1 p)Hy , where p = (G (y)

G (y 0 )) = (1

G (y 0 )),

and since y > y 0 , p 2 (0; 1). As before zHy = zy . The degenerate distribution with an atom in y

…rst-order stochastically dominates H 00 , and by Proposition 2, zH 00 > zy . From this it follows that
zHy0 > zy . Indeed, suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that zHy0
~ (zy ; Hy ) = 0, and also Q
~ zH 0 ; Hy0
Q
y

zy . From Proposition 1, we have

~ (zH 00 ; H 00 ) = 0, and thus Q
~ zy ; Hy0
= 0 and Q

~ (zy ; H 00 ) < 0. This implies that from the standpoint of person with signal zy ,
Q
(Hy0 )zy
and (H 00 )z < (Hy )z . But since Gzy is linear in G, we have (H 0 ) = p (H 00 )z + (1 p)
y

y

y

y

zy

0 and
(Hy )zy
(Hy )zy ,

a contradiction. Thus, zHy0 > zy in this case as well.
We have proven that any y such that zy = sy is a unique global minimum of sy , which proves
uniqueness of such y. It is straightforward to see that G (y) 2 (0; 1); indeed, if G (y) = 0, then Hy
…rst-order stochastically dominates the atom in y, and thus sy = zHy < zy , and if G (y) = 1, then,
similarly, sy > zy ; in either case sy 6= zy , a contradiction.
Let us prove that sy is indeed quasiconvex; this would prove the result that sbe minimizes sy
over

1; ~b \ (support of G) even if

(y)

~ constraint is binding. Take y 0 > y~ > y and let us

show that sy0 > sy~. Since the equation sy = zy has exactly one solution, we must have zy~ < sy~.
Consequently, sy~ = zy~0 for some y~0 < y~. Thus, in some vicinity of y~, we have y 0 > y~0 . We then can
use the same argument as before: for example, if y 0 > y~, take H 000 given by
8
>
>
0
if x y~
>
<
000
G(x) G(~
y)
H (x) =
~ < x y0 :
G(y 0 ) G(~
y ) if y
>
>
>
:
1
if x > y 0

As before, Hy~

pH 000 + (1

p)Hy0 , where p = (G (y 0 )

G (~
y )) = (1

G (~
y )), and p 2 (0; 1). Now,

we know that zHy~ = sy~0 = zy~0 . Now, the distribution H 000 …rst-order stochastically dominates

the degenerate distribution concentrated in y~0 , and by Proposition 2, zH 000 < zy~0 = zHy~ . Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that zHy0
~ zH 0 ; Hy 0
Q
y

~ zy~0 ; Hy~ = 0, and also
zy~0 = zHy~ . Consequently, Q

~ (zH 000 ; H 000 ) = 0, and thus Q
~ zy~0 ; Hy0
= 0 and Q
40

~ zy~0 ; H 0 > 0. Then, as
0 and Q

before, from the standpoint of person with signal zy~0 , (H 0 )
(Hy~)z 0 and (H 000 )zy~0 > (Hy )zy~0 .
y z 0
y
~
y
~
At the same time, we can again show that (Hy~) = p (H 000 )z + (1 p) (H 0 ) , a contradiction.
y z 0
z 0
y
~0
y
~

y
~

Thus, zHy0 > zy~0 = zHy~ , and so sy0 > sy~. The case y 0 < y~ < y is considered similarly, and this
proves quasiconvexity.
Proof of Proposition 3. First, notice that for any y, zy does not depend on

( does not enter

equation (21)). Let us show that for any y, zHy is decreasing in . It su¢ ces to prove that Hy;
…rst-order stochastically dominates Hy;

0

if

0,

>

i.e., that for any x, Hy; (x) is decreasing in .

Di¤erentiating, we get
dHy; (x)
d

G (x) (1

G (y)) + (1
) G (x) G (y)
2
(1
G (y))
G (x) (G (y) 1)
< 0:
(1
G (y))2

=
=

if x < y, and, similarly,
dHy; (x)
dt

=
=

if x

y. This shows that if

zbE = sbE , then after

G (y) (1

G (y)) + (G (x)
(1
G (y))2
G (y) (G (x) 1)
<0
(1
G (y))2

G (y)) G (y)

increases, then zHy decreases. This means that, since bE satis…ed

increases to

0,

we have zb0 E = zbE = sbE > s0bE . This means that under

0,

the equilibrium threshold that satis…es zb0 0 = s0b0 , must also satisfy b0E > bE . Consequently, bE is
E

E

increasing in .
To show that bE satis…es

(bE ) = ~ if

is close to 1, suppose not; then there is a limit

point b = lim

!1 bE .

Then the distributions Hb; converge, in distribution, to a distribution with

support on

1; b . But at the same time, the degenerate distributions with atoms in bE converge,

in distribution, to one with atom in b, which …rst-order stochastically dominates the former limit.
This means that in the limit, zb < zHb;
contradiction proves that
Conversely, if

=1

, and this contradicts that zbE = zHbE (

(bE ) = ~ (i.e., bE = ~b) for

);

for all . This

su¢ ciently close to 1.

approaches 0, then bE ( ) is decreasing, and converges to some point b0 . In

this case, distributions Hy; converge G for any …xed y. This means that distributions HbE (
converge to G, and thus zHbE (

);

converges to zG . Similarly, zbE (

by de…nition of bG ; thus, zbG = zb0 . This implies that lim

!0 bE

)

);

converge to zb0 . But zG = zbG

( ) = b0 = bG .

To demonstrate the comparative statics result with respect to c, take any c, and suppose that
bE is the threshold. At this threshold, zbE ;c = zHbE ;c . Now suppose that c increases, say, to c0 > c.
41

Then, for a given bE , both zbE and zHbE increase (see Proposition 2). However, zHbE will increase
by a lower margin than zbE . Indeed, at bE ,
of Proposition 1. Therefore,

@zbE
@c

>

@zHb

E

@c

@Q(z)
dc

=

~
@ Q(z)
dc ,

but

@Q
dz

E

and

~
@Q
dz ,

as follows from the proof

, and this implies that zbE ;c0 > zHbE ;c0 for c0 > c. Thus,

the equilibrium threshold under c0 , b0E which satis…es zb0E ;c0 > zHb0
The arguments in case of

<

;c0 ,

must satisfy b0E > bE .

are completely identical and are omitted.

Proof of Lemma 4. Let us …rst prove that the function E (r) is nondecreasing in r for r 2

( 1; +1]. Take two values, r and r0 > r (where r0 may take the value of +1). Let bE = E (r)
and b0E = E (r0 ); it su¢ ces to consider the case b0E > ~b (otherwise b0E

bE holds automatically).

Consider the function Hy (x) given by (15) for G = Gr and the function Hy0 (x) given by (15) for
0

G = Gr . We then have that for any y, the function Hy0 …rst order stochastically dominates Hy ;
indeed,
Hy (x) =

8
<
:

Hy0 (x)
Hy0 (r)

1

if x

r

.

if x > r

This means that, using the notation from the proof of Lemma 3, that s0y < sy for any y. We
also know that zbE = sbE ; in addition, zbE = zb0 E , because if the value of b is known, the protest
threshold does not depend on the distribution. Consequently, s0bE < zb0 E , and this means that the
equilibrium value b0E under repression threshold r0 satis…es b0E > bE . Thus, E (r0 ) > E (r), and this
proves that E (r) is a nondecreasing function; moreover, it is strictly increasing in the neighborhood
of (bE ; bR ) whenever bE > ~b. In addition, E (r) < r for any r 2 ( 1; +1], since Lemma 3 implies

that 0 < Gr (E (r)) < 1.
Now, if k

A, then (17) may not hold for any …nite R (y), and there is no repression for

any election threshold bE . In this case, (bE = E (+1) ; bR = +1) is the unique pair of thresholds
that constitute an equilibrium. If k < A, then the function R is given implicitly by (17), where
z~y (b) = zminfb;yg from (16), and since z~y (x) is bounded and decreasing in x, R (y) is uniquely
de…ned for any y. Moreover, z~ is decreasing in y for y < b and is constant for y

b, therefore,

R (y) is nonincreasing in y. Therefore, there is at most one equilibrium pair (bE ; bR ) that satis…es
bE = E (bR ) and bR = R (bE ). In addition, we get that the function R (E (r)) is nonincreasing,
which implies that there exists a unique equilibrium where bR is the …xed point of R (E (r)) and
bE = E (bR ).
It remains to note, for comparative statics results, that R (y) is decreasing in the neighborhood
of the equilibrium (bE ; bR ). Indeed, (17) is satis…ed for y = bE and R (y) = bR , and then bE < bR
implies y < R (y). Hence, z~y (R (y)) = zminfR(y);yg = zy in the neighborhood of (bE ; bR ), and this
42

is strictly decreasing in y. Hence, (17) becomes
Z +1
x
f
zy R(y)

dx =

k
,
A

(26)

which implies that R (y) is strictly decreasing in y. This completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 4. If A increases or k decreases, then the right-hand side of (17) decreases;
since the left-hand side is decreasing in R (y), this implies that R0 (y) < R (y) for any y (where R0
is the function after the change in A or k). At the same time, E (r) does not change. Since R is
strictly decreasing and E is nondecreasing, this leads to a decrease in bR and also an decrease in
bE , unless E (r) is constant in the neighborhood of bR , i.e., unless bE = ~b. The comparative statics
result with respect to

is established similarly.

Suppose that c increases to c0 > c, and suppose that this increase is small enough, so that
b0R > bE (considering a small deviation is su¢ cient). In this case, E 0 (r)

E (r) for all r as follows

from Proposition 3 (the inequality is strict if bE < ~b). At the same time, R0 (y) > R (y), because zy
becomes higher for any given y by Proposition 2, and thus R (y) must increase for any y, as follows
from 26. This already implies that bE decreases, strictly if bE < ~b, and it remains to prove that bR
increases.
Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that bR does not increase, i.e., b0R

bR . In this case, consider

the functions sy = zHy introduced in the proof of Lemma 3 and, similarly, s0y for b0R instead of bR
and c0 instead of c. Since b0R

bR , then the distribution Hy weakly …rst-order stochastically

dominates Hy0 for any y; in addition, for any distribution, the protest threshold increases because
c0 > c. This implies that for any y, s0y > sy . This, in turn, means that the same relation holds
for minima as well, i.e., miny s0y > miny sy . However, by Lemma 3, these minima are achieved at
the equilibrium values of bE ; therefore, s0b0 > sbE . Since b0E < b0R
E

bR and bE < b0R

bR , we

have that the equilibrium protest thresholds are the same at bR and b0R for both c and c0 (as the
dictator does not have competitive elections in either case), and are equal to sbE = zbE for c and
to s0b0 = zb0 0 for c0 . Now, s0b0 > sbE implies that the equilibrium utility of a dictator with any
E

E

E

b > max (bE ; b0E ) is higher under c0 than under c; in case he decides not to repress. In particular,
if under c, the dictator with b = bR was indi¤erent between repressing and not, he now strictly
prefers not to repress, which implies b0R > bR . But this contradicts the assertion that b0R
This contradiction proves that bR must increase as c increases.
The proof in the case of

and

is completely analogous and is omitted.

43

bR .

