                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        APPROPRIABILITY MECHANISMS, INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY:
                          EVIDENCE FROM THE UK

                                            Bronwyn H. Hall
                                              Vania Sena

                                         Working Paper 20514
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20514


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2014




This paper was originally written as one of the reports for the project “The choice between formal
and informal intellectual property,” funded by the UK Intellectual Property Office. We are grateful
to Christian Helmers and the late Mark Rogers for their participation in the project and the data
construction.We have received useful comments from participants in the CDM Workshop, London,
December 2013and various seminars. This work contains statistical data from UK ONS which is
Crown copyrightand reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and Queen’s Printer
for Scotland. Theuse of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the
ONS in relationto the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research datasets
which maynot exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. The views expressed herein are those
of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Vania Sena. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Appropriability Mechanisms, Innovation and Productivity: Evidence from the UK
Bronwyn H. Hall and Vania Sena
NBER Working Paper No. 20514
September 2014
JEL No. L25,O30,O34

                                                ABSTRACT

We use an extended version of the well-established Crepon, Duguet and Mairesse model (1998) to
model the relationship between appropriability mechanisms, innovation and firm-level productivity.
We enrich this model in several ways. First, we consider different types of innovation spending and
study the differences in estimates when innovation spending (rather than R&D spending) is used to
predict innovation in the CDM model. Second, we assume that a firm simultaneously innovates and
chooses among different appropriability methods (formal or informal) to protect the innovation. Finally,
in the third stage, we estimate the impact of the innovation output conditional on the choice of appropriability
mechanisms on firms’ productivity. We find that firms that innovate and rate formal methods for the
protection of Intellectual Property (IP) highly are more productive than other firms, but that the same
does not hold in the case of informal methods for the protection of a firm’s IP, except possibly for
large firms as opposed to SMEs. We also find that this result is strongest for firms in the services,
trade, and utility sectors, and negative in the manufacturing sector.


Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

Vania Sena
University of Essex
Southend Campus Elmer Approach
Southend-on-Sea SS1 1LW
United Kingdom
vsena@essex.ac.uk
1. INTRODUCTION

Innovation is the engine of long‐run growth. However innovation does not flourish in
isolation but it is the result of the interactions among firms, policy‐makers and the
institutions that shape the environment where firms innovate. Among the institutions
that matter for innovation, the legal system for the protection of the intellectual
property has a prominent role and unsurprisingly, its design has been one of the main
concerns of the innovation and technology policy across the world. A welfare‐enhancing
legal system for the protection of the intellectual property has to balance different
requirements (Nordhaus, 1969). On the one hand, it has to allow inventors to benefit
from their investment by letting them appropriate some of the returns from their
inventions. On the other hand, it has to do so in such a way that the social costs
associated to the creation of a (possibly short‐term) legal monopoly are minimised
while not hindering the diffusion of the newly created knowledge across the economic
system (Levin et al., 1987; Gallini, 2002; Kultti et al., 2006).

Most of the policy and academic debate around the benefits and the social costs
associated to the existence of a legal system for the protection of a firm’s intellectual
property (IP) has revolved around patents (Boldrin and Levine, 2013; Moser, 2013).
This emphasis on patents is mostly due to data availability and economic saliency (given
the economic distortions that the award of a patent generates in the economic system).
In reality, patents are just one of the instruments that the legal system offers to firms to
protect their intellectual property. Mechanisms to appropriate the returns to knowledge
assets are typically classified into formal (patents, trademarks, copyrights, and design
rights) and informal methods (secrecy, lead time, confidentiality agreements, and
complexity).

Survey evidence finds that firms do not consider patents the most effective mechanism
to protect their intellectual property. In two seminal papers in this area, Levin et al.
(1987) and Cohen et al. (2000) find that lead time and secrecy are considered by U.S.
manufacturing firms to be more effective than patents for the protection of their IP. In
addition, Cohen et al. (2000) find that patents are mostly used for strategic reasons.
More recent data sourced from the UK Community Innovation Survey show that the
                                               3
share of firms patenting among those reporting that they have innovated is around 4%
(Hall et al., 2013). Also, Howells et al. (2003) find that formal and informal
appropriability mechanisms are used simultaneously by firms and that the type of
innovation matters for the choice.

The implication is that any analysis on the relationship among appropriability
mechanisms, innovation and firm‐level performance needs to take into account two
main issues: a) formal and informal appropriability mechanisms are not mutually
exclusive and firms can use both at the same time; and b) the choice of the
appropriability mechanisms (be it formal or informal) is correlated with the type and
quality of innovation. Thus understanding how IP protection can foster innovation and
boost firm’s performance needs to control somehow for the type of innovations as well
as their quality where possible.

This paper builds upon the existing literature on the choice of the appropriability
mechanisms and its impact on firm‐level innovation and productivity. At the same time,
it innovates on the existing literature in two ways. First, we explicitly model the choice
that firms make between formal and informal appropriability mechanisms and we test
the extent to which this choice is correlated to the type of innovation. Second, we test
the possibility that the magnitude of the correlation between firms’ performance and
the choice of the appropriability mechanism is conditional on the type of innovation.

Modelling the relationship between firm productivity, innovation and the choice of the
appropriability mechanism presents a set of challenges. First, it is necessary to define
theoretically the channels through which the choice between formal and informal
appropriability mechanisms can affect performance. Our key assumption is that the
association between performance and appropriability mechanisms is conditional on the
type of innovation the IP method is protecting. In other words, firms that are in the
process of developing new products or new processes simultaneously decide whether
to use formal or formal IP methods to protect the intellectual capital attached to the
invention. Once the new products or/and processes are introduced we can observe
changes on firms’ performance that do not stem directly from the choice of a specific


                                            4
appropriability mechanism but rather from the combination of the innovation and how
it is protected.

Second, it could be argued that there may be a reverse causality relationship between
innovation output and productivity; indeed it well may be that more productive firms
may opt for formal IP methods (in particular, patents) as this may for example signal its
profitability and long‐term viability to investors (e.g., Czarnitzki et al. 2014). To
partially address this issue, we assume that the production of innovation and the choice
of the IP methods precede temporally the output. If so, we can then model the
relationship among appropriability, innovation and productivity in a semi‐sequential
fashion: in other words, we model the relationship between innovation and the choice
among the several methods for the protection of the IP simultaneously assuming that
the variables are correlated with each other conditional on observable firm
characteristics; then we model the productivity gains a firm may experience conditional
on the previous‐period innovation output and the choice of the IP method. This does not
solve the problem of simultaneity induced by permanent unobservable differences in
innovative capacity and output across firms, but it does mitigate any bias arising from
transitory effects. Given the fact that the panel structure of our data is very sparse, we
cannot do much better than this.

Empirically, we use an extended version of the well‐established Crepon, Duguet and
Mairesse model (1998) (CDM, henceforth) which connects the production of innovation
to the firm performance. Our version of the model is based on the model in Griffith et al.
(2006). We enrich this model in several ways. In the CDM model, R&D is an input to the
innovation production process and the knowledge produced by innovation becomes an
input to the production function. In the first stage of the model, the decision to invest in
R&D and the R&D intensity are estimated simultaneously while the innovation
production functions and the productivity equations are estimated sequentially in the
second and third stages respectively. Our specification differs from the usual CDM
model in several respects. First, we do not focus only on R&D spending but we also
consider different types of innovation spending and we study the differences in
estimates when innovation spending rather than R&D spending is used to predict
innovation in the CDM model. Second, we assume that a firm simultaneously innovates
                                             5
and chooses between the different appropriability methods (either formal or informal
IP methods, both methods, or possibly nothing at all). Finally, we estimate the impact on
firms’ performance of the innovation output conditional on the choice of IP method(s)
by estimating a production function augmented by a measure of the lagged innovation
output derived from the second stage and conditional on the IP choice.

Our analysis is based on a new firm‐level dataset for the UK that combines information
from a range of different sources. We merge the three waves of the UK Community
Innovation survey (CIS 3, 4 and 5) to the Annual Respondents Database (ARD2) and the
Business Strategy Database (BSD), which have information on firms’ inputs and outputs.
To reduce endogeneity bias in the production function, we use productivity data from
the year after the innovation and R&D data. That is, we merge each wave of the CIS with
the subsequent period ARD information (i.e. CIS 4 firms are matched to the 2005 ARD
and so on). The resulting dataset contains not only detailed information on firms’ self‐
reported innovation activities from the UK Community Innovation Survey (CIS), but also
on measures of firm inputs and outputs that allow to compute estimate the augmented
production function at firm‐level.

Only 40 per cent of our sample of firms is in manufacturing, with the remainder in
services, utilities, trade, and construction. Innovation in these sectors may be quite
different from innovation in manufacturing, relying less on R&D and more on the
introduction of new IT‐based processes. Our data source provides information on a
broader definition of innovation spending of which only about 20 per cent is R&D
spending.

Our key result is that firms who innovate and rate formal IP highly are more productive
than other firms, but this does not hold for informal IP by itself, except possibly for
larger firms. We also find that this result is strongest for firms in the services, trade, and
utility sectors, and negative in the manufacturing sector.

The paper is organised in the following way. Section 2 briefly summarises the relevant
empirical literature. Section 3 illustrates the empirical framework we use for our
analysis. The structure and the content of the datasets are presented in Section 4 and in

                                              6
an appendix, while the results are shown in Sections 5 and 6. Finally some conclusions
are presented in Section 7.


2. APPROPRIABILITY MECHANISMS AND FIRM‐LEVEL PERFORMANCE:
A SURVEY

The purpose of this section is to illustrate briefly the literature on the choice between
the appropriability mechanisms and their influence on innovation and firm‐level
performance. In doing so we will identify the main themes and outcomes emerging from
this literature and these will then drive our empirical analysis. As mentioned in the
Introduction, the innovation literature distinguishes between formal and informal
appropriability mechanisms which differ in the nature of the legal rights a firm has in
case of violation of its intellectual property. In spite of the emphasis on patents or more
generally on formal mechanisms, firms do use both formal and informal mechanisms.
This point was first made by Levin et al. (1987) and Cohen et al. (2000). They were both
concerned with the extent to which firms in different industries chose legal and non‐
legal methods to secure returns from innovation and their findings were broadly
consistent. On average, patents are not the most important mechanism to protect a
firm’s IP while secrecy and lead time are. However, this is not entirely true for product
innovations and for industries that are specialized in the production of “discrete”
products where patents are still the favourite instrument to secure returns from
innovation. These two seminal papers have been followed by a raft of similar studies
which have confirmed that the preference for informal appropriability mechanisms is
not limited to US firms only. Arundel (2001) focused on the relative effectiveness of
patents and secrecy using the CIS I survey for six EU countries and found that firms
systematically regard lead‐time and secrecy as more important ways to protect their
intellectual property than patents.3 Laursen and Salter (2005) found that the first mover
advantage is the preferred appropriability mechanism for UK firms while Amara et al.



3 In this survey, over 50% of firms ranked lead‐time as the most important mechanism to appropriate

returns to their innovation and nearly 17% regarded secrecy as the most important way to protect an
innovation. In contrast, only about 10% regarded patents as the most effective way to secure returns.

                                                 7
(2008) confirmed these findings for Canadian firms from the KIBS sectors but they also
found that patents and secrecy tend to be complementary, in line with what has been
suggested by other authors (see for instance Howells et al., 2003).

Why do firms use a variety of appropriability mechanisms? Teece (1986) points out that
the strength of the legal mechanisms for the protection of a firm’s intellectual property,
the nature of the technology and the type of knowledge embodied in the technology
may influence the nature of the appropriability regime in an industry and in turn, this
may drive the choice between the different appropriability mechanisms. So innovating
firms may differ in their choice of the appropriability mechanisms and these differences
may be due to the characteristics of the knowledge embodied in the invention (for
instance, if the knowledge attached to an invention is tacit, then again secrecy may be
sufficient to protect an invention), the type of innovation (process innovation can be
protected by secrecy as reverse engineering may not be of much help in these cases),
industry‐ and firm‐level characteristics (size, innovation strategies etc.). Thanks to the
volume of papers which have tried to understand why firms may find some
appropriability mechanisms more effective than others, we do have now a good
understanding of how each of the above factors influences the firms’ choice. For
instance, we know that the size of the firm matters. Arundel (2001) finds that large
firms are more likely to patent than small firms, likely because of the patent application
costs.4 Innovation and general business strategies are also found to influence the choice
among appropriability mechanisms. For instance, Hurmelinna‐Laukkanen and
Puumalainen (2007) find that there exists a positive relationship between pursuing
short‐term value and the use of lead time in a sample of 299 Finnish firms. Hanel (2005)
also finds that firms whose strategy focuses on the development of new markets are
likely to use formal appropriability mechanisms like trademarks (but not patents)
although export strategies are not associated with the use of IPR. Also, involvement in
R&D cooperation has been found to increase the value of patenting because patents help



4
 Arundel (2001) also states that this result may be counterintuitive as theoretically small firms may find patents
more valuable than large firms as they would help them to enter an industry. Although this is clearly true for a
small subset of small firms (those relying on external financing such as venture capital), it may not be true for
small firms in general.

                                                        8
to define the property rights among the members of the consortium (Cohen, et al.
2000).5

We do know that the type of industry the firms operates in may influence the choice
between different appropriability mechanisms. Some studies have focused on services
(rather than manufacturing) and they all suggest that most service firms do not use any
IP at all and among those which do, trademarks and copyrights (i.e. formal
appropriability mechanisms) are the most used appropriability mechanisms. Among the
informal mechanisms, lock‐in of customers, suppliers and/or workers is preferred to
secrecy (Mairesse and Mohnen, 2003; Hipp and Herstatt, 2006).

The typology of the products also matters. Cohen et al. (2000) divide manufacturing
industries into discrete and complex products industries and suggest that in discrete
products industries patents are typically used more often than secrecy. In contrast, in
complex products industries it is often much easier to invent around technologies and
this reduces the incentive to patent and may lead complex‐product firms to rely on
alternative appropriability mechanisms (like lead time, for instance). Also, product
innovations are more likely to be patented than process innovations (Harabi, 1995;
Hanel, 2005). This can be explained by the fact that the benefit offered by a patent in the
case of process innovations (where reverse engineering cannot be used) may be
minimal. The stage of development of an innovation has a bearing on the choice
between formal and informal mechanisms For instance, firms may use secrecy when
developing a new technology but then apply for a patent when the new product is about
to be commercialised (Hussinger, 2006).

Very little is known about the influence that the preference for secrecy (or informal
appropriability mechanisms, in general) may have on some indicators of firm’s
performance. A few studies have focused on financial or innovation performance and
have tried to relate them to the firms’ preferences for the different appropriability
mechanisms. Hussinger (2006) focuses on the percentage of sales and the impact that



5
  However, Leiponen and Byma (2009) find that small firms cooperating in innovation with competitors prefer
lead time to patents to protect their IP.

                                                    9
the choice between patents and secrecy has on it. Her analysis is based on a data‐set of
626 German manufacturing firms and she finds a strong positive correlation between
patents and sales of new products, whereas there is no correlation for secrecy. Hanel
(2008) focused on profits among Canadian manufacturing firms, modelling the
relationship between profits and the choice of the preferred IP mechanism(s) in a two‐
stage model where the first stage estimates the propensity of innovative firms to use IP
mechanisms and the second stage estimates the impact of this choice on the profits. The
main conclusion is that firms that use formal appropriability mechanisms increase or
maintain their profit. Similarly, Hall et al. (2013) find that firms’ preference for patents
is positively associated to innovative performance measured as turnover due to
innovation although there is little relationship between patenting and other measures
of performance (like employment growth). These findings seem to suggest that patents
are used to protect product innovations which have a direct bearing on profits and sales
while secrecy may be rather used either for process innovation or for early‐stage
inventions that will be commercialised later on.

The studies reviewed here focus mainly on manufacturing where formal IP in the form
of patents is traditionally associated to innovation. Services can be different: innovation
among service firms may not be technology‐related and there might be no benefit from
using formal IP protection.6 So we could potentially observe innovative service firms
which are more productive than their non‐innovative counterparts but at the same
time, showing a preference for secrecy. A recent study by Masayuki (2014) presents
some circumstantial evidence suggesting that higher productivity among services may
be correlated with the preference for informal appropriability mechanisms (proxied by
their trade secrets holdings) among innovative Japanese service firms.

In summary, this short survey confirms the importance of the informal appropriability
mechanisms and their bearing on firm‐level productivity and profits. It also identifies
some characteristics of the firms, of the technology and of the industries which are



6
 Clearly this is an evolving area. To the extent that software and business method patenting are available, some
parts of the service sector may indeed benefit from formal IP. In addition, copyright and trademark protection
may be very useful in some services.
                                                      10
associated to the choice of the appropriability regime and which we will employ for our
empirical analysis.


3. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK

As mentioned in the Introduction, this section is devoted to the description of the model
we use for the empirical analysis. Our model captures the original flavour of the CDM
model in that it attempts to model the relationship between the firm’s decision to invest
in R&D and the way this is exploited to generate innovation, first and improve their
performance, afterwards. Unlike the original CDM model, we model explicitly the choice
between formal and informal appropriability mechanisms. We assume that this choice
is made simultaneously with innovation success as firms’ perception about the
quality/type of innovation is correlated the choice of the preferred appropriability
mechanism.

One of the well established limitations of the CDM model is that it does not allow one to
establish causal relationships but instead describes correlations because the system
does not generally permit the identification of true instruments. Our model obviously
shares these limitations: indeed, in specifying our empirical model, we do impose some
exclusion restrictions based on assumptions which are plausible from an economic
standpoint but they are not testable. The implication is that we cannot necessarily
predict the consequences of a change in IP behaviour on firms’ productivity.

We have tried to mitigate these drawbacks in two ways: first, our empirical model is
based on a set of exclusion restrictions which are grounded in economic theory. For
instance, we have assumed that the decision to invest in innovation and the amount
invested depend on the general IP environment in the sector, but that the firm’s own
rating of IP is jointly determined with its innovation success or failure. And when
specifying the innovation production functions and the equations which govern the
preference for the appropriability mechanisms, we assume that the goals of innovation
are associated to the production of innovation and not to the choice of IP protection.
Second, we have used productivity data in the year following the last year in each
innovation survey, so that the innovation expenditure and innovation performance

                                           11
precedes the performance measure, although we are aware that this is a weak
identification strategy and does not fully solve the endogeneity problem.

Our empirical model is formalised in three stages. In Stage 1, we model the firm’s
decision to invest in innovation as well as the intensity of the innovation expenditure. In
Stage 2, we model in a simultaneous fashion the production of innovation and the choice
of the appropriability mechanism. We assume that these are conditional on the
innovation expenditure and are affected by other firms’ characteristics. We assume
there may be unobservables that drive both the firm’s propensity to innovate and the
choice of the appropriability mechanism. In the third stage, we model the process of
exploitation of innovation by estimating an augmented production function where in
line with the CDM model, the innovation outputs are introduced among the regressors
of the augmented production function; however their correlations with the firm’s
measure of output are conditional on the choice of the appropriability mechanism. In
other words, we allow for the fact that the correlation between output and innovation
output varies with the preferred appropriability mechanism. This way, we capture the
extent to which the use of a specific appropriability mechanism is associated to a more
innovative and productive firm. We will now analyse each stage in more detail.

Stage 1: the first two equations model simultaneously the firm’s decision to invest in
innovation and the intensity of its innovation expenditure using a sample selection
model. Traditionally, the CDM model focus on the decision to invest in R&D and its
intensity but we have decided to expand the model in such a way that different types of
innovation expenditures are modelled in this stage with the R&D expenditure being
included as a particular type of innovation expenditure. The decision to invest in
innovation is governed by the following equations:

             isi  1 if is*  wi   i  0
                                              i  1,...., N      (1)
             isi  0 if is*  wi   i  0


Where is * is an unobservable latent variable whose value determines whether the firm
invests in innovation, is is an observed indicator which equals zero for firms that do not
invest in innovation and one for innovation‐investing firms. w is a vector of variables

                                                12
explaining the investment decision, α is a vector of parameters to be estimated and εi is
an error term, assumed to be normally distributed.

Conditional on firms investing in innovation, we observe the amount of resources
invested in innovation (modelled here as innovation expenditure intensity – isi i.e. the
logarithm of the innovation expenditure per employee):

                              isii  z i   ei if isi  0
                                                                      (2)
                              isii  0         if isi  0


where zi is a vector of variables affecting the innovation expenditure intensity, β is the
vector of coefficients and ei is an error term. Assuming that the two error terms are
distributed as a bivariate normal with zero mean, variances  2  1 and  e2 , and a

correlation coefficient ρ, the system of equations (1) and (2) can be estimated as a
generalised Tobit model by Maximum Likelihood estimation.

Stage 2. The second block consists of a set of innovation production functions and the
equations which describe the choice between appropriability mechanisms. For our
purpose, we distinguish between two types of binary innovation outcomes (product and
process innovations) and between formal (patents, design and copyrights) and informal
(secrecy, confidentiality agreements, complexity and lead time) appropriability
mechanisms. Although ideally we would like to include product and process innovations
in the same model, we found that their fitted values after instrumenting were so highly
correlated that it was difficult to obtain sensible results when both variables were
included in an equation. Therefore, we chose to analyse one type of innovation at a time
(product or process) due to lack of identifying power.

We assume that the choice of the appropriability mechanism and the innovation
production functions are correlated conditional on their predictor variables and
therefore we estimate them using a multivariate model. Formally, the multivariate
model is specified as a system of three equations:




                                               13
            INN i        1isi *  X i1 1  d s1  d t1       
                                                               
            i 
             IIP         2 isi *  X  2
                                         i 1   d  2
                                                       d   2
                                                              ,     (3)
                                                                 
                                                    s      t
            FIP          3 isi *  X i3 1  d s3  d t3 
                i                                              

where Φ (., Σ) is the multivariate normal distribution, isi* is the predicted value of the
innovation expenditure intensity (controlling to some extent for the fact that the
investment in innovation is endogenous to the production of innovation), the Xs are
vectors of variables that affect firms’ propensity to innovate and their choice between
formal and informal appropriability mechanisms, and ds and dt are industry and wave
dummies. Each type of innovation output (either new to the firm or to the market) is
proxied by a dummy variable (INN) indicating whether the firm has introduced at least
one product/process innovation in the last three years. The dependent variables of the
two equations which model the choice between the formal and informal IP methods is
also measured by dummies variables (FIP for the formal IP methods and IIP for the
informal ones): each takes the value of one if the firm rated at least one of the relevant
methods as of medium or high importance to the enterprise.

We estimate (3) simultaneously as a trivariate probit system using the GHK algorithm
(Cappellari and Jenkins, 2006), assuming that the three disturbances are correlated. As
in Griffith et al. (2006), the predicted values from the first stage estimation computed
for all firms taking into account the probability that their innovation expenditure is
observed are used to proxy innovation effort in the innovation production function. This
approach assumes that a firm that reports no innovation expenditure may have still
have some informal expenditure related to innovation that is not reported.

Stage 3. The augmented production function is a standard Cobb‐Douglas model where
the logarithms of labour (l), capital (k), and purchased goods and services (m) are
inputs along with the predicted value of the innovation outputs and of the firm’s
appropriability mechanism. The basic idea is that firms’ acquired knowledge has been
codified into specific product or process innovations captured in the innovation output
variables and that these variables are positively correlated with the firm’s performance.




                                                         14
To control for the potential endogeneity of the innovation output, we use the predicted
values from the innovation production functions (INN*) rather than the actual values.
More importantly, to gauge the extent to which the size of the correlation between
output and innovation output varies according to the chosen appropriability
mechanism, we interact the innovation output indicator with an indicator taking the
value of one if formal/informal appropriation mechanisms are highly rated and zero
otherwise. We also include the usual set of industry and survey dummies to control for
unobserved characteristics that affect the output level.

Formally, the augmented production function is as follows:

yi  a  bk ki  bl li   1 INN i*   2 IIPi   3 FIPi   4 IIPi  INN i*   5 FIPi  INN i*
                                                                                                    (4)
    d s  d r  vi


4. DATA AND VARIABLES

4.1 Data

The dataset we have used for our analysis has been constructed by merging several
databases compiled by the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) and made available
through the SecureLab at the UK Data Service (UKDS). The databases are the following:
the Business Structure Database, containing information about firms’ demographic, the
Annual Respondents Database (ARD) which has information about inputs/outputs and
the UK Community Innovation Survey (waves 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7) which has information
about the innovation outputs, the investment in R&D plus information about the
preferred appropriability mechanism. Appendix A has more details about the datasets
and the merging procedure.

Our resulting dataset is an unbalanced panel containing detailed information on firms’
characteristics, innovative activities over the 13 years period, 1998‐2010. However, the
main results of the paper refer to the period 1998‐2006 and that is because the
questions that were asked about IP preferences changed in the CIS 6 and 7: firms were
asked only about use of formal IP methods (rather than importance) and no questions
on informal methods were included.
                                                           15
As this paper is concerned with firm characteristics and behaviour that is captured
mainly in the CIS, we focus on the sample of firms surveyed by the CIS and we drop all
firms from the integrated dataset that have not been sampled in at least one of the CIS
waves. This means that we use the BSD and ARD2 only to enrich the dataset available
from the CIS. Each CIS refers to several years (CIS 3 to 1998‐2000, CIS 4 to 2002‐2004,
CIS 5 to 2004‐2006, CIS 6 to 2006‐2008, and CIS 7 to 2008‐2010) with 2001 being a
missing year. We linked each wave of the CIS with the next period ARD2 (i.e. CIS 4 firms
are matched to the 2005 ARD2 and so on) in order to reduce simultaneity problems
between our innovation, appropriability and productivity measures. Note that because a
new sample of firms is drawn for each CIS (in principle), there is relatively little overlap
among the surveys and the average number of observations per firm is about 1.3. 7 This
means that panel data estimation that controls for fixed firm effects is essentially
infeasible.

One problem that arises in combining these datasets is the identification of the relevant
sampling unit. The ARD2 is apparently sampled at the reporting unit level (which may
not coincide with the firm in the case of multi‐unit firms), where it is possible that a
reporting unit may belong to a larger enterprise, although most of the enterprises
consist of a single reporting unit. In principle, the UK CIS is sampled at the enterprise
level. Thus for multi‐establishment enterprises, there is some ambiguity about whether
we have the full complement of data from the ARD2. Fortunately this problem will affect
relatively few firms in our sample.

Table A1 in the appendix gives a quick overview of the main characteristics of the basic
dataset. The interesting feature of these data is that there is not too much variation
across the different CIS waves and this suggests that most of the variation is cross‐
sectional. There are a total of 68,112 observations in the combined CIS 3‐7 surveys, of
which 48,107 match to the ARD. About half of these either were missing industry, were
in the primary industries or in service sectors that were not covered by all the CIS, or




7
  In fact, the CIS 5 survey was based on the same stratified sample as the CIS 4 survey, so there is slightly more
overlap than implied by drawing a new sample each year.
                                                        16
were non‐profits or government firms.8 We also lose an additional ~10,000
observations due to missing values in some of the key variables, or due to sparse
coverage in certain 3‐digit industries. The resulting sample contains 10,850
observations on 7,255 firms and the sample for CIS3,4,5 contains 7,144 observations on
5,684 firms (or enterprises).


4.2 Variables

In the empirical implementation of the structural model outlined in Section 2, we have
followed the existing empirical literature on the determinants of the investment in R&D
(and in other types of innovation expenditure) and of the production of innovation in
the CDM model.

Stage 1. We assume that the industry‐level appropriability environment can influence
the amount of innovation expenditure undertaken by firms (although the firm’s own
innovation success affects its choice of IP directly). This assumption is reasonable as we
would expect firms to invest more in R&D (or any other type of innovation expenditure)
if the industry environment is such that they can appropriate most of the returns from
their investment (Arrow, 1962). As in Griffith et al. (2006), the variables that capture
the industry environment with respect to appropriability are defined as binary
variables equal to one if the firm rates any one of the formal (informal) IP methods as of
high or medium importance. They are then averaged over 3‐digit industry. We use
industry rather than firm level information because in the second stage we model the
firm’s own choice of IP simultaneously with its innovation success.

Additional controls include the firm’s propensity to export (here proxied by a dummy
variable taking the value of one if the firms has exports) and whether the firm is foreign‐
owned. The first variable captures the notion that exporting firms may be more willing
to invest in R&D (or any other innovation spending) as the competition and the learning
effect of exporting should enhance its innovative effort (Crespi and Zuniga, 2012). The
second variable controls for the possibility that foreign firms may be more innovative



8
    The industries deleted were the two-digit sectors (SIC 2007) 1-9 and 80-99.
                                                         17
(and therefore more willing to spend more in R&D) than national firms potentially
because of their superior management practices and human capital (Girma and Gorg,
2007; Kumar and Aggarwal, 2012). Additional controls include size (measured by the
log of the number of employees) and age (measured by the log of the age). The
expectation is that larger firms may be more inclined to invest in innovation as it is
easier for them to spread the fixed costs of the investment in innovation than for
smaller firms (Cohen and Levin, 1989; Cohen and Klepper, 1996). Equally, the empirical
literature suggests that older firms tend to invest more in R&D than younger ones
because of the need for specialist skills that younger firms may lack (see for instance
Zahra et al., 2005), although it is possible that new entrants in technology sectors
actually invest at a higher rate in the hope of future sales. Thus the age effect can go
either way.

We also control whether the firm has a cooperative arrangement with another
organisation for innovation by introducing a dummy variable taking the value of one for
those firms which have a cooperative arrangement. Several authors suggest that
collaboration stimulates further innovation investment by allowing firms to share costs
and internalising knowledge spillovers (see Kamien et al., 1992). We also include a set
of categorical variables indicating the intensity of use of different information sources in
innovation‐related activities (Crespi and Zuniga, 2012; Griffith et al., 2006); these take
the value of 1 if information from internal sources/ customers/ suppliers/ competitors/
universities was of high or medium importance. As in Griffith et al. (2006), we introduce
demand‐pull factors (namely related to the need to meet regulations and industry
standards) in our equations which are proxied by the share of firms in the 3‐digit
industry for which meeting regulations or standards were of high, medium, or low
importance for innovation (as opposed to no importance).9

We control for industry‐level perception of barriers to innovation due to either financial
constraints or uncertain demand for the new products. Several papers suggest that
financial factors are an important impediment to R&D spending (Hall, 2002; Hall and


9
  Note that because we also include 2-digit industry dummies in the regressions, the demand pull effects are
measured relative to the average for the relevant industry.
                                                    18
Lerner, 2010).10 Equally, industries characterised by uncertainty in the new products’
markets are characterised by low levels of R&D spending.11 The average perception of
financial constraints for innovation and constraints due to market risk (uncertain
demand) in the 3‐digit industry are each measured as the average of the qualitative
indicator 0,1,2,3. Finally, we have included 25 dummy variables for the 2‐digit industry
to which the firm belongs, and 2 dummy variables for the CIS waves. The excluded
industry is automobile manufacturing and the excluded wave is CIS3.

Stage 2. The key independent variable in Stage 2 (and appearing in all the equations of
Stage 2) is the predicted value of the log of the innovation expenditure intensity
(derived from the first stage estimates). As mentioned in Section 2, this way the model
takes into account the fact that the innovation expenditure is endogenous to the
production of innovation and to firm’s preferences in relation to the appropriability
mechanisms.

The innovation and appropriability equations share some independent variables with
the equations from Stage 1: size, age, the dummy for cooperation and the dummies for
the sources of information. The rationale for including them among the regressors of
the innovation equations is quite similar to the one offered in the previous stage. Older
and larger firms are more likely to innovate successfully as they have the necessary
experience and capability to transform their innovation investment in innovation
output. The same argument applies to firms which are in a cooperation agreement for
innovation with other organisations.

As for the appropriability equations, Arundel (2001) finds that large firms are more
likely to patent than small firms because of the costs associated to the enforcement of
patents. Involvement in inter‐firm cooperation has also been found to influence the
choice of the IP method. Firms that engage in cooperative arrangements may be



10
  Also, Canepa and Stoneman (2008) report that firms from high tech industries are more likely to report a
project being abandoned or delayed thanks to financial constraints.
11
  See for instance Tiwari et al. (2007) for a study of how financial constraints interact with market uncertainties
(among the others) and influence R&D spending.

                                                        19
interested in using formal IP methods as patents would help them when bargaining
with the other partners of the research consortium (Cohen et al., 2000). Finally, the use
of different types of information sources can be associated to the preference for specific
IP methods. For instance, firms which source information from universities may be
more likely to patent while those which source information from competitors or
suppliers may prefer to use secrecy or lead time to protect their IP.

Consistently with the empirical literature in this area, we also control for the perceived
financial constraints (taking the value of 1 if the firm is constrained and 0 otherwise)
and the perceived demand for innovation (taking the value of 1 if the firm considers the
demand for innovation too uncertain) in both the innovation and the appropriability
equations. Financially constrained firms are less likely to produce innovation while at
the same time they may prefer informal IP methods (see Hall et al., 2013 and Scellato,
2007). Also, firms which face an uncertain demand for innovation may decide to patent
anyway because of the real option that patents generate (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2002).

We also include two indicators of demand‐pull factors for innovation: whether the firm
rated meeting regulations or standards of medium or high importance for innovation
(as opposed to no or low importance) and whether environmental concerns were of
medium or high importance for innovation (as opposed to no or low importance). We
also control for the industrial sectors as well as the CIS wave.

To identify the equations, we assume that the direction of innovation (i.e. the reasons to
innovate) is associated to the production of innovation but not to the preference for
formal and/or informal appropriability methods. Therefore, in the product innovation
equation we introduce three indicators of the direction for innovation: increasing the
range of products, expanding to new markets or increasing market share, and
improving the quality of products. In the process innovation equation we include three
indicators of the direction of innovation: improving the flexibility of production,
increasing capacity, and lowering unit costs. We assume also that whether a firm
prefers either of the IP methods is related to whether the innovation which is new to the
market. Therefore, in the appropriability equations only, we introduce a dummy
variable if the firm’s innovation is new to the firm but not the market. We exclude the

                                             20
foreign ownership, exports, and the industry‐level variables from the equations in Stage
2. Our assumption is that these drive the innovation or R&D decision but do not predict
innovation output once we control for the level of spending.

Stage 3. In the augmented production function, output is measured as sales while
labour is measured by the number of employees, capital by the total stock of physical
capital, constructed from the investment series using a 10% depreciation rate, and
materials by purchased goods and services. We also include the predicted value of
innovation output from the second stage, the formal and informal IP dummies, and their
interactions with innovation outputs.

Table 1 gives descriptive statistics for the estimation sample, for all firms, the firms that
have positive R&D spending, and the larger set of firms with positive innovation
spending. The first panel shows the medians and interquartile ranges for the continuous
variables and the second panel shows the means for all the dummy variables. The
median firm has 305 employees, value added of 9 million pounds sterling, and a capital
stock of 5 million pounds sterling. On average, the firms are 28 years old and 25 per
cent are foreign‐owned, but 48 per cent export. 33 per cent of the firms have introduced
products new to the firm or market in the past three years (22 per cent new to the
market), and 26 per cent have introduced a process innovation during the same period
(7 per cent new to the market). 35 per cent rate some form of formal IP of medium to
high importance, whereas 45 per cent rate informal IP of medium to high importance.

In addition to R&D spending, which has been well studied in the past, this paper also
looks at the broader definition of innovation spending, which includes internal and
external R&D, purchase of new capital equipment for innovation, purchase of external
knowledge, and marketing and, training expense associated with the introduction of
new products and processes. Table 1 shows that the total of this spending is
substantially larger than R&D alone, and that more firms have non‐zero expenditures.
The median innovation expenditure per employee is 158 thousand pounds sterling. The
R&D‐doing firms are higher on all the IP and innovation dimensions. They are also large,
and have higher non‐R&D innovation expenditure, with a median that is five times the
R&D median. When we add the firms that have other types of innovation expenditure to

                                             21
the R&D‐doing firms, the IP and innovation indicators generally fall, but are still higher
than those for firms with no innovation expenditure at all.

Table 2 gives some information about the composition of innovation spending. By far
the largest share of such spending is for the acquisition of machinery and computer
hardware and software, especially in SMEs and service firms. Internal R&D spending is a
relatively small share (less than 20 per cent) of innovation spending, although it is
somewhat more important for manufacturing firms. This confirms the fact that
innovation in firms is a much broader concept than innovation associated with R&D. We
expect that process innovation and innovation in services in particular to be associated
with the acquisition of new equipment and software, rather than with R&D per se.


5. BASIC RESULTS

We present two versions of our estimates of the CDM model, one that uses R&D
spending as the innovation input and one using the broader definition of innovation
spending that includes R&D, new capital equipment, and training and marketing
associated with innovation. Table 3 shows estimates for both the R&D and the
innovation models. Tables 4a and 4b show the innovation‐IP equation estimates using
R&D as an input, and Tables 6a and 6b the corresponding estimates using innovation
spending as an input. Finally, Tables 5 and 7 show the production function estimates for
each model. In the next two subsections of the paper, we discuss the results that use
R&D as in input first, followed by those using innovation spending.

R&D spending
The results from Table 3 show that the choice of a sample selection model with
correlated disturbances is supported by the data: the correlation coefficient between
the two equation disturbances is positive and quite significant. This implies that firms
which invest in R&D (even though they are not predicted to) also have higher R&D than
predicted. Firms in industries that rate formal appropriability mechanisms as of
medium or high importance do invest more in R&D, with a coefficient that implies a
doubling of R&D per employee, even in the presence of two‐digit sector dummies. For


                                           22
informal IP methods, the coefficient is somewhat lower, but the confidence interval
overlaps with that of formal IP methods.

Looking at the predictor variables, firms that invest in R&D are exporters, and if they
export, their R&D investment rate is about 65 per cent higher. Foreign‐owned firms are
slightly less likely to invest in R&D, but when they do, they have a higher R&D
investment rate, other things equal. The uses of different sources of information for
innovation are generally positive for investing R&D and R&D intensity. Collaborating
with other organizations and firms has a positive impact on doing R&D and its intensity.
As we control for two‐digit industry, the sector‐specific characteristics generally do not
matter, with the exception of the attitudes toward IP protection, which has a positive
impact on R&D intensity.

Tables 4a and 4b focus on the choice of the IP methods and on the innovation
production function. The hypothesis that the type of innovation and the choice of IP
methods are positively correlated conditional on the observables is confirmed by the
data, with all correlations significantly positive, and ranging from 0.04 to 0.55; most are
above 0.1.

In general, the results for product and process innovators are quite similar but there are
some important differences. Firms rating some form of IP highly are larger firms with
high R&D intensity and are likely both to rate demand uncertainty large and to consider
themselves financially constrained. Firms that are imitators (that is, they produce
innovations that are new to the firm but not to the market) rate formal IP of less
importance, as we also found in Hall et al. (2013). Where the source of information for
innovation is suppliers or competitors, firms tend to rate the use of formal and informal
IP highly. However, when customers are the main source of information or the source is
within group, they are less likely to consider formal IP mechanisms as important, which
is perhaps not surprising. More surprising is the fact that firms collaborating for
innovation are less likely to rate formal IP highly.

Turning to the innovation equations (third columns of Tables 4a and 4b), we observe
that product innovators have a high predicted R&D intensity from the previous stage of
estimation but that process innovation appears to be less driven by R&D. Larger firms
                                             23
are more likely to innovate, but innovation does not depend on firm age. Information
internal to the firm’s group is rated as important for innovation, and information from
suppliers is important only for process innovation. It appears that meeting regulatory
requirements or standards reduces the probability of innovation, and that reducing
environmental impacts and improving health and safety increases the probability of
process innovation. This may be because the results of innovative activities directed in
this way are somewhat more predictable.

The estimates of the augmented production function are shown in Table 5, for four
types of innovation: product, process, and new‐to‐the‐market product and process. The
coefficients of the usual production function inputs (labour, capital, and materials) are
as expected, and imply a scale coefficient slightly greater than unity. Few of the
innovation or IP coefficients are significant, with the exception of formal IP in the case
of process innovation. However, when the coefficients are combined to identify the
interaction of innovation probability with IP preferences, some highly significant results
appear: for product innovation, formal IP coupled with high predicted innovation raises
productivity by about 12 per cent (15 per cent for new‐to‐the‐market innovation),
whereas informal IP coupled with innovations has essentially no impact. For process
innovation, there are similar results, although the precision is lower, especially for new‐
to‐the‐market process innovation. The conclusion is that innovating firms that rate
formal IP as important for protecting their innovations achieve a substantial gain in the
contribution of their innovations to productivity growth.

Innovation spending
The estimates for the model using innovation spending as an input are presented in
Tables 3, 6, and 7. Table 3 shows the results for the first stage (investment in innovation
and innovation spending intensity) while Tables 6a (product) and 6b (process) shows
the results for the two different innovation production functions and the choice of IP
methods. Finally, Table 7 presents the estimates of the augmented production function.

Table 3 allows us to compare the estimates of a generalized Tobit model for innovation
spending to those for R&D investment alone. Note first that there does not seem to be
any correlation between the unobserved propensity to spend on innovation and its

                                            24
level, conditional on all the firm characteristics in the model, in contrast to the R&D
model. Otherwise, the estimated coefficients are similar with a few exceptions. The most
important is the difference in the sector’s formal IP importance, which has little
predictive power for innovation spending intensity and strong predictive power for
R&D. The other significant differences are in the information sources: information from
within the group is a less important predictor of innovation spending, whereas
information from suppliers flips sign and is a much more important predictor than it is
for R&D intensity. Both results undoubtedly reflect the importance of capital equipment
spending as a component of the larger innovation spending variable. Innovation that
depends on the acquisition of new hardware and software is less likely to be influenced
by the importance of formal IP in the sector, and more dependent on information from
the suppliers of that equipment.

Tables 6a and 6b show relatively few differences from Tables 4a and 4b. That is, using
innovation spending instead of R&D as a predictor of the preference for formal and
informal IP and innovation makes little difference to the coefficient estimates. The
largest differences statistically are the increase in the within group information source
coefficients and the decrease in the suppliers information source coefficient. This may
reflect the changes in these coefficients in the innovation spending equations, and raises
some concern about the interpretation of these coefficients. That is, stronger
coefficients in the innovation spending model seem to be reflected in strengthened
coefficients of the opposite sign in the IP‐innovation probability model. Recall that the
latter model includes the value of R&D or innovation spending that is predicted based
partly on these coefficients.

The finding that there are few large differences between instrumenting innovation
outcomes via R&D spending or innovation spending suggests that the choice will
probably make little difference to the predicted innovation probability and that is
indeed the case, as we see in Table 7. There are essentially no differences in the
estimates between Table 5 (which uses the R&D model) and Table 7 (which uses the
innovation spending model). The conclusion is that it makes no difference to the CDM
model whether one uses R&D spending or innovation spending as the innovation input,
even though the two variables are in fact quite different for most firms. The correlation
                                           25
of the two variables is about 0.35 and approximately half of the firms with innovation
expenditures have no R&D spending. However, it is important to keep in mind that
these variables are being instrumented, which means that what it really says is that the
values of R&D and innovation spending predicted by size, age, industry, exporting,
ownership, collaborating, the IP and regulation environment, and sources of
information have the same impact on productivity. It is possible that our instruments
are not sufficiently powerful to see a differential effect, although this is a bit surprising,
especially in the case of process innovation, where we might have expected innovation
spending to have greater impact than R&D.


6. SIZE AND SECTOR

The previous results showed that firms favouring formal IP to protect their innovations
have a productivity higher by 10‐20 percent for the same set of inputs, but that
favouring only informal IP did not have a similar impact. In this section we examine how
this result varies over firm size and broad sector. To this end, we divide the sample into
two groupings: 1) SMEs, defined as firms with fewer than 250 employees, and other
(large) firms; 2) Manufacturing and Services, including construction, trade, utilities, and
business services. The full R&D model was re‐estimated for both groupings and a
summary of the results for the production function is shown in Tables 8 (size) and 9
(sector).12 Both groupings produced estimates with a slightly better fit than the pooled
estimates.

Looking at Table 8, we first note that the IP variables enter productivity jointly
significantly only for the SMEs, but not for the larger firms. However, looking at the
individual coefficients, the earlier results on the importance of formal IP for
productivity in the case of product innovation still holds for SMEs; equally, both
informal and formal IP are important for the productivity of both SMEs and large firms
in the case of product innovation. The most interesting result is that when we split the
sample like this, we can see that informal IP protection is much more important for


12
   We also estimated the full innovation spending model, but as we saw earlier, it makes little difference for the
productivity equation which model we use, so we do not show these estimates.
                                                        26
large firm productivity than for SMEs, which is a somewhat surprising result. It can be
rationalised in the light of the theoretical model of Anton and Yao (2004) who suggest
that firms may be inclined to protect very valuable inventions (which may have a
potential large impact on their productivity) with secrecy rather than with patents to
avoid the risks of potential disclosure. That is, although the use of formal IP protection
is more prevalent among large firms than among small firms (Hall et al. 2013), these
firms also seem to find informal IP protection somewhat more useful for increasing
their productivity than smaller firms. This may reflect the fact that SMEs have a greater
need to access inputs external to the firm and therefore need to protect their knowledge
more formally. Unlike large firms, SMEs may lack the necessary financial and human
resources to engage in internal R&D and therefore they may tend to rely on external
knowledge created by neighbouring firms (as well as universities) (Acs, Audretsch and
Feldman, 1994) which makes necessary the use of formal IP mechanisms.

Turning to the sector‐specific estimates in Table 9, we find first that the importance of
formal IP over informal IP for productivity is supported strongly for the service sector,
but much more ambiguously for the manufacturing sector, where informal IP is as
important as formal IP and all the impact is negative. It turns out that this result is due
primarily to the fact that a high probability of innovation in that sector is associated
with substantially lower measured productivity, regardless of the firm’s preference for
IP protection. Further exploration did not turn up an explanation for this result. It may
be due to the fact that there are longer lags between innovative activity and
productivity in this sector, or to problems in measuring the inputs to productivity in
innovative firms.


7. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have explored the estimation of an augmented CDM model that
includes firm and industry ratings of the importance of various forms of intellectual
property protection. Our main assumption was that the choice of a specific IP method
does not necessarily affect a firm’s productivity per se but does so through the type of
innovation. Thus we modelled the choice of the appropriability mechanisms
simultaneously with innovation success and then included the interaction of the choice
                                            27
with innovation in the productivity equation. We also explored the use of innovation
spending rather than R&D as an innovation predictor, and took a brief look at the
differences across firm size and sector.

There are a number of key results from this exploration. First, we found that firms who
innovated and rated formal IP highly were more productive than other firms, but that
the same did not hold for informal IP by itself, except possibly for large firms as opposed
to SMEs. We also found that this result was strongest for firms in the services, trade, and
utility sectors, and negative in the manufacturing sector, largely due to the negative
impact of predicted innovation probability.

Second, we provide evidence that R&D spending is only a fraction of total innovation
spending, especially when we look beyond the manufacturing sector. However, the
predictive power of the two types of spending for productivity is very similar, at least
when we instrument the variables.

Third, we noted that in spite of the previous result, there were significant differences in
the equations that predict R&D and innovation spending. R&D intensity is higher in
exporting firms, those in formal IP sectors, and firms obtaining innovation information
from within their group and from universities, whereas innovation spending is higher
when suppliers are an important information source. This contrast appears to be one
between the traditional technology‐intensive sectors (patenting, exporting, and closer
to university science) and innovation in sectors that rely on the acquisition of hardware
and software to upgrade and change their processes.

Our study also suffers from a number of limitations. Most importantly, we found that
predicted process and product innovation probabilities were so highly correlated that it
is not really possible to tease out their separate impact in the same productivity
equation, and we chose to analyse them separately to look for differences. We found
relatively few differences, with the exception of a clear association of process
innovation and information from suppliers. Second, the use of an IP importance rating
as a proxy for IP use is somewhat untested, although we know they are related from our
earlier work (Hall et al. 2013). A related problem is that the relationship between IP
preferences and innovation is also rather imprecise, as the preference is based on the
                                              28
general outlook of the firm and the innovation(s) something that may have happened
any time during the prior 3 years. That is, we do not have a precise measure of an
innovation and the choice of IP for that innovation, only broad firm‐level indicators.

Another limitation of this analysis, which we share with most studies using innovation
data, is that it is conducted at the enterprise level, so that we cannot be sure that the
answers to the questions on methods of IP protection are directly related to the
innovation(s) identified by the firm as introduced during the preceding three years.
Thus our data and our results are likely to contain considerable noise. In general this
will weaken rather than strengthen the results, especially for the larger firms that have
many activities.

Nor do we have an indicator of the quality of the innovation. This means that our finding
of higher productivity when innovating firms favour formal IP protection may reflect
the fact that firms with high quality innovations leading to higher productivity are also
those more likely to use formal IP. The precise interpretation of our result matters,
because if the formal IP‐productivity relationship is due to higher quality, there is no
implication that firms should shift to using formal IP, whereas if protecting any type of
innovation with formal IP increases productivity, there would be such an implication.
We leave the resolution of this conundrum to future work.


References

Acs, Z. J, Audretsch, D. B. and Feldman, M. P., 1994, R&D Spillovers and Recipient Firm
        Size, The Review of Economics and Statistics, v. 76(2), 336‐340.

Amara, N., R. Landry and N. Traore (2008). Managing the Protection of Innovations in
      Knowledge‐Intensive Business Services. Research Policy, 37(9), 1530‐47.

Anton, J. J. and D. A. Yao (2004). Little Patents and Big Secrets: Managing Intellectual
       Property, RAND Journal of Economics, 35(1), 1‐22.

Arrow, K. J. (1962). Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inventions” in
      Nelson, R. R. (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and
      Social Factors. Princeton University Press. Princeton.

Arundel, A. (2001). The relative effectiveness of patents and secrecy for appropriation.
      Research Policy 30(4): 611‐624.

                                            29
Arundel A. and I. Kabla (1998). What percentage of innovations are patented? empirical
      estimates for European firms. Research Policy. 27(2): 127‐141.

Boldrin M. and D. K. Levine (2013). The Case Against Patents. Journal of Economic
       Perspectives. 27 (1): 3‐22.

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2002). Patents, Real Options and Firm Performance. The
      Economic Journal, 112 (March), C97‐C116.

Canepa, A. and P. Stoneman. (2008). Financial Constraints to Innovation in the UK:
      Evidence from CIS2 and CIS3, Oxford Economic Papers, 60(4), 711‐730.

Cappellari, L. and S. P. Jenkins (2003). Multivariate Probit Regressions Using Simulated
      Maximum Likelihood, Stata Journal, 3(3), 278‐294.

Czarniztki, D., B. H. Hall, and H. Hottenrott (2014). Patents as Quality Signals? The
       Implications for Financing Constraints on R&D. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working
       Paper No. 19947.

Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, and J. Walsh (2000). Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
      Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not).
      Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 7552.

Cohen, W. N. and S. Klepper (1996). A reprise of Size and R&D. The Economic Journal,
      106 (437): 925‐951.

Cohen, W. M. and R. C. Levin. (1989). Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market
      Structure. In R. Schamalensee & Willig (eds.). Handbook of Industrial
      Organisations, 1059‐1107. Amsterdam, Elsevier.

Crepon, B., E. Duguet, and J. Mairesse. (1998) Research, Innovation and Productivity: An
      Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level. Economics of Innovation and New
      Technology 7 (2): 115‐58.

Crespi, G. and P. Zuniga. (2012) Innovation and Productivity: Evidence from Six Latin
       American Countries. World Development 40 (2): 273‐90.

Gallini, N. T. (2002). The Economics of Patents: Lessons from Recent U.S. Patent Reform.
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(2): 131‐154.

Girma, S. A. and H. B. Gorg. (2007). Multinationals’ Productivity Advantage: Scale or
       Technology?. Economic Inquiry, 45(2), 350‐362.

Griffith, R. E. Huergo, J. Mairesse, and B. Peters (2006). Innovation and Productivity
        Across Four European Countries. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 22(4): 483‐
        498.

Hall, B. (2002). The Financing of Research and Development. Oxford Review of Economic
        Policy, 18(1), 35‐51.

                                            30
Hall, B. and J. Lerner. (2010). The Financing of R&D and Innovation. MERIT Working
        Paper 012, United Nations University.

Hall, B. H., C. Helmers, M. Rogers, and V. Sena (2013). The importance (or not) of patents
        to UK firms. Oxford Economic Papers 65 (3): 603‐629.

Hanel, P. (2005). Current Intellectual Property Protection Practices of Manufacturing
       Firms in Canada. In Intellectual Property and Innovation in the Knowledge‐Based
       Economy, J. Putnam (ed.), Industry Canada.

Hanel, P. (2008). The use of intellectual property rights and innovation by
       manufacturing firms in Canada. Economics of Innovation and New Technology
       17(4): 285‐309.

Harabi, N. (1995). Appropriability of Technical Innovations: An Empirical Analysis.
      Research Policy, 24, 981‐92.

Hipp C. B. and C. Herstatt (2006). Patterns of Innovation and Protection Activities within
       Service Companies. Results from a German Study on Service‐intensive
       Companies. Working Paper 45, Technical University of Hamburg.

Howells, J., A. James and K. Malik. (2003), The Sourcing of Technological Knowledge:
      Distributed Innovation Processes and Dynamic Change. R&D Management, 33(4),
      395‐409.

Hurmelinna‐Laukkanen, P. and K. Puumalainen (2007). Nature and dynamics of
     appropriability: strategies for appropriating returns on innovation. R&D
     Management 37(2): 95‐112.

Hussinger, K. (2006). Is silence golden? Patents versus secrecy at the firm level.
      Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15(8): 735‐752.

Kamien, M, S. Oren and Y. Tauman. (1992). Optimal Licencing of Cost‐reducing
      Innovations. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 21, 483‐508.

Kultti, K., T. Takalo, and J. Toikka (2007). Secrecy versus Patenting. RAND Journal of
        Economics 38(1): 22‐42.

Kumar, N. and a. Aggarwal (2005). Liberalisation, Outward Orientation and in‐house
     R&D Activity of Multinational and Local Firms: A Quantitative Exploration for
     Indian Manufacturing, Research Policy, 34(4), 441‐460.

Leiponen, A. and Byma, J. (2009). If You cannot Block, You Better Run: Small Firms,
      Cooperative Innovation and Appropriation Strategies. Research Policy, 38, 1478‐
      88.

Levin, R. C., A. K. Klevorick, R. R. Nelson, and S. G. Winter (1987). Appropriating the
       Returns from Industrial Research and Development. Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity 3: 783‐831.

                                             31
Laursen, K. and A. Salter (2005). My Precious – The Role of Appropriability Strategies in
      Shaping Innovative Performance. Working Paper 05‐02, Danish Research Unit
      for Industrial Dynamics.

Mairesse, J. and Mohnen, P. (2003). Intellectual Property in Services. What do we learn
      from Innovation Surveys?. Patents Innovation and Economic Performance.

Morikawa, M. (2014). Innovation in the Service Sector and the Role of Patents and Trade
      Secrets, RIETI Discussion Paper 14‐E‐030.

Moser, P. (2013). Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives. 27 (1): 3‐22.

Nordhaus, W. D. (1969). An Economic Theory of Technological Change. American
      Economic Review 59(2), 18‐28.

Scellato, G. (2007). Patents, Firm Size and Financial Constraints: an Empirical Analysis
       for a Sample of Italian Manufacturing Firms, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1,
       55‐76.

Teece, D. (1986). Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration,
       Collaboration, Licencing and Public Policy. Research Policy, 15, 285‐305.

Tiwari, A. K., P. Mohnen, F. C. Palm and S. S. Van der Loeff (2007). Financial Constraints
       and R&D Investment: Evidence from CIS. UNU‐Merit Working Paper 2007‐011,
       United Nations University.

Zahra, S., Keil, T. and M. Maula, (2005). New ventures' inward licensing: examining the
       effects of industry and strategy characteristics. European Management Review,
       2(3), 154‐166.




                                            32
Appendix A: Construction of the dataset

For this study we have constructed an ad hoc dataset by using the following five
components available at the SecureLab, UK Data Service. These are all linked by the
unique reporting unit number:

Business Structure Database (BSD): the dataset is derived from the Inter
Departmental         Business       Register      (IDBR)       and     provides       longitudinal       business
demography information for the population of businesses in the UK. We use information
on a company’s industrial classification (SIC 92) as well as incorporation and market
exit dates from the BSD to be able to define the age of the firm.13

Annual Respondents Database (ARD2): the ARD2 is constructed from the microdata
collected in the Annual Business Inquiry (ABI) conducted by the ONS. The stratified
survey sample is drawn from the IDBR.14 The ARD covers both the production
(including manufacturing) and the non‐production sector (services). However the time
series dimension varies across the twos: while for the production sector it is possible to
have information available up to 1980 (and early 70s for some industries), the data for
the services sector is available only after 1997. The information is assembled from the
replies to the Census forms: as this is a mandatory requirement for UK‐based business,
the response rates to the ARD are rather high and this makes it highly representative of
the underlying population. Each establishment has got a unique reference number that
does not change over time and so allows us to build up a panel dataset. The ARD is a
stratified random sample where sampling probabilities are higher for large
establishments: indeed for establishments with more than 250 employees, the sampling
probability is equal to one. The ARD contains all the basic information (namely the
inputs and output variables) needed to estimate the production function. Output is
measured by the deflated added value. Employment is measured by the total number of



13
   The definition of market exit is problematic. It is not possible to identify whether a firm has ceased trading or
if it has merely undergone a change in structure that leads to its original reference number becoming extinct.
14
  The stratification sample weights are as follows: businesses with (a) <10 employees 0.25, (b) 10-99
employees 0.5, (c) 100-249 employees all or ≥ 0.5 depending on industry, and (d) >250 employees all.
Moreover, if a firm with <10 employees is sampled once, it is not sampled again for at least three years.
                                                         33
employees. As for capital, it is well known that the ARD does not contain information on
capital stock. However, stock of capital has been constructed at the ONS by using the
perpetual inventory method.

UK Community Innovation Survey (CIS) 3, 4, and 5: the CIS is a stratified sample of
firms with more than 10 employees drawn from the IDBR. The CIS contains detailed
information on firms’ self‐reported innovative activities. This covers firms’ innovation
activities over a three‐year window targeting firms with more than ten employees. The
CIS is a survey carried out by national statistical agencies in all 25 EU member states
under the coordination of Eurostat. The sampling frame for the UK CIS was developed
from the Interdepartmental Business Register (IDBR) with the survey being conducted
by post. Firms are asked whether they have produced any innovation in the reference
period (i.e. the three years before the survey starts) and if so, what type of innovation
they have introduced. In turn innovation can be of three types: product innovation,
process innovation and wider (or organisational) innovation. Unsurprisingly, firms can
be simultaneously produce two type of innovations (or even three types) and this
allows us to construct our dependent variable as the total number of innovations
produced by a firm over the period 2005‐07. This variable can then vary between 0 (as
firms may not produce any innovation in the reference period and therefore are
recorded as non‐innovators) and 3 (if firms produced a product, a process and a wider
innovation at the same time). The CIS provides information on what external sources of
information a firm uses and whether it collaborates with other organisations to develop
innovation. In addition, the Survey contains information on R&D expenditure, the
proportion of the workforce with a degree in engineering or a science subject and
whether or not the plant is part of a group. We use three surveys: CIS 3 which covers the
period 1998‐2000, CIS 4 which covers 2002‐2004, and CIS 5 which covers 2004‐2006.
The sample frames differ for the three CIS waves both in terms of size and industry
coverage. For CIS 3, the sample frame consists of 19,625 enterprises with responses
from 8,172 enterprises (42% response rate); CIS 3 covers both production
(manufacturing, mining, electricity, gas and water, construction) and services sectors
whereas the retail sector has been excluded. CIS 4 has the largest sample size out of the
three CIS waves with a sample frame of 28,355 enterprises and responses from 16,446

                                           34
enterprises (58% response rate); it also includes the following sectors: sale,
maintenance & repair of motor vehicles (SIC 50); Retail Trade (SIC 52); and Hotels &
restaurants (SIC 55). CIS 5 was answered by 14,872 firms which correspond to a
response rate of 53% (Robson and Haigh, 2008). It covers the same industries as CIS 4
with the addition of SIC 921 (motion picture and video activities) and 922 (radio and
television activities).




                             Table A1: Choosing the sample
                                                           Observations    Firms
        Total CIS observations                                   68,112   46,638
        Not matched to ARD                                       20,005
        ARD‐CIS match                                            48,107
        Drop missing industries, primary inds, inds 80‐98        26,092
        Drop non‐profits, government, missing legal status          519
        Unable to construct capital stock                         5,040
        Potential CIS sample                                     16,456   11,421
        Missing employment on CIS                                 1,049
        Large estimation sample                                  15,407   10,844
        Missing capital, turnover, or materials                   3,761
        Trim ratios for production function at 1%                   796
        Estimation sample                                        10,850    7,255
        CIS 6 and 7 sample                                       3,706     3,068
        CIS 3,4,5 sample                                         7,144     5,553




                                            35
                     Table A2: Sectoral breakdown 1998‐2010
                                                    Number of observations      Share
SIC          Description                             Total Large SMEs        Large SMEs
23‐25, ex
244,245     Mfg of chemical, rubber, plastic, oil      445     267     178   60.0%   40.0%
30, 32      Mfg of computers & electronic inst         156      80      76   51.3%   48.7%
31          Mfg of elec equipment                      192      92     100   47.9%   52.1%
28          Mfg of fabricated metal goods              318     117     201   36.8%   63.2%
15,16       Mfg of food, beverage, and tobacco         713     500     213   70.1%   29.9%
33          Mfg of medical & scientific inst           171      92      79   53.8%   46.2%
17‐19, 36   Mfg of misc low‐tech goods                 502     237     265   47.2%   52.8%
34          Mfg of motor vehicales                     294     176     118   59.9%   40.1%
29          Mfg of non‐elec machinery                  413     239     174   57.9%   42.1%
35          Mfg of other transport equipment           188      98      90   52.1%   47.9%
244         Mfg of pharmaceuticals                      57      47      10   82.5%   17.5%
26, 27      Mfg of primary metals                      301     153     148   50.8%   49.2%
22          Mfg of printed goods                       285     202      83   70.9%   29.1%
245         Mfg of soap & toiletries                    61      46      15   75.4%   24.6%
20, 21      Mfg of wood & furniture                    243      97     146   39.9%   60.1%
            Total manufacturing                       4339    2443    1896   56.3%   43.7%
45          Construction                               803     413     390   51.4%   48.6%
64          Post, telephone, and telegraph             148      85      63   57.4%   42.6%
37,40,41,90 Utility services                           134      68      66   50.7%   49.3%
50‐52       Wholesale & retail trade                  2077    1372     705   66.1%   33.9%
            Total utilites & trade                    3162    1938    1224   61.3%   38.7%
72          Computer services                          206     125      81   60.7%   39.3%
65‐70       Financial, insurance, real estate          286     181     105   63.3%   36.7%
55          Hotel & restaurant services                499     401      98   80.4%   19.6%
71          Leasing services                           163      72      91   44.2%   55.8%
52, 74      Other  business services                  1394     932     462   66.9%   33.1%
73          R&D services                                76      49      27   64.5%   35.5%
60‐63       Transportation services                    725     455     270   62.8%   37.2%
            Total services                            3349    2215    1134   66.1%   33.9%

             Total                                   10850    6596    4254   60.8%   39.2%




                                             36
                            Table 1: Estimation sample ‐ CIS 3, 4, 5 matched to BSD (2000‐2006)
                                                                  All observations          R&D firms            Inn. spend firms
Variable                                                          Median IQ range         Median IQ range        Median IQ range

Observations                                                            7,144                  2,162                   4,414
Number of employees                                                   305        627.5     353.5          763        315        607
Turnover*                                                          25000        71327     35811        89629      27385      73283
Value added*                                                         8951       21916     11729        25951        9748     22167
Capital*                                                             5002       15407       7572       19522        5661     16315
Purchased goods & services*                                        12014        39102     18794        42940      13490      39168
Output‐employee ratio*                                              85.87        93.85     94.82        87.81      89.52      93.68
Output‐capital ratio                                                  5.22       10.49       4.69         8.30       5.02     10.21
Output‐materials ratio                                                1.80         2.25      1.75         1.87       1.76      2.19
Capital per employee*                                               17.17        31.97     20.72        34.95      18.48      32.92
R&D ‐turnover ratio                                                0.0000       0.0004    0.0025       0.0092     0.0000 0.0024
Innovation spend ‐turnover ratio                                   0.0019       0.0155    0.0142       0.0380     0.0104 0.0290
R&D per employee*                                                   0.000        0.036     0.246        0.942      0.000      0.234
Innovation spend per employee*                                      0.158        1.421     1.333        3.728      0.915      2.663
Age in 2011 in years                                                    28           18        29           17         28        18
Importance of formal IP in the 3‐digit sector                        0.35         0.33      0.44         0.28       0.38      0.35
Importance of informal IP in the 3‐digit sector                      0.40         0.36      0.59         0.31       0.48      0.36
Perception of market risk in the 3‐digit sector                      0.37         0.34      0.40         0.24       0.38      0.29
Perception of financial constraints in the 3‐d sector                0.34         0.25      0.34         0.22       0.34      0.25
Importance of regulation & standards in the 3‐digit sector           0.33         0.32      0.39         0.25       0.36      0.31
Importance of environmental, H&S regs. in the 3‐digit sector         0.29         0.29      0.37         0.30       0.31      0.32
* Units are 1000s of GBP.
                             Table 1 (cont.): Dummy variable means

                                                           All                   Innov. spend
Variable                                              observations   R&D firms      firms
D (formal IP of med or high importance)                  35.1%         62.3%        46.7%
D (informal IP of med or high importance)                44.8%         77.3%        60.7%
D (foreign ownership)                                    25.0%         29.4%        26.3%
D (export status)                                        48.1%         70.6%        57.0%
D (market risk)                                          43.2%         55.6%        50.0%
D (financial constraints)                                39.5%         46.2%        44.5%
D (innov to improve range)                               39.2%         64.8%        52.0%
D (innov for new markets)                                40.8%         66.6%        54.1%
D (innov for quality improvement)                        47.3%         73.7%        62.4%
D (innov to increase flexibility)                        37.1%         57.6%        49.0%
D (innov to increase capacity)                           34.2%         52.3%        45.3%
D (innov to reduce unit cost)                            37.2%         59.9%        49.3%
D (innov to meet regulations or standards)               34.3%         50.7%        43.7%
D (innov for environment or health&safety)               31.0%         49.0%        40.3%

D (collaborates)                                         19.2%         37.0%        26.4%
D (within group important info source)                   58.4%         91.4%        78.3%
D (suppliers important info source)                      52.7%         75.2%        70.1%
D (customers important info source)                      55.9%         83.4%        73.7%
D (competitors important info source)                    41.9%         62.0%        54.8%
D (universities important info source)                   10.3%         20.8%        14.1%

D (product imitator only)                                11.0%         19.6%        15.8%
D (product innovator)                                    33.4%         63.0%        47.1%
D (new‐to‐market product innovator)                      22.4%         43.4%        31.3%
D (process imitator only)                                19.2%         32.1%        26.8%
D (process innovator)                                    26.4%         46.8%        37.2%
D (new‐to‐market process innovator)                      7.2%          14.7%        10.4%
                               Table 2: Average composition of innovation expenditure
                                                                                                  Manu‐      Services &
                                                                    All           SME    Large   facturing     other
Acquisition of mach. & comp. hardware/software                    45.1%          48.0%   43.0%    43.2%        47.0%
Internal R&D spending                                             18.6%          17.7%   19.2%    25.1%        12.0%
Marketing expense                                                 13.5%          11.8%   14.9%    10.6%        16.5%
Training expense                                                   9.5%          10.2%    8.9%     5.4%        13.4%
Design expense                                                     6.4%           5.9%    6.8%     8.8%         4.2%
External R&D spending                                              3.7%           3.5%    3.9%     4.2%         3.2%
Acquisition of external knowledge                                  3.2%           2.9%    3.4%     2.6%         3.7%
Observations with nonzero spending                                4,414          1,876   2,538    2,199        2,215
Share with nonzero spending                                       61.8%          57.1%   65.8%    71.1%        54.7%

The shares shown are for firms that have some form of innovation spending reported.
                                       Table 3: Sample selection estimates ‐ Investment in R&D or Innovation and its intensity
Dependent variable                                          Invests in R&D (1/0)              Log (R&D/employee)           Invests in innov (1/0)             Log (IS/employee)
                                                                                          Marginal                                                       Marginal
                                                      Coefficient       Standard Errors    Effects    Standard Errors Coefficient Standard Errors         Effects     Standard Errors
Log (number of employees)                               0.073             0.013     ***    ‐0.230       0.033     ***   0.024           0.011      *      ‐0.263        0.021     ***
Log (firm age in 2011)                                  0.011             0.056            ‐0.202       0.108           ‐0.077          0.051             ‐0.052        0.072
D (foreign ownership)                                   ‐0.097            0.046      *      0.320       0.087     ***   ‐0.071          0.043              0.291        0.061     ***
D (export status)                                       0.314             0.045     ***     0.651       0.096     ***   0.163           0.042     ***      0.418        0.060     ***
D (collaborates)                                        0.415             0.047     ***     0.475       0.091     ***   0.272           0.055     ***      0.393        0.057     ***

Importance of formal IP in the 3‐digit sector
                                                         0.256            0.170             1.050         0.299      ***   ‐0.284      0.165               0.351       0.212

Importance of informal IP in the 3‐digit sector
                                                         0.242            0.188             0.637         0.315      *     0.378       0.183        *      0.710       0.231      ***

Perception of market risk in the 3‐digit sector
                                                         0.348            0.182             0.017         0.292            0.156       0.175               ‐0.017      0.212
Perception of financial constraints in the 3‐digit
sector                                                   ‐0.290           0.171            ‐0.256         0.284            ‐0.218      0.166               0.224       0.198
Importance of regulation & standards in the 3‐
digit sector                                             0.016            0.198             0.427         0.354            0.127       0.197               0.150       0.250
Importance of environmental, health & safety
regs. in the 3‐digit sector                              ‐0.037           0.186            ‐0.296         0.347            0.059       0.185               ‐0.002      0.243
D (within group important info source)                   1.026            0.059    ***     0.859          0.195      ***   0.790       0.045       ***     0.292       0.077      ***
D (suppliers important info source)                      0.044            0.048            ‐0.279         0.086      **    0.493       0.042       ***     0.326       0.060      ***
D (customers important info source)                      0.305            0.056    ***     0.392          0.112      ***   0.401       0.049       ***     0.145       0.068       *
D (competitors important info source)                    ‐0.072           0.046            0.055          0.081            ‐0.026      0.048               0.169       0.055      **
D (universities important info source)                   0.307            0.061    ***     0.410          0.097      ***   0.050       0.074               0.238       0.071      ***

Year Dummies                                                  51.8 (0.000)***                       3.2 (0.206)                39.5 (0.000)***                   2.4 (0.295)
Two‐digit sector dummies                                      101.6 (0.000)***                    181.8 (0.000)***              34.7 (0.093)*                  163.2 (0.000)***

Correlation of the disturbances in the two equations                                        0.349         0.101      **                                     0.064      0.043
Standard error of log R&D per employee residual                                             1.637         0.046      ***                                    1.576      0.019      ***
Log likelihood                                                                       ‐7097.7                                                        ‐11696.9
Wald test for model (d.f.)                                                        914.7 (43)***                                                  1082.7 (43)***
Observations (nonzero share)                                                       7,144 (30%)                                                     7144 (62%)

Standard Errors robsut to heteroskedasticity, clustered by enterprise
The method of estimation is maximum likelihood on a generalized Tobit model.
                     Table 4a. Multivariate Probit estimates of IP choice and product innovation
                                      7,144 observations on 5,684 firms; Log likelihood = ‐8967.1
                                                                                                                     Product Innovator or
                                                    Formal IP methods                Informal IP methods                   imitator
                                                  Coeff.       Std. err            Coeff.        Std. err           Coeff.       Std. err

Log (predicted R&D per employee)                  0.843         0.045      ***     0.638         0.044      ***     0.304         0.046     ***
Log (n of employees)                              0.321         0.016      ***     0.229         0.015      ***     0.116         0.015     ***
Log (firm age in 2011)                            0.132         0.054        *      0.114        0.053       *      ‐0.057        0.057
D (collaborates)                                  ‐0.191        0.052      ***     ‐0.026        0.054              0.428         0.053     ***
Firm perception of market risk                    0.324         0.043      ***     0.366         0.044      ***     0.172         0.044     ***
Firm perception of fin. Constraints               0.123         0.043      **      0.293         0.044      ***     0.018         0.044
Firm ‐ impt. of reg & standards                   0.140         0.050       **     0.121         0.052       *      ‐0.118        0.053      *
Firm ‐ impt. of env, H&S regs                      0.052        0.051               0.160        0.054       **     ‐0.023        0.054
D (innov to improve range)                                                                                          0.704         0.051     ***
D (innov for new markets)                                                                                           0.234         0.054     ***
D (innov for quality improvement)                                                                                   0.266         0.058     ***
D (within group impt info source)                 ‐0.234       0.066       ***     0.096        0.064               0.311         0.068     ***
D (suppliers important info source)               0.289        0.047       ***     0.415        0.047       ***     0.123         0.051      *
D (customers impt info source)                    ‐0.127       0.054        *      0.140        0.053        **      0.139        0.058      *
D (competitors impt info source)                  0.173        0.045       ***     0.130        0.045        **     ‐0.113        0.047      *
D (universities impt info source)                 0.058        0.064               0.049        0.071               ‐0.080        0.066
D (imitator)                                      ‐0.270       0.060       ***     ‐0.266       0.064       ***
Year dummies (2)                                       65.4 (0.000)***                  80.1 (0.000)***                    1.5 (0.464)
Two‐digit sector dummies (25)                         298.2 (0.000)***                 105.4 (0.000)***                  52.9 (0.000)***
Wald test for model (d.f.)                                                              5,322.1 (125)***
Corr (formal IP, informal IP)                      0.548        0.019      ***
Corr (formal IP, innovation)                       0.197        0.026      ***
Corr (informal IP, innovation)                     0.236        0.026      ***

Note: The method of estimation is maximum likelihood on a trivariate probit model. Standard Errors are clustered around the enterprise
                    Table 4b. Multivariate Probit estimates of IP choice and process innovation
                                    7,144 observations on 5,684 firms; Log likelihood = ‐8,959.6
                                                                                                                    Process Innovator or
                                                   Formal IP methods                Informal IP methods                   imitator
                                                 Coeff.       Std. err            Coeff.        Std. err           Coeff.       Std. err

Log (predicted R&D per employee)                 0.843        0.045      ***      0.636        0.044       ***     0.100         0.046      *
Log (n of employees)                             0.321        0.016      ***      0.228        0.015       ***     0.085         0.016     ***
Log (firm age in 2011)                           0.136        0.055        *      0.116        0.053        *       0.015        0.057
D (collaborates)                                 ‐0.201       0.052      ***      ‐0.038       0.054               0.573         0.052     ***
Firm perception of market risk                   0.322        0.043      ***      0.365        0.044       ***     0.119         0.044      **
Firm perception of fin. Constraints              0.121        0.043      **       0.292        0.044       ***     0.016         0.043
Firm ‐ impt. of reg & standards                  0.144        0.050       **      0.122        0.052        *      ‐0.183        0.053     ***
Firm ‐ impt. of env, H&S regs                     0.046       0.051                0.157       0.054        **      0.161        0.054      **
D (innov to increase flexibility)                                                                                  0.480         0.055     ***
D (innov to increase capacity)                                                                                     0.408         0.053     ***
D (innov to reduce unit cost)                                                                                      0.180         0.054     ***
D (within group impt info source)                ‐0.240       0.066   ***         0.089        0.064               0.471         0.072     ***
D (suppliers important info source)              0.287        0.047   ***         0.413        0.047   ***         0.319         0.051     ***
D (customers impt info source)                   ‐0.136       0.055    *          0.129        0.053     *         0.032         0.059
D (competitors impt info source)                 0.169        0.045   ***         0.129        0.045    **         ‐0.109        0.047      *
D (universities impt info source)                0.068        0.064               0.066        0.071               ‐0.113        0.064
D (imitator)                                     ‐0.084       0.056               ‐0.054       0.064
Year dummies (2)                                      65.4 (0.000)***                  80.1 (0.000)***                  21.1 (0.000)***
Two‐digit sector dummies (25)                        298.2 (0.000)***                 105.4 (0.000)***                  45.2 (0.000)***

Wald test for model (d.f.)                                                            5,115.5 (125)***
Corr (formal IP, informal IP)                    0.547        0.019      ***
Corr (formal IP, innovation)                     0.039        0.024
Corr (informal IP, innovation)                   0.125        0.024      ***
Note: The method of estimation is maximum likelihood on a trivariate probit model. Standard Errors are robust to heteroskedasticity, and
clustered on enterprise.
                                                      Table 5. OLS Estimates of the production function
Dependent variable                                                                                        Log (turnover)
                                                                                                                   New‐to‐market product     New‐to‐market process
Type of innovation                                          Product innovation           Process innovation               innovation                innovation
                                                          Coeff.       Std. err        Coeff.       Std. err       Coeff.       Std. err     Coeff.       Std. err

Log (n of employees)                                      0.664     0.011     ***      0.664     0.011    ***     0.663     0.011    ***     0.664    0.011    ***
Log (capital)                                             0.096     0.007     ***      0.097     0.007    ***     0.096     0.007    ***     0.096    0.007    ***
Log (materials)                                           0.276     0.010     ***      0.277     0.010    ***     0.276     0.010    ***     0.277    0.010    ***
Scale coefficient#                                        1.036     0.006     ***      1.038     0.006    ***     1.035     0.006    ***     1.037    0.006    ***

Predicted prob of innovation                              0.000     0.050              ‐0.105    0.056           0.054      0.069            ‐0.256   0.180
D (formal IP important)*Pred P of innov                   ‐0.007    0.038              ‐0.012    0.034           0.022      0.032            0.013    0.027
D (informal IP important)*Pred P of innov                 0.028     0.034               0.035    0.032           0.025      0.029             0.030   0.025
D (formal IP important)                                   0.121     0.066              0.191     0.076       *   0.077      0.075            0.416    0.186        *
D (informal IP important)                                 ‐0.006    0.070               0.019    0.080           ‐0.020     0.083             0.088   0.216
Prob innov and formal IP                                  0.114     0.055         **   0.074     0.068            0.153     0.075       **   0.173    0.216
Prob innov and informal IP                                0.022     0.041              ‐0.051    0.051            0.059     0.054            ‐0.138   0.157
Prob innov and both                                       0.136     0.031     ***      0.128     0.029    ***     0.158     0.038    ***      0.291   0.105    ***
F‐test for 4 IP variables                                      3.6 (0.009)***              6.6 (0.009)***             2.6 (0.037)**              5.6 (0.009)***
F‐test for 2 survey dummies                                   36.0 (0.000)***             34.2 (0.000)***            35.6 (0.000)***            34.0 (0.000)***
F‐test for 25 industry dummies                                22.1 (0.000)***             22.3 (0.000)***            21.8 (0.000)***            22.0 (0.000)***
F‐test for model (df=35)                                     1360.9 (0.000)***           1357.5 (0.000)***          1357.7 (0.000)***          1357.2 (0.000)***
R‐squared                                                           0.902                       0.902                     0.902                       0.902
SSR                                                                2,572.9                     2,571.7                   2,573.4                     2,572.4
Standard error                                                      0.602                       0.602                     0.602                       0.602
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, clustered on firm.
Shaded coefficients are derived from the estimated coefficients.
7,144 observations on 5,684 firms.
# Test is for the scale coefficient equal to unity
                     Table 6a. Multivariate Probit estimates of IP choice and product innovation
                                     7,144 observations on 5,684 firms; Log likelihood = ‐9,005.1
                                                                                                                     Product Innovator or
                                                    Formal IP methods                Informal IP methods                   imitator
                                                  Coeff.       Std. err            Coeff.        Std. err           Coeff.       Std. err

Log (predicted IS per employee)                   1.026         0.065      ***     0.945         0.063      ***     0.453         0.066     ***
Log (n of employees)                              0.399         0.020      ***     0.329         0.019      ***     0.165         0.020     ***
Log (firm age in 2011)                            0.028         0.053              0.042         0.053              ‐0.092        0.056
D (collaborates)                                  ‐0.182        0.054      ***     ‐0.093        0.056              0.395         0.055     ***
Firm perception of market risk                    0.331         0.043      ***     0.373         0.044      ***      0.175        0.044     ***
Firm perception of fin. Constraints               0.092         0.042        *     0.270         0.044      ***     0.007         0.044
Firm ‐ impt. of reg & standards                   0.151         0.050       **     0.131         0.052       *      ‐0.114        0.053      *
Firm ‐ impt. of env, H&S regs                      0.030        0.051               0.142        0.054       **     ‐0.031        0.054
D (innov to improve range)                                                                                          0.704         0.051     ***
D (innov for new markets)                                                                                           0.234         0.054     ***
D (innov for quality improvement)                                                                                   0.266         0.058     ***
D (within group impt info source)                 0.204        0.055       ***     0.372        0.054               0.441         0.058     ***
D (suppliers important info source)               ‐0.288       0.048       ***     ‐0.067       0.048               ‐0.108        0.051      *
D (customers impt info source)                    0.054        0.052               0.250        0.051   ***         0.191         0.056     ***
D (competitors impt info source)                  0.048        0.046               0.007        0.046               ‐0.173        0.049     ***
D (universities impt info source)                 0.167        0.062        **     0.086        0.070               ‐0.063        0.065
D (imitator)                                      ‐0.282       0.059       ***     ‐0.275       0.064   ***
Year dummies (2)                                       65.4 (0.000)***                  80.1 (0.000)***                    1.5 (0.464)
Two‐digit sector dummies (25)                         298.2 (0.000)***                 105.4 (0.000)***                  52.9 (0.000)***
Wald test for model (d.f.)                                                              5,269.2 (125)***
Corr (formal IP, informal IP)                      0.553        0.019      ***
Corr (formal IP, innovation)                       0.202        0.026      ***
Corr (informal IP, innovation)                     0.237        0.026      ***

Note: The method of estimation is maximum likelihood on a trivariate probit model. Standard Errors are clustered around the enterprise
                    Table 6b. Multivariate Probit estimates of IP choice and process innovation
                                    7,144 observations on 5,684 firms; Log likelihood = ‐8,994.8
                                                                                                                    Process Innovator or
                                                   Formal IP methods                Informal IP methods                   imitator
                                                 Coeff.       Std. err            Coeff.        Std. err           Coeff.       Std. err

Log (predicted IS per employee)                  1.025        0.065      ***      0.936        0.064       ***     0.139         0.066      *
Log (n of employees)                             0.400        0.020      ***      0.327        0.020       ***     0.098         0.021     ***
Log (firm age in 2011)                           0.036        0.054               0.045        0.053               0.002         0.056
D (collaborates)                                 ‐0.172       0.054       **      ‐0.110       0.057               0.567         0.054     ***
Firm perception of market risk                   0.336        0.043      ***      0.371        0.044       ***     0.120         0.044      **
Firm perception of fin. Constraints              0.090        0.042       *       0.267        0.044       ***     0.012         0.043
Firm ‐ impt. of reg & standards                  0.153        0.050      **       0.133        0.052        *      ‐0.183        0.054     ***
Firm ‐ impt. of env, H&S regs                     0.042       0.051                0.133       0.054        *       0.159        0.056      **
D (innov to increase flexibility)                                                                                  0.482         0.056     ***
D (innov to increase capacity)                                                                                     0.410         0.053     ***
D (innov to reduce unit cost)                                                                                      0.176         0.054     ***
D (within group impt info source)                0.213        0.056      ***      0.358        0.054   ***         0.516         0.062     ***
D (suppliers important info source)              ‐0.271       0.048      ***      ‐0.070       0.048               0.247         0.052     ***
D (customers impt info source)                   0.041        0.052               0.237        0.051   ***         0.049         0.057
D (competitors impt info source)                 0.041        0.046               0.008        0.046               ‐0.127        0.049     **
D (universities impt info source)                0.169        0.063       **      0.110        0.071               ‐0.104        0.063
D (imitator)                                     ‐0.197       0.061      ***      0.042        0.065
Year dummies (2)                                      65.4 (0.000)***                  80.1 (0.000)***                  21.1 (0.000)***
Two‐digit sector dummies (25)                        298.2 (0.000)***                 105.4 (0.000)***                  45.2 (0.000)***

Wald test for model (d.f.)                                                            5,042.8 (125)***
Corr (formal IP, informal IP)                    0.556        0.018      ***
Corr (formal IP, innovation)                     0.105        0.032      ***
Corr (informal IP, innovation)                   0.118        0.033      ***
Note: The method of estimation is maximum likelihood on a trivariate probit model. Standard Errors are robust to heteroskedasticity, and
clustered on enterprise.
                                  Table 7. OLS Estimates of the production function ‐ innovation spending model
Dependent variable                                                                                        Log (turnover)
                                                                                                                   New‐to‐market product     New‐to‐market process
Type of innovation                                          Product innovation           Process innovation               innovation                innovation
                                                          Coeff.       Std. err        Coeff.       Std. err       Coeff.       Std. err     Coeff.       Std. err

Log (n of employees)                                      0.664     0.011     ***      0.664     0.011    ***     0.663     0.011    ***     0.664    0.011    ***
Log (capital)                                             0.096     0.007     ***      0.097     0.007    ***     0.096     0.007    ***     0.096    0.007    ***
Log (materials)                                           0.276     0.010     ***      0.277     0.010    ***     0.276     0.010    ***     0.277    0.010    ***
Scale coefficient#                                        1.036     0.006     ***      1.038     0.006    ***     1.035     0.006    ***     1.037    0.006    ***

Predicted prob of innovation                              0.003     0.051              ‐0.107    0.056           0.048      0.069            ‐0.282   0.180
D (formal IP important)*Pred P of innov                   ‐0.009    0.037              ‐0.013    0.034           0.019      0.032            0.012    0.027
D (informal IP important)*Pred P of innov                 0.028     0.034               0.035    0.032           0.026      0.029             0.030   0.025
D (formal IP important)                                   0.126     0.066              0.194     0.076       *   0.088      0.075            0.433    0.186        *
D (informal IP important)                                 ‐0.008    0.070               0.020    0.080           ‐0.022     0.084             0.093   0.216
Prob innov and formal IP                                  0.120     0.056         **   0.074     0.068            0.155     0.076       **   0.163    0.216
Prob innov and informal IP                                0.023     0.041              ‐0.052    0.051            0.052     0.054            ‐0.159   0.156
Prob innov and both                                       0.140     0.031     ***      0.129     0.031    ***     0.159     0.038    ***      0.286   0.105    ***
F‐test for 4 IP variables                                      3.7 (0.006)***              6.7 (0.009)***             2.7 (0.027)**              5.9 (0.000)***
F‐test for 2 survey dummies                                   36.0 (0.000)***             34.2 (0.000)***            35.5 (0.000)***            33.7 (0.000)***
F‐test for 25 industry dummies                                22.1 (0.000)***             22.3 (0.000)***            21.7 (0.000)***            22.1 (0.000)***
F‐test for model (df=35)                                     1361.4 (0.000)***           1357.6 (0.000)***          1357.7 (0.000)***          1357.2 (0.000)***
R‐squared                                                           0.902                       0.902                     0.902                       0.902
SSR                                                                2,572.7                     2,571.6                   2,573.4                     2,572.2
Standard error                                                      0.602                       0.601                     0.602                       0.602
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, clustered on firm.
Shaded coefficients are derived from the estimated coefficients.
7,144 observations on 5,684 firms.
# Test is for the scale coefficient equal to unity
                                                 Table 8: Estimates of the production function by firm size
Dependent variable                                                                                 Log (turnover)
Type of innovation                                                   Product                                                          Process
                                                  SMEs                  Large firms               T‐test#            SMEs                Large firms            T‐test#
Log (capital)                            0.115     0.009      ***   0.069 0.011           ***   3.24 ***    0.116     0.009    ***   0.069 0.011        ***   3.31 ***
Log (n of employees)                     0.705     0.018      ***   0.686 0.016           ***   ‐0.79       0.707     0.018    ***   0.686 0.016        ***   ‐0.87
Log (materials)                          0.236     0.012      ***   0.361 0.016           ***   6.25 ***    0.237     0.012    ***   0.362 0.016        ***   6.25 ***
Prob innovation                          0.006     0.074            0.075 0.065                 0.70        ‐0.157    0.081          0.030 0.072               1.73     *
Prob innov and formal IP                 0.162     0.083      **    0.111 0.070                 ‐0.47       ‐0.027    0.109          0.131 0.083               1.15
Prob innov and informal IP               ‐0.067    0.057            0.115 0.055            **    2.30 **    ‐0.122    0.073     *    0.047 0.065               1.73     *
Prob innov and both                      0.095     0.048      **    0.151 0.040           ***   0.90        0.008     0.067          0.148 0.046        ***    1.72     *

F‐test for 4 IP variables                     2.8 (0.027)**               0.8 (0.554)                          3.2 (0.011)**             1.6 (0.184)
SSR                                              1,220.8                    1,224.5                               1,220.0                  1,225.3
Standard error                                    0.613                      0.566                                 0.613                    0.566
Observations (firms)                          3,285 (3,022)              3,859 (2,831)                         3,285 (3,022)            3,859 (2,831)
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, clustered on firm.
F test for difference of product models = 10.5
F test for difference of process models = 10.4
SMEs are firms with employment less than 250.
# The t‐test is for the equality of the coefficient between manufacturing and services.
                                                   Table 9: Estimates of the production function by sector
Dependent variable                                                                                  Log (turnover)
Type of innovation                                                    Product                                                           Process
                                             Manufacturing             Services & other          T‐test#        Manufacturing            Services & other         T‐test#

Log (capital)                             0.027      0.010    ***    0.134     0.009      ***   7.95    ***   0.028    0.010      ***   0.134   0.010      ***   7.50    ***
Log (n of employees)                      0.764      0.016    ***    0.587     0.014      ***    8.33   ***   0.765    0.016      ***   0.587   0.014      ***   8.37    ***
Log (materials)                           0.334      0.017    ***    0.266     0.012      ***   ‐3.27   ***   0.333    0.016      ***   0.266   0.012      ***   ‐3.35   ***
Prob innovation                           ‐0.164     0.058     **    0.117     0.077            2.91    ***   ‐0.297   0.066      ***   0.067   0.086            3.36    ***
Prob innov and formal IP                  ‐0.086     0.061           0.254     0.096      ***    2.99   ***   ‐0.176   0.073       **   0.299   0.121      **    3.36    ***
Prob innov and informal IP                ‐0.093     0.047     **    0.076     0.069             2.02   ***   ‐0.171   0.056      ***   0.042   0.087            2.06    ***
Prob innov and both                       ‐0.015     0.035           0.213     0.061      ***    3.24   ***   ‐0.050   0.040            0.274   0.080      ***   3.62    ***

F‐test for 4 IP variables                     2.1 (0.083)*                 1.9 (0.111)                           3.9 (0.004)***            2.8 (0.025)**
SSR                                               711.7                      1748.2                                   708.7                   1747.8
Standard error                                    0.482                       0.658                                   0.481                    0.658
Observations (firms)                          3,091 (2,430)               4,053 (3,272)                           3,091 (2,430)            4,053 (3,272)

Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, clustered on firm.
F test for difference of product models = 9.2
F test for difference of process models = 9.4
Services & other includes construction, trade, and utilities in addition to services.
# The t‐test is for the equality of the coefficient between manufacturing and services.
