NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECONSTRUCTING MACROECONOMIC THEORY TO MANAGE ECONOMIC
POLICY
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 20517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20517
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

This essay was prepared for an event honoring Jean-Paul Fitoussi, to whom it owes an enormous intellectual
debt. I should also acknowledge helpful discussions with Rob Johnson and my long-term collaborator,
Bruce Greenwald. Financial support from INET is gratefully acknowledged. Research and editorial
assistance was provided by Eamon Kircher-Allen and Sandesh Dhungana. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Reconstructing Macroeconomic Theory to Manage Economic Policy
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 20517
September 2014
JEL No. E00,E12,E24,E5,G01
ABSTRACT
Macroeconomics has not done well in recent years: The standard models didn't predict the Great Recession;
and even said it couldn't happen. After the bubble burst, the models did not predict the full consequences.
The paper traces the failures to the attempts, beginning in the 1970s, to reconcile macro and microeconomics,
by making the former adopt the standard competitive micro-models that were under attack even then,
from theories of imperfect and asymmetric information, game theory, and behavioral economics.
The paper argues that any theory of deep downturns has to answer these questions: What is the source
of the disturbances? Why do seemingly small shocks have such large effects? Why do deep downturns
last so long? Why is there such persistence, when we have the same human, physical, and natural
resources today as we had before the crisis?
The paper presents a variety of hypotheses which provide answers to these questions, and argues that
models based on these alternative assumptions have markedly different policy implications, including
large multipliers. It explains why the apparent liquidity trap today is markedly different from that
envisioned by Keynes in the Great Depression, and why the Zero Lower Bound is not the central impediment
to the effectiveness of monetary policy in restoring the economy to full employment.
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Reconstructing Macroeconomic Theory to Manage Economic Policy1
Joseph E. Stiglitz2

Why macroeconomics needs to be reconstructed6
No one would, or at least should, say that macroeconomics has done well in recent years. The
standard models not only didn't predict the Great Recession, they also said it couldn't happen—
bubbles don't exist in well-functioning economies of the kind assumed in the standard model.
Not surprisingly, even after the bubble broke, the models didn't predict the full consequences,
and they haven't provided good guidance to policymakers in responding to the crisis. A half
decade after the bursting of the bubble, US unemployment is still high—with almost one out of
eight Americans who would like a full-time job not being able to get one.7 The government is
still financing almost all mortgages.
So, too, our standard models didn't predict either the occurrence of or the follow-on from euro
crisis—neither its occurrence nor its evolution, including the high levels of unemployment that
persist today and a downturn that in some countries is comparable to that of the Great
Depression.
The assertions about how well the economy was performing just before the crisis by those who
relied on such models are painful testament to how badly our models performed. As Robert
Wade8 has written:
In April 2006 Anne Krueger, deputy managing director of the IMF, announced
the IMF’s view that ‘the world economy has rarely been in better shape.” 9 In
May 2007, Jean-Philippe Cotis, the chief economist of the OECD, presented the
OECD’s view that ‘the current economic situation is in many ways better than
what we have experienced in years… Our central forecast remains quite

1

Paper presented at a conference in honor of Jean-Paul Fitoussi, Paris, June 2013. I would like to acknowledge
research and editorial assistance provided by Eamon Kircher-Allen and Sandesh Dhungana. The financial support of
INET is gratefully acknowledged.
2
University Professor, Columbia University.
6
This paper draws heavily upon two previous lectures I have given on related subjects, Stiglitz (2011) and Stiglitz
(2013a), as well as my book Freefall (Stiglitz, 2010).
7
Figure is current as of the time this paper went to press in May 2014. But for most of the four years since Great
Recession ended, this figure was 1 in 6, or worse.
8
Wade (2013).
9
Quoted in Lansley (2012), p. 224.

1

benign…[we expect the OECD to show] strong job creation and falling
unemployment.’ 10
These assertions of confidence in the economy were made after the housing bubble, which was
the precipitating event that brought on the crisis, had already broken. Even after the bubble
broke, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve predicted that the crisis would be contained.11
Their record in seeing that there was a bubble, let alone predicting when it would burst, was
perhaps even more dismal. When shortly before the bubble broke, Greenspan was asked
whether there was a bubble, he replied that there was not—just “a little froth” on the
economy.12
The test of science is prediction—and one should have some skepticism of a model that can't
predict the two biggest macro-events of the last eighty years. A model whose predictive ability
is so weak can hardly be relied upon for policy guidance. With so many of the same
policymakers in place after the crisis as before, relying on the same flawed models, it is no
wonder that our recovery from the crisis has been so weak13.
Those who were so optimistic about the economy even as it was about to implode were guided
in their assertions by the prevalent models. Not only did such models deny the existence of
bubbles—in spite of more than two centuries in which capitalism had been marked by volatility,
much of it brought about by credit and asset bubbles—the models asserted that even if there
were a bubble, globalization had enabled the effects of its breaking to be diversified away.
They didn’t even contemplate that the effects could have been amplified in a process of
contagion.
It is remarkable, given how poorly the models performed, how complacent some of the
advocates of the model have been. Defenders of the model argue that the models actually
worked quite well—for the purposes for which they were intended:
“The standard models were designed for … non-crisis periods, and they have proven
quite useful in that context.” 14
Indeed, the chairman of the Federal Reserve argued that there was little wrong with the models
themselves:
“the recent financial crisis was more a failure of economic engineering and economic
management than … of economic science.”15
10

Cotis (2007), p. 7.
See e.g. Bernanke (2007).
12
See e.g. Torres and Fitzgerald (2005).
13
See Fitoussi (2013).
14
Bernanke (2010).
11

2

Defenders of the model often go further, arguing that no model could deal with events that
happen once in 80 years, accidents of nature that are intrinsically unpredictable. But this misses
three essential points: (1) The economy wasn’t really performing well, in a fundamental sense,
prior to the crisis; it was setting up the conditions—the excesses—that led to the crisis. (2) The
crisis itself was not just the result of an “accident”, an exogenous event that struck the
economy; rather the crisis was created, or at least enabled, by the economic policies that were
pushed by the Federal Reserve . And (3) the benefits of slightly better performance in
prediction in times of “normal” economic activity are far outweighed by the failures in
prediction in the context of deep downturns. If we are concerned with overall societal welfare,
macroeconomics should be focused on these deep downturns. Between the US and Europe,
the loss in output as a result of the current downturn amounts to well over five trillion dollars,
an amount far in excess of the benefits from improved fine-tuning of the economy in normal
times over decades.16
Embarrassingly, some of the defenders of the current models go even further, suggesting that
this is the “golden age of [macro-]economics.”17

Back to the beginning18
Prior to Keynes, there was, among classical economists the general belief that markets worked
well, that they were stable and efficient. Indeed, so strongly were these beliefs held that in the
midst of the Great Depression, a majority of American economists supported the notion that
government should do nothing. Markets would self-correct. (These economists did not, of
course, explain why matters had gone so disastrously.)
Keynes provided an answer—a theoretical model, or perhaps more accurately, a set of
theoretical models, with clear policy implications, the central tenets of which were: (a) markets
were not self-correcting, at least in the relevant time span—unemployment could persist; (b) in
deep downturns, monetary policy was ineffective; and (c) fiscal policy—government spending—
could stimulate the economy, by a multiple of the amount that was spent.

15

Ibid.
This is a very conservative number, based on a comparison of GDP in each year since the crisis and a
straightforward extrapolations of where the economy would be had there not been a crisis. The disparity for the
US in 2014 is in excess of 15 percent, and for Europe is even larger.
17
See Ed Prescott's April 2006 lecture at Trinity University in San Antonio, Texas, available
at http://www.trinity.edu/nobel/Prescott/Prescott_Webquotes.htm (accessed June 12, 2013).
18
This discussion can be thought of as taking off where Fitoussi left off in his wonderful description of the
evolution of macroeconomic theory, in his introduction to Modern Macroeconomic Theory, Basil Blackwell, 1983.
16

3

The model provided an explanation both for the failure of President Herbert Hoover’s economic
policies to resuscitate the economy and for the successes of the New Deal and the war-led
recovery in the U.S. Keynes’s ideas were incorporated in 1946 U.S. legislation that recognized
the responsibility of the government to maintain the economy at full employment, and
entrusted the Council of Economic Advisers with formulating macroeconomic policies that
would ensure that this would be achieved. In the ensuing decades, there were several
instances—most notably under President John F. Kennedy—where Keynesian ideas were tried
and tested, and worked.
But Keynes was never liked by those who believed in unfettered markets—who wanted to
minimize the role of government—and the counterattack that began in the 1960s had
remarkable successes in the ensuing decades. Prosperity meant that the Great Depression
quickly faded into ancient history, and the problem of the day was inflation, not
unemployment. The economics profession changed, too, demanding greater standards of rigor.
The schism between micro-economics, which focused on well-functioning markets (which
always “cleared,” so that there was never any unemployment), and in which the central result
was Adam Smith’s invisible hand, and macroeconomics, which focused on dysfunctional
markets, which could be characterized by high and persistent levels of unemployment, was
unsettling.
Modern macroeconomics can be viewed as growing out of an attempt to reconcile traditional
Keynesian macroeconomics with micro-economics.19 There were two ways to achieve such a
reconciliation: try to adapt macroeconomics to the micro-economic model of the time, or try to
glean from macroeconomics insights about what was wrong with the traditional microeconomic models and reform them accordingly. Much of the mainstream of economics took
the former course—just at the time that standard micro-economics was itself under attack,
from the proponents of theories of imperfect and asymmetric information, game theory, and
behavioral economics.
Mainstream macroeconomics came to be dominated by two “churches”—I use the term
advisedly, because both were dominated by strong beliefs, which could be little altered by
evidence and experience, though the style of argument seemed to suggest that both based
their faith on a close examination of the empirical record.
One school returned to the doctrines of the classical economists, holding that markets worked
well, and that accordingly policy intervention was unnecessary. Some suggested that what was
widely viewed as unemployment was actually just leisure. Their theories were designed to
19

4

Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987).

explain the wide fluctuations in the demand for leisure. When challenged with the observation
that normally, when individuals are experiencing a period of extensive leisure, they feel happy,
and yet there were ample indicators that in recessions, that was not the case, they responded:
that was a matter for psychologists, not for economists.
They held two further, somewhat contradictory positions: government policy was likely to be
ineffective, and if and when it had effects, it was counterproductive.
In support of their models, they took a major step backwards from the use of statistical
inference. They constructed calibrated models, and using simulations, described the
correlations between certain selected variables, comparing those correlations with observed
correlations. In many cases, when one looked at the underlying behavior, e.g. of savings or
labor supply, it was in fact poorly described by the model. What had begun as an attempt to
reconcile macro and micro behavior seemed, in the end, to almost ignore what should have
been the underlying micro-foundations.
Part of the reason for the failure of these models was their reliance on the concept of the fully
rational representative agent with rational expectations—the notion that the economy could
be well described as if it consisted of a group of identical such individuals. Such models
couldn't embrace information asymmetries: with a representative agent, these could only arise
if the individual suffered from acute schizophrenia, which would in turn be hard to reconcile
with their assumptions of all-knowing rationality.
Moreover it is hard to have a robust financial sector in representative agent models: who is
lending to whom? Since all risk is borne by the same (representative) agent, financial structure
can’t matter. Not surprisingly, banks then play no role. With the financial sector at the center
of this, and many other crises, it is no wonder that these models had little to say—either before
or after the crisis.
The belief in rational agents with rational expectations was taken almost as an article of faith.
My own research into equilibrium models with asymmetric information but rational
expectations clearly demonstrates the need for behavioral economics: even if models with
information asymmetries but rational agents with rational expectations are able to explain
many phenomena that the standard model with perfect information fails to account for, there
are many important phenomena that simply cannot be explained even within that model.20 It
should be clear too that the behavior of so many market participants in the run-up to the 2008
crisis cannot be reconciled with any model of “rational behavior with rational expectations,”
even if there were some market participants who profitably exploited others’ irrationality.
20

5

See Stiglitz (1982) and the introduction to its reprinting in Stigltiz (2013b).

There is another reason that the representative agent models fail: they assume that the
distribution of income doesn't matter. But if that were true, debt wouldn't matter, for all that
debt is a claim by one person on another's income. Distribution matters. If one is concerned
about social justice, then this is obvious. But distribution matters even if one is just concerned
about economic performance. 21
It matters, in particular, if the marginal propensity to consume differs significantly for at the top
and those at the bottom. While there is overwhelming evidence that that is the case22—
reinforced by recent work focusing on consumption behavior in this recession23—there are still
those who believe to the contrary, citing Milton Friedman’s classic work. But Friedman ignored
the importance of credit constraints; those alone explain why those at the bottom might have a
higher marginal propensity to consume than those at the top.24
Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993, op cit) have also shown that the distribution of net worth among
firms also matters. An increase in the relative price of oil benefits oil producers at the expense
of the users of oil; but the latter are likely to contract output, employment and investment as a
result far more than the former increase output, employment and investment, so that such a
change will have a contractionary macro-economic effect. But the same would be true for a
decrease in the relative price of oil.
(To some economists, this recent attention on distribution is an anathema. As one economist
forcefully put it,
“of the tendencies that are harmful to sound economics, the most seductive and …
poisonous is to focus on questions of distribution”.25
I might suggest that, to the contrary, of the tendencies that have marked modern
macroeconomics, the most seductive and poisonous is the failure to pay due attention to
inequality.)

The second of the two mainstream “churches” was a little—but only a little—better. It too
relied on variants of the representative agent model, maximizing utility over an infinite lifetime,

21

See Fitoussi (1994) and Fitoussi and Saraceno (2011).
See e.g. Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004).
23
See Dynan (2012); and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013).
24
See discussion in Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes, op. cit.; Zeldes (1989) discusses such constraints in more detail.
25
Lucas (2004).
22

6

with rational expectations. Accordingly, it too largely ignored financial markets, credit, and a
host of other behavior hard to reconcile with observed macro- and micro- behavior.
It can be thought of growing out of the Hicksian fixed wage/price interpretation of Keynes.
While basing itself on the standard competitive equilibrium framework, the proponents of this
model recognized that there could be unemployment, and the challenge was how to reconcile
this reality with the standard competitive equilibrium model. There was a simple answer: a
single market failure—prices and wages didn’t adjust to the equilibrium level. It was the
smallest deviation from the standard competitive equilibrium model that could give rise to
persistent unemployment. But the fact that such a model could explain persistent
unemployment doesn’t in fact mean that it provides a good explanation of what has actually
occurred; it doesn’t mean that the model is a “good” model.
This particular school had implications that were as pernicious as the first. It essentially blamed
the victim for unemployment. If only workers would accept lower wages then unemployment
would disappear, and the economy would be restored to its potential. The belief in this notion
helps explain why central bankers, rather than sticking to their own knitting—trying to ensure
financial stability—were so fond of discussing labor market rigidities. It was unions and
government intervention in labor markets (through labor protection legislation, minimum
wages, etc.) that were at the root of the problem of unemployment. If only government
allowed markets to work as markets then the macro-economy would behave as classical
economists had predicted.
But this was nonsense, and was shown so by the current crisis. In the initial years of the crisis,
the United States, with purportedly the most flexible labor market among the advanced
countries, performed in many ways far more poorly than the Northern European countries.
But the idea had long before been discredited: there are many economies with weak or
essentially nonexistent unions and little or no effectively enforced government protections that
are marked by high levels of unemployment.26 With Easterly and Islam, I sought to explain the
levels of volatility across countries: excessive financialization appeared more important than
wage rigidities.27
Some advocates of these models recognize its limitations, arguing that it is, however, just the
beginning of a research strategy that will, over time, bring in more and more of the relevant
complexities of the world. Anything left out—agency problems, financial constraints, etc.—will
26

Of course, with homogeneous labor/perfect information/no search costs, the efficiency wage theories are no
longer relevant. In the representative agent models, the only reason that labor is not fully employed is some form
of wage rigidity. But this is an artificial consequence of these artificial assumptions.
27
Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2001a and 2001b).

7

eventually be incorporated. (And especially since the crisis, DSGE models incorporating some
of these features have been constructed.) To the contrary, I believe these models are not a
good starting point. Such Ptolemaic exercises in economics will be no more successful than
they were in astronomy in dealing with the facts of the Copernican revolution.
It should be clear then why a reconstruction of macroeconomics is necessary.

The foundations of a reconstruction
Once one goes beyond the standard competitive equilibrium model, one can easily explain
market failures, including markets that do not clear. (It is real rigidities, not nominal rigidities,
that for instance should be relevant for the failure of the labor market to clear.) Indeed, the
presumption that markets were efficient (Adam Smith's invisible hand) was reversed by the
Greenwald-Stiglitz theorem,28 which showed that whenever there was asymmetric information
or imperfect risk markets—that is, essentially always—markets are not constrained Pareto
efficient (taking into account the costs of obtaining information and creating risk markets).
That theorem has some important implications: privately profitable transactions may not be
socially desirable. The banks may have incentives to engage in contracts with each other that
make, for instance, the economic system more unstable (which is exactly what they did). There
are important (pecuniary) externalities associated with individuals’ actions that matter and
which individuals do not take into account. Price changes have not just distributive
consequences, but also shift incentive compatibility, self-selection, and collateral constraints. 29
These models not only provide a better explanation of the rigidities that exist (providing an
explanation for real rigidities, e.g. in wages, as a result of efficiency wage effects30 31), but
suggest that there are other market failures—for instance, the failure of contracts to be fully
indexed—with significant macro-economic consequences. They pick up strands of thought in
Keynes (as well as others, like Fisher32) suggesting that wage and price flexibility may be a
problem: with unindexed contracts, real debt burdens worsen as wages and prices fall. They
thus suggest that the natural dynamics of the economy may be unstable—the fall in wages and
prices in response to a downturn may exacerbate the downturn, not correct it.

28

Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986).
There is a growing literature focusing on exploring the macroeconomic implications of the externalities that
Greenwald and I identified, .e.g. not just for self-selection and incentive compatibility constraints, but also for
borrowing constraints. See e.g. Jeanne and Korinek (2010 and 2012).
30
See, e.g. Stiglitz (1974), and Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984).
31
They also provided, I believe, a better explanation of nominal rigidities than the fashionable menu cost theory.
See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1989).
32
Fisher (1933).
29

8

It is strange, in fact, that macroeconomic theories focusing on wage and price rigidities became
so fashionable, when in the Great Depression, wages and prices fell so deeply and rapidly.
Would things have been better if they fell even faster?33
This illustrates another incoherence in the standard model: the more rapid fall would have led
to higher real interest rates, given that the nominal interest rate can’t fall below zero. The
standard model focuses on the role of real interest rates. If so, more wage and price flexibility
would have made matters worse.
Of course, if real interest rates played the central role that the standard models assert, even
with a zero lower bound, there would be an easy way to lower the real interest rate, through
tax policy. A large but declining investment tax credit would confront firms with intertemporal
choices that are similar to those associated with high real interest rates.
But I don’t believe, especially today, that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates is the
central problem, the critical impediment to the restoration of the economy to full employment.
Real interest rates in the United States are already minus 2%. Does anyone really believe that
lowering them to minus 4% would solve the economy’s problem? To be sure, a sufficiently
large negative real interest rate might make a difference. (I will return to this issue later.)
Again, the representative agent model (and its descendants) imposed a straightjacket that
made it difficult to think clearly about what was going on. The problem was not just that the Tbill rate couldn’t be negative, but the unavailability of credit to firms and the adverse terms at
which such credit was available. The spread between the lending rate and the borrowing rate
was endogenous. There could be credit rationing—indeed, the inability of banks to borrow was
the liquidity crisis that brought on the downturn. To me, the strangest aspect of modern
macroeconomics was that central banks were using a model in which banks and financial
markets played no role.

The central questions of macroeconomics
Thus the reconstruction of macroeconomics based on alternative models to those of the two
prevailing “churches” of mainstream economics is likely to provide better answers to the three
central questions underlying deep downturns:

33

9

Even if wages and prices fall, it does not mean that real wages change. That depends on differences in the rates
of changes in wages and prices. There can be real wage rigidities even in the presence of flexibility of
nominal wages and prices. See Solow and Stiglitz (1968).

a. What is the source of the disturbances? The standard models assumed that they were
exogenous technology shocks—by implication, the Great Depression was marked by an
episode of acute amnesia, where in large parts of the world, people got less productive!
The reality was that this, and most other major downturns are man-made events.34 The
system creates them. And that means it may be possible for us to at least reduce their
frequency and depth.
b. Why do seemingly small shocks (after all, even the sub-prime mortgage market was only
a small fraction of global wealth) have such large effects? Standard theories describe
the economy’s buffers—how, for instance, price and inventory adjustments help
stabilize the economy. Instead, it seems that the system often amplifies shocks.35 And
shocks spread, like a contagious disease.
Indeed, a central concern of policy makers after a shock is preventing contagion. But
the standard models say that interdependence—global diversification—contributes to
stability. Their implicit recommendation for a group of individuals found to have
smallpox would be global diversification—send a few with the disease to each locality.
But we all know that this would have spread the risk and amplified the problem.
c. Why do deep downturns last so long? Why does there seem to be such persistence?
After all, we have the same human, physical, and natural resources today as we had
before the crisis. If markets worked well, we would quickly be restored to full
employment. Debt can’t be the problem: after all, debt is just money that we owe to
ourselves. It is a matter of distribution, and in the standard models, distribution doesn’t
matter. And even if debt did matter (because distribution matters), standard theory
says that there is still a new full employment equilibrium. The standard equilibrium
theory provides no explanation for why we don’t quickly get there, other than wage and
price rigidities. We should note that the losses after the breaking of the bubble are far
larger than those associated with the massive misallocation of capital prior to the crisis.
Moreover, the state variables (capital stock, labor supply, human capital) change slowly.
If (as in the standard model) there was a continuous mapping from state variables to the
value of market equilibrium variables, then presumably the requisite change in wages
34

See Kindleberger (1978).
Greenwald and Stiglitz show how price flexibility can lead to large balance sheet effects, leading to firms to
curtail production, employment, and investment, amplifying the effect of any shock. (This is sometimes referred
to as the financial accelerator.) (Because it takes time for balance sheets to be restored, the effects of the shock
are likely to be persistence.) The effects can be further amplified as a result of impacts on bank balance sheets,
leading them to contract lending. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993 and 2003).
35

10

and prices would be small, so that even with imperfectly flexible wages and prices, the
aggregate loss from the rigidities would be small.
This would not, of course be the case if there were multiple equilibria, so that (with the
same state variables) the economy’s equilibrium could change dramatically.36 It is, in
fact, easy to construct models with such multiple equilibria, once one leaves the world
of representative agents. There can even be multiple rational expectation equilibria.37
Recently, I have been working on models in which there can be large changes in perceived
wealth.38 When individuals have different expectations (which can easily occur in the presence
of differences in information even with rational expectations), then there is scope for them to
engage in bets. Each of the two sides believes (in expectation) that they will win, and the sum
of the believed wealth exceeds the “true” wealth. I refer to this perceived wealth as “pseudowealth”. Of course, next period, when the bets are settled, one side of the bet will win, the
other lose, and pseudo-wealth will get destroyed. But if differences in beliefs persist, then new
pseudo-wealth will be created.
But if, for some reason, there are changes in the economy such that the ability and/or
willingness to engage in such pseudo-wealth creation changes, then the total perceived wealth
of the economy can change quickly. There will then be large changes (at current wages and
prices) in levels of consumption and investment and other aspects of economic activity
(lending). Such changes can occur even if prices themselves are actuarially accurate; but even
more so if (as in Scheinkman et al.39) prices differ from actuarial value, and the disparity
between the two can change quickly. An event such as the bursting of a real estate bubble can
change both the ability and willingness to engage in bets (and thus the level of pseudo-wealth
in the economy), and the magnitude of the disparity of beliefs (before the crisis, some believed
that there was a bubble, others that there was not; after the crisis, it was clear that there had
been a bubble).

36

Or if there were multiple steady states, such that with a small change in state variables, the economy entered
into a differ orbit of attraction.
37
I do not, however, believe that one can explain the crisis of 2008—the sudden change in the aggregate output
and employment, with little change in the state variables—by such models. It was not that the economy suddenly
shifted from one equilibrium to another. What happened is better described by a model of disequilibrium: the
economy was experiencing a bubble, but of course didn’t realize it. Bubbles always break, and it was the
unwinding of the bubble—and the gradual realization that there had been a bubble—that was at the root of the
marked change in macro-economic aggregates.
38
Stiglitz and Guzman (2014).
39
Scheinkman and Xiong (2002).

11

Indeed, a crisis can give rise to the rapid creation of negative pseudo-wealth, as creditors
become more pessimistic about the ability of borrowers to repay their loans, while borrowers
believe that they will repay (and act accordingly.)
The theory of pseudo-wealth can explain how, even when there are small changes in the
standard state variables (physical, human, and natural capital) there can be large changes in
macro-economic behavior (in, for instance, aggregate consumption), for there can be large
changes in perceived wealth, and the effects of these changes may not easily be offset by
changes in relative prices—including interest rates.
I do not have time to flesh out further how this reconstruction of macro-economics (as it has
proceeded so far, and how it may proceed in coming years) provides answers to these three
questions. I want to move on, however, to how these theories, even in their imperfect state of
development, provide policy frameworks that are far more likely to produce better
macroeconomic performance.

Policy frameworks
I begin my discussion of policy frameworks with two key analytic questions: Can austerity work,
that is, can cutting government spending lead to an increase in output when the economy is in
a deep recession? And can government spending work? I then discuss the limitations of
monetary policy.

A. Austerity and contractionary expansion45
Austerity is in fashion in many quarters, buttressed by an occasional study (most notably the
work of Allesina and Ardagna).46 But these studies have been strongly challenged, if not It is
thoroughly discredited (even by the IMF.47) And there is a long historical record questioning
austerity.
Hoover’s austerity is widely given credit for helping turn the stock market crash of 1929 into the
Great Depression; the policies that the IMF-US treasury foisted on East Asia and Latin America
similarly converted downturns there into recessions, recessions into depressions.
45

For an excellent discussion of these issues, see Baker (2010); and Jayadev and Konczal (2010).
Alesina and Ardagna (2010).
47
See for example International Monetary Fund (2010).
46

12

By now, it should be clear that austerity has not worked in Europe—with unemployment
reaching record levels. This is true even though there are some who have seen in the end of
the recession proof that austerity works. But the end of a recession is not the same as a robust
recovery; and even with the “official” end of the recession, per capita GDP remains below what
it was before the crisis, and unemployment rates, especially of youth, remain highly elevated.
Several of the European countries can best be described as in a depression. Moreover, the real
test of the success of an economic policy is not whether the economy eventually returns to full
employment: every economic downturn eventually comes to an end. It is the depth and
duration of the downturn and the magnitude of the long term damage. Austerity, in these
terms, has been a failure: the cumulative gap between actual and potential output is already in
the trillions. Today, the Eurozone economies are some 15 to 20 percent below where they
would have been had there been no crisis, and the gap is not closing. Countries that engaged in
less contractionary policies did less badly. I believe austerity has been a key factor in
contributing to Europe’s poor performance in the years since the crisis.
There have been some discussions of instances in which government cutbacks have been
associated with economic expansion. Some have suggested that these benefits arise from
supply-side responses (e.g., as a result of the lower tax rates, now or in the future, there is a
negative balanced-budget multiplier). But in situations such as the current one, where
aggregate demand is limiting output, supply-side responses can even increase unemployment
and have an adverse effect on output: the downward pressure on wages shifts the distribution
of income towards profits, lowering aggregate demand. This suggests that the few instances of
government cutbacks bringing on expansion must be special and peculiar. And indeed that is
the case: they happened in small countries that had the good fortune to have exports expand
more than enough to fill the gap in aggregate demand caused by reduced government
expenditures.
They are typically instances where (a) the country's trading partners were growing, so the
export market was expanding; and (b) the country had a flexible exchange rate, so it could
quickly become more competitive by lowering interest rates or undertaking other policies that
affect the exchange rate.
For Europe and America now, the notion that exports could fill the gap created by reduced
government spending is a chimera, especially in view of the current global slowdown. And this
is especially so for the weak countries in Europe. With their fixed exchange rate with their
major trading partners in Europe, austerity is designed to improve competiveness by forcing
down wages and prices, in a process called internal devaluation. But internal devaluation has
never worked to restore an economy to health, partly because the decreased wages increases

13

the burden of debts (in the case, debt denominated in euros). The decreased demand for nontradeables typically more than offsets any gains from increased exports.
But looking across Europe, the growth in exports has been at best disappointing; the
improvements in the current account position are mainly a result of the decreased imports as a
result of lower incomes. (Part of the reason for this is that the ECB, focusing on inflation,
allowed interest rates to remain high relative to those in the US, increasing the value of the
euro.)
Perhaps the strongest criticism of this approach to economic recovery is, to the extent it is
successful, it is a policy that is aimed more at shifting demand away from others than at
increasing global aggregate demand.48 It is a "quiet" form of competitive devaluation. Indeed,
by lowering incomes in the afflicted countries and increasing the burdens of their debts it
reduces global aggregate demand.
But for those in the euro-zone, with an exchange rate that cannot adjust, with a single market,
where capital (in principal) can flow freely, and with a single currency but without the
institutions necessary to make a single currency work, the abandonment of austerity—without
further reforms in the structure of the Eurozone-- poses its own problems: Weaknesses in
Spain and Greece, for instance, are caused not just by the lack of government spending, but by
lack of lending—an almost inevitable consequence of the failure to have a banking union. With
a weak private sector, the burden on government is all the greater. And if somehow, the
economy is restored to full employment, large current account deficits are likely to show up in
many of the countries.
If a single currency is to work, then, not only must the policies of austerity be reversed, but
other reforms in the structure of the Eurozone, its policies, and its institutions will have to be
undertaken. At a minimum, there will have to be some form of mutualization of debt, a robust
banking union, with common supervision, resolution, and most important, deposit insurance,
and a convergence strategy.
In creating the euro, the designers did not recognize what convergence required, for the
countries to be sufficiently similar that they could share a common currency. The Maastricht
convention was based on neoliberal notions that, if only the government managed the macroeconomy well, the private sector would ensure that all else would go well. Thus, the ECB was
given the mandate of ensuring price stability, and the growth and stability pact required that
countries joining the euro would have low deficits (under 3% of GDP) and low debt (under 60%
of GDP). But as country after country went into crisis, it became clear that these conditions
48

Though not designed to be beggar-thy-neighbor policies, they have effects that are much akin to such policies.
See also Fitoussi (2013).

14

were neither necessary nor sufficient for convergence. Spain and Ireland both had surpluses
and low debt-to-GDP ratios before the crisis, and yet, after Greece, they were the first to join
the long list of countries facing difficulties. It was clear that it was private sector excesses that
were at fault, not government excesses, and yet the Eurozone framework had no way either to
detect or to respond to such excesses. Tougher agreements to make sure that fiscal
imbalances do not appear in the future would not have prevented the last crisis, and will not
prevent the next one. But the austerity measures that are now being imposed will make a full
recovery from this crisis more difficult.
Long-run convergence will require parallel increases in costs of production in the different
countries, which can be achieved only through convergence of productivity and, given wellrecognized downward rigidities in wages, faster wage increases in countries with higher
increases in productivity. Convergence of productivity increases will require the laggard
countries to embark on industrial policies—more than just creating a “conducive environment,”
again as assumed by the neoliberal models. But industrial policies were effectively discouraged
under the EU framework. Convergence and growth could also be facilitated by more
infrastructure investment, financed by the EU as a whole; but while there were generous funds
for new entrants to the EU, funds for the lagging countries have not been sustained.
Instead of creating a framework that would facilitate convergence, they created one that
exhibits dynamic instability: with each country responsible for its own banking system, and
with confidence in a country’s banking system inevitably depending on the country’s ability and
willingness to bail out troubled banks, money flees weak countries and its banks, making them
even weaker. Private contraction amplifies the effects of public austerity. So too, the
obligation of citizens to pay for their parents misdeeds—but only if they remain in the
country—induces skilled labor to leave, increasing the burden on those remaining.
While the crisis made the problems of the euro-structure clear, they were present long before.
Indeed, the euro helped create the crisis: for the markets seemed to have vastly overestimated
the extent to which the single market/single currency had reduced risk (another example of
market irrationality), leading to excessive lending to the afflicted countries. And the structure
of the Eurozone provided no way to curb the excesses thus generated.

B. The multiplier49
There has been considerable discussion of the magnitude of the multiplier associated with
government spending, with critics of expansionary government spending suggesting that it is
49

For a discussion of some of the issues raised here, see Solow (2012).

15

low, zero, or even negative. They look at the experience of different countries over long time
periods. Such analyses should be an important warning of the foolishness of mindless
regressions. Of course, when the economy is at or near full employment, the multiplier
(correctly measured) will be low. Even then, measurement problems (GDP is not a good
measure of economic output, providing only a biased estimate of economic performance when
the share of government expenditure increases.50) and econometric problems bedevil such
analyses. But the question is, what will the multiplier be when there is a high level of
unemployment and large underutilization of capacity? Since we have not had the levels of
unemployment and capacity utilization that we are now experiencing since the Great
Depression of the 1930s—and the structure of the economy was markedly different during the
Great Depression than now—there is no way we can, with confidence, extrapolate the
experiences of previous post- Depression downturns to the current situation.51
Economic theory, though, provides a compelling framework for analysis. The problem is lack of
aggregate demand. Government spending increases aggregate demand. We can identify
leakages (from savings and imports) and, on the basis of that, calculate the multiplier.
Traditional analyses, based on downturns of short duration, focused on one-period multipliers:
two years from now, the thinking went, the economy would presumably be back to full
employment, and the multiplier would be zero. But this downturn is long-term, so in
calculating the multiplier, we should calculate the impacts not just for this period, but for
subsequent periods as well.
For the United States, this kind of analysis yields a multi-period multiplier (with reasonable
values of savings and import coefficients) in the range of 1.5 to 2.
The next question is: are there reasons to believe that there are reactions from market
participants that will amplify or reduce these effects, i.e., are there "crowding in" or "crowding
out" effects? Again, in normal periods, the Central Bank, worried about an overheated
economy, raises interest rates and tightens credit, discouraging investment. The result is that
government spending crowds out private investment. But now, the Fed is committed to
keeping interest rates low and doing what it can to increase the availability of credit. This
explains again both why estimates of the multiplier based on normal periods are irrelevant, and
why, in this case, the multiplier will not be reduced by crowding-out of investment.
There may, in fact, be crowding-in of investment—if government spending, for instance, goes
to public investment, and public investment is complementary to private investment.

50

See Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi, op. cit.
Recent econometric studies do show significant multipliers, e.g. around 1.5. See Nakamura and Steinsson
(2014).
51

16

Alexander Field,52 for instance, makes a persuasive case for the theory that infrastructure
investment during the Depression enhanced private-sector productivity, and that this helped
lay the foundations for strong growth after World War II. Government investments in the
Internet and the life sciences have clearly spawned entire industries. More recently,
government investments in the Internet and the life sciences have clearly spawned entire
industries.
The Barro-Ricardo hypothesis suggests that the increased indebtedness of government will lead
to more savings (to offset future tax liabilities), and thus that government debt financed
spending crowds out consumption. There is little evidence of such an effect in recent years; in
fact, the Bush tax cuts gave rise to soaring deficits, which were followed by savings falling to
near zero.53 To believe in the Barro-Ricardo model, one would have to hypothesize that in the
absence of the tax cut, savings would have been markedly negative.
The criticisms of the hypothesis are well known: it ignores capital constraints and distributive
effects. Indeed, there may even be "crowding in" of consumption. First, if government
spending is for high-return investment, in a period such as the current one where government
can borrow at a negative real interest rate, the government's balance sheet will be improved;
thus (in the world of rationality, in which taxpayers see through the public veil), savings would
be reduced.54 There would be crowding in of consumption, not crowding out.
Moreover, if, as we have already noted is the case now, the downturn is likely to extend for
several periods, some of today's savings will be for future consumption; with rational
expectations, individuals would then know that incomes in future periods will be higher than
they otherwise would have been, meaning that their lifetime budget constraint has moved out.
This again leads to increased consumption today.55
Of course, a good multiplier analysis takes into account the fact that different kinds of
expenditures have different multipliers. What matters is not what the average multiplier has
been in the past, but the effect of a well-designed expansionary policy today. We have

52

Field (2011).
The St. Louis Fed tracks personal savings rate on its website at
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/data/PSAVERT.txt (accessed October 31, 2012); the historically low personal
savings rates during the Bush years are clear here.
54
Government expenditures do not even have to be investments: if government consumption expenditures and
private consumption expenditures are complements, then there will be crowding in of consumption. Moreover,
there is another channel through which crowding in of investment, to which we already alluded, takes place:
when government investment and private investment are complements.
55
Neary and Stiglitz (1983).
53

17

suggested that spending on investments in the US today on education or research has a far
higher multiplier, say, than on contractors in Iraq. 56
For some highly indebted countries, the additional borrowing to finance expansionary
investment-oriented fiscal policy would come at a high price; they would have to pay
increasingly higher interest rates, which might constrain what they could spend overall on
output-expanding projects.57 In principle, the market should realize this, in which case the
greater indebtedness could lead to a lowering of interest rates. But there is no shortage of
evidence of market irrationality; and whether justified or not, if increased indebtedness leads
to higher interest rates, governments may have to employ another strategy, making use of the
balanced-budget multiplier.
Traditional analyses suggested that the balanced-budget multiplier is unity. But well-designed
increases in taxes and expenditures can have a balanced-budget multiplier that is much larger,
plausibly twice the traditional number, e.g., recognizing that the marginal propensity to
consume at the top is low relative to that elsewhere, tax hikes at the very top reduce
consumption by far less than the increased expenditures expand it. Taking advantage of
crowding in of consumption and investment can further enhance the balanced-budget
multiplier.
Indeed, there are some taxes that might even stimulate demand. An increase in the estate tax
would encourage the elderly to consume more today; the imposition of a carbon tax would
encourage investment in buildings and equipment that reduced carbon emissions. So too
might an increase in a tax on dividends.58
In short, there is every reason to believe that well designed government policies could be very
effective in stimulating the economy. Keynes was right about there being a multiplier—and
advances since then have shown how that multiplier can actually be increased.

C. Debt and deleveraging
There are many in Europe and America who believe that our current troubles arise from excess
debt, at both the household and national level. Those focusing on debt at the national level
have warned that debt financed spending will in the long run be counterproductive.
56

Stiglitz (2010) and Bilmes and Stiglitz (2008).
Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) suggested, furthermore, that increased indebtedness beyond a 90% debt-to-GDP
ratio would lead to significantly lower growth. Putting aside the fact that their analyses ignored the central point
we have emphasized—the forms of expenditure and the circumstances of the economy make a big difference—
their work has since been extensively criticized. See, e.g. Herndon, Ash, and Pollin (2014).
58
Korinek and Stiglitz (2009).
57

18

Much of this view has been based on work of Reinhardt and Rogoff, who contended that once
debt exceeded 90%, the adverse effect on growth increased significantly. This work has been
the subject of extensive debate. 59 A large literature has now called attention to other
concerns—the lack of attention to causality (it was the recession that caused slow growth, not
the other way around); to the difference in circumstances. Does it make a difference whether
the debt is borrowed in one’s own currency or in another currency? Whether one is a reserve
currency country? Was the debt generated by war, or by gross incompetence? America left
World War II with a debt of 130% of GDP, and yet in the ensuing decades the country
experienced its fastest rate of growth (and the growth was shared growth). So too, Martin Wolf
has commented that if debt held back growth, England would never have experienced the
industrial revolution, for it emerged from its wars with France with massive debts.60 The wide
range of experiences shows at the minimum that debt is not destiny.
It is noteworthy that the debt pessimists have never come up with a coherent theory for why
debt itself should lead to lower growth—except if countries listened to the debt pessimists and
adopt austerity measures in response. Older literature for a closed economy emphasized that
we simply owe it to ourselves—and in the standard representative agent model that would
mean that there would be no effect. In the currently unfashionable life cycle models, debt can
displace capital, and lead to lower levels of per capita income, but it does not lead to a lower
rate of growth (though in the transition period growth would be smaller). And in an open
economy increased indebtedness to foreigners would lead to lower standards of living for the
citizens (they are poorer); but not to lower rate of growth.
Private indebtedness can, however, have significant effects—though in the neoliberal
framework, whatever the private market decides is by definition “right.”61 That ignores the
pervasive market failures that we noted earlier, associated with imperfect and asymmetric
information and imperfect risk markets (what have come to be called macro-economic
externalities).

59

See footnote 57 above. Interestingly, in their original paper, they didn't check the statistical

significance of any observed differences in growth of countries with debt-to-GDP ratios below
and above 90%
60

Wolf (2013).
Moreover, the standard competitive models do not provide an explanation for why a high level of indebtedness
should lead to a high level of persistent unemployment. Even if it led to a lower level of aggregate consumption at
a given set of wages and prices (including interest rates), there is some set of wages and prices at which full
employment could be attained. Our analysis above pointed out, however, that the natural adjustments
mechanisms may actually lead to increased unemployment.
61

19

Many have pinned their hopes for a quick recovery on deleveraging. There was excess private
(mainly household) debt prior to the crisis—especially so once the housing bubble had broken.
This indebtedness puts a damper on household spending. However, households are working
down this debt. Once they do so, consumption will recover, or so it is believed.
High levels of indebtedness do have an adverse effect on consumption, both because of the
real wealth effect and because of the effect it has in imposing borrowing constraints (which my
own work on imperfect capital markets, arising out of asymmetric information, has
emphasized). Still, there are reasons to believe that even after deleveraging, consumption will
return to anything like it was before the crisis.
The use of representative agent models has obscured what was going on in the US before the
crisis: the bottom 80% were consuming approximately 110% of their income. Even after they
deleverage, even after the financial sector is fully restored, we shouldn't expect them to
consume, on average, more than 100% of their income. With the top 20% garnering for
themselves some 40% of national income, and with their savings rate being roughly 15%, one
should expect a national savings rate of some 6%—somewhat higher than we see today but
somewhat lower than the prevailing rate in the US in earlier decades. The continuing rise in
inequality provides an additional argument for why we should not expect a return of the
savings rate to pre-crisis levels.
The puzzle is why hasn't the US savings rate increased even more (from slightly more than zero
to around 4.5% today). The answer may have to do with slow adjustments in consumption
patterns, which are aspects perhaps not adequately incorporated into the traditional models.
If, of course, we do get recovery of the economy through consumption, we should be worried:
it would mean a return to unsustainable patterns of the kind that marked the pre-crisis days.
Interestingly, as we have already suggested, the representative agent model without financial
constraints would suggest that leverage doesn’t matter at all. Debt simply reflects an
ownership claim on a stream of returns—a transfer of money from debtors to creditors; but
such transfers have no effects in this model.62

D. The liquidity trap and the zero lower bound

62

Of course, in an open economy model, if individuals in a country become indebted to those abroad, it lowers
their wealth, and thus their standard of living. This just affects who gets the benefits of the country’s output, not
the level of output or its rate of growth.

20

Before the crisis, many economists argued that monetary policy was, and should be, the main
vehicle for regulating macroeconomic activity, which the government carried out by
manipulating interest rates. It was the most effective and least distortionary instrument of
government policies.
I have never found convincing the empirical evidence for many aspects of these doctrines, and
I have always found the theoretical arguments unconvincing. Indeed, the relationship between
real interest rates and investment (especially outside of real estate) is hard to establish. In
most models, if nominal and real interest rates are both put in the right-hand side of a
regression, nominal interest rates appear to have more importance. Moreover, the notion that
monetary policy is non-distortionary—or at least less distortionary than fiscal policy--is a fiction
that arises from the simplistic aggregative models commonly employed. Reliance on monetary
policy forces adjustments to macroeconomic disturbances to be borne by interest and credit
sensitive sectors. There is no general theory suggesting that making these sectors bear the cost
(almost surely shrinking these sectors relative to what they otherwise would be) is optimal in
any sense.
In this crisis, the Fed (along with other central banks) has lowered interest rates to near zero—
real interest rates have become negative-- without producing much of a stimulative effect—
indeed, far less than was desired or hoped. I was not surprised, knowing that in the flawed
modeling of investment in the standard model credit availability and its determinants, risk, and
risk aversion, are given short shrift. And as we noted above, even if the T-bill rate is low, what
matters is the lending rate, and the spread between the two is an endogenous variable. The
lending rate may not fall in tandem with the decrease in the T-bill rate.
As Keynes’ view of the inefficacy of monetary policy has seemed to triumph, those who believe
in the standard model have suggested that its fundamental problem is the "zero lower bound"
on interest rates, a variant of the Keynesian liquidity trap. But the situation during the Great
Depression was completely different from today’s. Then, prices were falling at 10% a year, so
the real interest rate—as interest rates approached zero—was 10%.63 Today, the real interest
rate is -2%. There is no reason to believe that if (expectations of) the inflation rate were to rise
to 4% or even 6%, and the real interest rate fell to -4% or -6%, there would be a surge in
investment. After all, there is excess capacity in many sectors, and especially in real estate.
Getting funds at a lower rate is no reason to boost one's excess capacity. (To be sure, as I noted
earlier, there is a fast enough rate of inflation to make the real interest rate negative enough to

63

What should matter (in the standard theory), of course, for investment is the real product interest rate, not the
real consumption interest rate, and when there are large changes in relative prices, as occurred during the Great
Depression, these can differ markedly.

21

perhaps stimulate investment. But the uncertainty brought about by this change in economic
policy would itself have adverse effects on investment.64)
Again, the use of overly simplistic models has obscured some potentially important adverse
effects of lower interest rates, including lower long-term interest rates achieved through
quantitative easing. This would have the potential to partially or totally offset the alleged
benefits assumed to arise, particularly if the interest elasticity of investment is small. There are,
for instance, complex distributive effects. Traditionally, over the long run, creditors have been
considered better off than debtors; that being the case, the redistributive effects seen in this
scenario would be expected to enhance aggregate demand. However, if debtors have long-term
fixed-interest contracts, and if there are groups like the elderly who are dependent on the
income from government T-bills and bonds, the effects may well turn out to be negative. This is
especially so because the marginal propensity of the elderly to consume may be higher than
that of mortgagees and/or if QE results in a much greater decline in T-bill rates than in
mortgage rates.65 If quantitative easing leads to commodity booms (a question that remains in
contention), then there is a distributive effect from households to commodity producers, which
almost surely has a downward impact on aggregate demand.
In a world of full rationality, as assumed in the traditional models, there is a further negative
effect: the long-term bonds that the Fed is buying now will be sold back at a capital loss. The
government is (in effect) buying long-term bonds at a peak price. Therefore, under the BarroRicardo hypothesis, households should rationally include the expected capital loss in their
budget constraints, and thus reduce consumption. (This is the case whether or not accounting
rules require the government to recognize the loss, or whether or not the Fed goes through
machinations to avoid selling them at a loss by holding them to maturity.)66
The traditional mechanism by which lower (long term) interest rates might benefit the
economy is an increased flow of credit at better terms—but that does not seem to be playing a
major role today, perhaps for five reasons. (a) The firms that are most constrained by
borrowing, small and medium-sized enterprises, remain constrained, because the supply of
funds is constrained—while the big banks were given huge amounts of money, and repaired
64

Some (Woodford, 2003, 2010) have suggested that what is required is a credible commitment to inflation (e.g.,
through price-level targeting, which implies when there is less than normal inflation now, perhaps due to
deflationary pressures arising from excess capacity, there will be higher than normal inflation in the future). But
even if the expected real interest rate were the critical determinant of investment (which we suggest it is not),
there is no way that the monetary authority could commit itself to such a policy.
65
With the increased spread going to the financial sector, with little positive effect on aggregate demand.
66
I believe that it is reasonable for the Fed to ignore this effect; but this simply illustrates the inconsistencies in the
use by the Fed and other central banks of some of the standard models based on full rationality. In practice, they
seem to use the model when it produces results they like, and not otherwise. Thus, for instance, a pre-announced
policy of a temporary interest rate cut should have little effect on asset prices or demand, since long run prices and
lifetime budgets should be relatively unaffected. See the discussion below.

22

their balance sheet through monopoly profits and speculative activities, the smaller regional
and community banks upon whom the SME’s depend remain weak. (b) Large multinationals are
awash with trillions in cash, small changes in interest rates are not likely to induce them to
invest when they were reluctant to do so before, and when they do invest, it is likely not in the
US. (c) The consolidation of banks as part of the attempt to preserve the banking system has
led to non-competitive markets, e.g. in mortgages, so that rather than just passing on lower
interest rates to customers (as would happen in a competitive market), lenders have enjoyed
larger spreads. (d) In a world of globalization, money goes to where the returns are highest—
and right now, that seems elsewhere than the US and Europe—money is going where it’s not
needed and not going where it is needed. And (e) in a world of globalization, what one central
bank does can (and often will) be undone by other central banks: one adds liquidity to the
global financial system, while others take it out. 67
The Fed has stressed the benefits from high stock market prices. This effect, of course, is only
relevant for those who own stocks. But even then, the size of the effect is questionable. The
Fed has announced that its interventions are temporary. If so, why should the effects be long
lasting—why should they affect long-run budget constraints? (To be sure, some may gain from
selling bonds when they are high, but others will lose from selling bonds at a loss. But in a
representative agent model, these should largely cancel out.) The effects can be longer lasting,
if somehow, the higher stock price shifts expectations in a way that moves the economy into
another equilibrium—but again we have moved outside the standard representative agent
model.
Finally, in the standard putty-clay model, firms, able to get access to long-term capital at a very
low interest rate, will invest in highly capital-intensive technologies, because wages have not
fallen as much as the cost of capital. But this means that, at any given level of demand for
output, employment will actually be reduced. Thus, loose monetary policy today may be
setting up the conditions for a jobless recovery in the future. Even today, the outlines of such a
situation are already visible. The knowledge that weaker demand for labor lies ahead affects
consumption demand directly and indirectly, as it puts further downward pressure on wages,
worsening the distribution of income.
The importance of this is not that we should have tight monetary policy. It is that we cannot
rely on monetary policy for our recovery, and that other government policies have to be put in
place to offset the potential and real adverse effects that we have described.

67

For a formal model of this process, see Siglitz (forthcoming).

23

Concluding comments
As Keynes rightly pointed out, policy is shaped by theories. In Keynes’s day, it may have been
theories promulgated decades earlier. In today’s world, it seems that lags have been reduced,
with policy subjected to the ebb and flow of the fads and fashions in the economic profession.
The fads and fashions that dominated in the decades preceding the current crisis have not
served us well—the models/theories that guided policy were not just innocent bystanders in
the crisis that unfolded beginning in 2008. They were critical in the creation of the crisis and in
the inadequate responses to it. Moreover, as I argue in my book The Price of Inequality these
theories were also not innocent bystanders to the growth in inequality that has marked recent
decades; the policies based on these theories were an important factor in the marked increase
in inequality over the past thirty years.
For decades, Jean-Paul Fitoussi has been one of the few voices holding out against these
intellectual trends. He insisted that models be based on common sense, that the common
sense be informed by historical experience as well as empirical evidence. In the end, the
theories he has pushed and the policies that are derived from them provide a far better
understanding of our macro-economy than the currently fashionable ones. But they also
provide the basis of policies that are more consistent with underlying values of social justice,
and democratic accountability and process.69

69

See, in particular, Fitoussi (1997).

24

References
Alesina, A. and S. Ardagna, 2010, “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes versus Spending,” in Tax Policy
and the Economy, Jeffrey R. Brown (ed.), vol. 24, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 35-68.
Baker, D., 2010, "The Myth of Expansionary Fiscal Austerity," CEPR, Washington, DC.
Bernanke, B.S., 2007, “The Economic Outlook: Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress,”
March 27, available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20070328a.htm (accessed July
11, 2014).
——,2010,”On the implications of the financial crisis for economics,” September 24, conference cosponsored by the Center for Economic Policy Studies and the Bendheim Center for Finance,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ: US Federal Reserve. Available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100924a.htm (accessed June
10, 2013).
Bilmes, L. and J. E. Stiglitz, 2008, The Three Trillion Dollar War: The True Costs of the Iraq Conflict, New
York: W.W. Norton.
Dynan, K.E., 2012, “Is a Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring 2012, pp. 299-362, available at
http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Projects/BPEA/Spring%202012/2012a_Dynan.pdf
(accessed June 10, 2013)
——, J. Skinner, and S.P. Zeldes, 2004, “Do the Rich Save More?” Journal of Political Economy, 112(2):
397–444.
Cotis, J.-P., 2007, “Editorial: achieving further rebalancing”, OECD Economic Outlook, 1:7-10
Easterly, W., R. Islam, and J. E. Stiglitz, 2001a, “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth Volatility,” Annual
Bank Conference on Development Economics 2000, Washington: World Bank, pp. 191-212.
——, ——, and ——, 2001b, “Shaken and Stirred: Volatility and Macroeconomic Paradigms for Rich and
Poor Countries,” in Advances in Macroeconomic Theory, J. Dreze (ed.), IEA Conference Volume,
133, Houndsmill: Palgrave, pp. 353-372.
Field, A., 2011, A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and U.S. Economic Growth, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Fisher, I., 1933, “The Debt Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica, 1(4): 337-357.
Fitoussi, J.-P., 1994, “Wage Distribution and Unemployment,” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, 84(2): 59-64.

25

——, 1997, “Following the Collapse of Communism, Is There Still a Middle Way?” in Colin Crouch &
Wolfang Streeck (eds). Political Economy of Modern Capitalism, London: Sage Publications,
October, pp. 148-60.
——, 2006 “Macroeconomics and Institutions,” Angelo Costa Lecture, Rivista di Political Economica
95(6): 9-30.
——, 2013, Le theorem du lampadaire, Paris: Les liens qui Libèrent.
—— and Saraceno, F., 2011, “Inequality, the Crisis and After,” Rivista di Politica Economica, Série III,
fascicule I-III: 9-27
—— and J. E. Stiglitz (eds.), 2011, The G20 and Recovery and Beyond: An Agenda for Global Governance
for the Twenty-First Century, , e-book with contributions from The Paris Group.
Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz, 1986, “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and
Incomplete Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2): 229-264.
—— and ——, 1987, “Keynesian, New Keynesian, and New Classical Economics,” Oxford Economic
Papers, 39, March: 119-133
—— and ——, 1989, “Toward a Theory of Rigidities,” American Economic Review, 79(2): 364-69.
—— and ——, 1993, “Financial Market Imperfections and Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108(1): 77-114.
—— and ——, 2003, Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Herndon, T., M. Ash, and R. Pollin, 2014, “Does High Public Debt Consistently Stifle Economic Growth? A
Critique of Reinhart and Rogoff,” Cambridge Journal of Economics 38(2): 257-279.
International Monetary Fund, 2010, “Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation,” in
World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing, Washington, D.C.: IMF, pp. 93-124.
Jayadev, A. and M. Konczal, 2010, "The Boom not the Slump: The Right Time for Austerity," The
Roosevelt Institute, August 23.
Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek, 2010, “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,”
American Economic Review, 100(2): 403–407.
—— and ——, 2012, “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,” NBER
Working Paper Number 16377, available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w16377.pdf (accessed
June 10, 2013).
Kindleberger, Charles, 1978, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, New York: Basic
Books.
26

Korinek, A., and J. E. Stiglitz, 2009, “Dividend Taxation and Intertemporal Tax Arbitrage,” Journal of
Public Economics, 93: 142-159
Lansley, S., 2012, The Cost of Inequality, London: Gibson Square.
Lucas, R., 2004, “The Industrial Revolution: past and present”, 2003 Annual Report Essay, The Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 1, available at
http://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications_papers/pub_display.cfm?id=3333 (accessed June
18, 2014).
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi, 2013, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump,”
June working paper, available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1961211
(accessed June 12, 2013)
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson, 2014, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions,”
American Economic Review, 104(3): 753-92.
Neary, P. and J. E. Stiglitz, 1983, “Toward a Reconstruction of Keynesian Economics: Expectations and
Constrained Equilibria,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, Supplement, pp. 199-228.
Reinhart, C.M. and K.S. Rogoff, 2010, “Growth in a Time of Debt,” American Economic Review, 100(2):
573-578.
Scheinkman, J. and W. Xiong, 2002. "Overconfidence, Short-Sale Constraints and Bubbles," Princeton
Economic Theory Working Papers 98734966f1c1a57373801367f.
Shapiro, C. and J. E. Stiglitz, 1984, “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device,” American
Economic Review, 74(3): pp. 433-444
Solow, R., 2012, “Fiscal Policy,” in O. Blanchard, D. Romer, M. Spence, and J.E. Stiglitz (eds.), In The Wake
of the Crisis: Leading Economists Reassess Economic Policy, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press, pp. 73-76.
—— and J.E. Stiglitz, 1968, “Output, Employment and Wages in the Short Run,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 82, November, pp. 537-560.
Stiglitz, J.E., 1982, “Information and Capital Markets,” in William F. Sharpe and Cathryn Cootner (eds.),
Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, pp. 118-158.
——, 1984, “Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and Unemployment in L.D.C.’s: The Labor
Turnover Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88(2): 194-227.
——, 2010, Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy, New York: Norton.
——, 2011, “Rethinking Macroeconomics: What Failed and How to Repair It,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 9(4): 591-645.
27

——, 2013a, “Stable Growth in an Era of Crises: Learning from Economic Theory and History,” Ekonomitek, 2(1): 1-38.
——, 2013b, Selected Works of Jospeh E. Stiglitz,Volume II, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Stiglitz, forthcoming, "Monetary Policy in a Multipolar World," in the proceedings of the International
Economics Association's 2012 Izmir roundtable.
—— and Guzman, M., 2014, “Pseudo-wealth and Consumption Fluctuations”, Columbia University
Working Paper, presented at the World Congress of the IEA, June, 2014.
——, A. Sen, and J.-P. Fitoussi, 2010, Mismeasuring Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn’t Add Up, New York: The
New Press.
—— and Members of a UN Commission of Financial Experts, 2010, The Stiglitz Report: Reforming the
International Monetary and Financial Systems in the Wake of the Global Crisis, New York: The
New Press.
Torres, C. and A. Fitzgerald, 2005, “Greenspan Says Housing Market `Speculation' Is Unsustainable,”
Bloomberg.com, May 20, available at
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=azb8fwbe5Fqw (accessed June
10, 2013)
Wade, R.H., 2013, “What economists should have learned from the Western Financial Crash and Long
Slump: inequality, financial globalization, and macroeconomics,” lecture presented at seminar
on Globalization, Development and Inequality”, Bangalore, January 8, in conjunction with 6th
Annual Advanced Graduate Workshop on Poverty, Globalization and Development, Azim Premji
University, Bangalore.
Wolf, M., “Austerity loses an article of faith”, Financial Times, April 23, accessed at
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/60b7a4ec-ab58-11e2-8c63-00144feabdc0.html#axzz353a9n6Mv,
on June 18, 2014.
Woodford, M., 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton
University Press.
Woodford, M., 2010, “Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis,” Journal of Economic
Policy, 24(4): 21–44.
Zeldes, P., 1989, “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Political
Economy, 97(2): 305-346.

28

