NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT
Dominic Coey
Bradley Larsen
Kane Sweeney
Working Paper 20523
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20523

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We thank Gaurab Aryal, Matt Backus, Tom Blake, Jeremy Bulow, Alex Frankel, Amit Gandhi, Phil
Haile, Jakub Kastl, Nicola Lacetera, Dimitriy Masterov, Dan Quint, Jimmy Roberts, Paulo Somaini,
Steve Tadelis, CaioWaisman, and seminar and conference participants at Vanderbilt University, the
2013 Stanford-Berkeley IO Fest, the 2014 International Industrial Organization Conference, and the
2014 North American Econometric Society Meetings for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Dominic Coey, Bradley Larsen, and Kane Sweeney. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Bidder Exclusion Effect
Dominic Coey, Bradley Larsen, and Kane Sweeney
NBER Working Paper No. 20523
September 2014
JEL No. C10,D44,L10,L13,L40
ABSTRACT
We introduce a simple and robust approach to answering two key questions in empirical auction analysis:
discriminating between models of entry and quantifying the revenue gains from improving auction
design. The approach builds on Bulow and Klemperer (1996), connecting their theoretical results to
empirical work. It applies in a broad range of information settings and auction formats without requiring
instruments or estimation of a complex structural model. We demonstrate the approach using US timber
and used-car auction data.

Dominic Coey
eBay Research Labs
2065 East Hamilton Ave,
San Jose, CA 95125
dcoey@ebay.com
Bradley Larsen
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bjlarsen@stanford.edu

Kane Sweeney
eBay Research Labs
2065 East Hamilton Ave,
San Jose, CA 95125
kane.sweeney@ebay.com

2

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

1. I NTRODUCTION
Empirical work on auctions often requires estimating a complex structural model
relying on strong assumptions about the data generating process. For example,
computing revenue under counterfactual auction formats typically involves making simplifying assumptions, such as bidders having independent private values
(IPV) or bidders’ values being independent of the number of bidders who participate in the auction.1 The researcher may then estimate the underlying distribution
of bidder valuations from bid data, and use the estimated distribution to simulate the counterfactuals of interest. While these structural methods are sometimes
necessary, we demonstrate that some key questions in the analysis and design of
auctions can be answered with a simple-to-compute tool we refer to as the bidder
exclusion effect.
The bidder exclusion effect is the decrease in expected auction revenue when
a random bidder is excluded from an auction. The effect is not of intrinsic interest but instead serves as a means to an end, providing a simple and powerful
tool for empirical auction work. We show that the bidder exclusion effect can be
used to test whether the number of bidders varies exogenously across auctions,
as an important class of entry models imply, and as some recent methodological
advances in structural auctions assume. The bidder exclusion effect can also be
used to bound above the revenue gains from optimal auction design, building on
and providing a new empirical interpretation of the theoretical work of Bulow and
Klemperer (1996).
In contrast to much of the empirical auctions literature, our approach does not
involve estimating bidder primitives in a structural model, nor does it rely on exogenous variation in the number of bidders. Computation only requires calculating sample means or conditional means. We do not require instruments, and even
with valid instruments, instrumental variables approaches would not suffice to
1

Paarsch and Hong (2006); Hendricks and Porter (2007); Athey and Haile (2007); and Hickman,
Hubbard, and Saglam (2012) describe structural econometric methods for auction data and survey
the literature.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

3

answer the auction design questions our method addresses. Our approach is also
valid under a broad range of information settings and auction formats.
For the intuition behind how the bidder exclusion effect can be estimated, consider the example of an n > 2 bidder ascending auction with private values and no
reserve price, where in equilibrium bidders bid their values. If a bidder is excluded
at random from the auction, with probability

n −2
n

he will be one of the n − 2 lowest

bidders, and so his exclusion will not affect revenue. With probability n2 , he will
be one of the two highest bidders, and revenue will drop from the second-highest
to the third-highest bid of the n bidders. The bidder exclusion effect is therefore

2
n

times the expected difference between the second and third-highest bids.
This estimator is robust to a variety of modeling frameworks which would normally complicate or prohibit identification in auction models. For example, Athey
and Haile (2002) prove that the joint distribution of bidder valuations is not identified in ascending auction models with correlated private values because the researcher never observes the willingness to pay of the highest bidder. The bidder
exclusion effect, however, is identified in this setting—and in a broad class of other
auction settings considered in the literature—when the econometrician observes
the second and third-highest bids and the number of bidders. With these data,
the bidder exclusion effect is point identified in ascending auctions with (possibly asymmetric and correlated) private values and auction-level heterogeneity
(observed or unobserved).
While it is particularly straightforward to find the bidder exclusion effect in the
example above, we show that it can be bounded above in a wide range of other
settings, including common values, bidders bidding below their values (which we
refer to throughout as “low bidding”), binding reserve prices, and first price auctions. Bounds can also be obtained when the econometrician only observes the second and third-highest bids and not the number of bidders. Incorporating auctionlevel covariates parametrically or nonparametrically is also straightforward, as the
bounds on the bidder exclusion effect reduce to conditional means in these cases.

4

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

In each of these settings, an estimate of the bidder exclusion effect (or an estimate of an upper bound on the effect), sheds light on several important issues in
empirical auctions work. First, it is possible to test whether bidders’ valuations are
independent of the number of bidders who participate in the auction.2 This type of
independence is central to identification in many recent methodological advances.3
Knowing whether the number of bidders is independent of valuations is also key
to modeling bidders’ entry decisions. Specifically, a prominent distinction in the
auction literature is between entry models which have this property, and models
of selective bidder entry, which do not.4 Choosing an inappropriate entry model
might result in misleading estimates of bidders’ valuations, or unreliable counterfactual simulations.
Although the assumption that bidders’ values and the number of bidders are
independent is widely used in the empirical auctions literature and is critical for
modeling entry, it is rarely tested. We propose a simple test of this assumption,
which involves comparing the estimated bidder exclusion effect to the observed
difference in average revenue between n − 1 and and n bidder auctions. If the
two quantities are significantly different, then n − 1 bidder auctions are not just
like n bidder auctions with one bidder randomly removed, and this is evidence
against exogeneity of bidder participation. Estimating the bidder exclusion effect
can therefore guide the decision of whether to rely on exogenous variation in the
number of bidders for identification and, similarly, guide the choice of the most
appropriate entry model. In contrast to other methods of discriminating between
entry models, this does not require exogenous variation in, or even observing, the
2This type of independence has a variety of names in the auctions literature: “exogenous participa-

tion” (Athey and Haile 2002, 2007), “valuations are independent of N” (Aradillas-López, Gandhi,
and Quint 2013a), or an absence of “selective entry” (Roberts and Sweeting 2013a).
3
See, for example, Haile and Tamer (2003), Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013a), and Sections 5.3 and 5.4 of Athey and Haile (2007).
4
Bajari and Hortacsu (2003); Bajari, Hong, and Ryan (2010); Athey, Levin, and Seira (2011); Krasnokutskaya and Seim (2011) and Athey, Coey, and Levin (2013) feature entry models without selection, derived from the theoretical work of Levin and Smith (1994). Roberts and Sweeting (2013b,a);
Bhattacharya, Roberts, and Sweeting (2013) and Gentry and Li (2013), present models of selective
entry.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

5

number of underlying potential bidders.5 Nor does it require fully estimating an
entry model or other complex structural auction model.6
The bidder exclusion effect also allows the analyst to gauge how important it
is to set reserve prices optimally. A typical empirical approach to answering this
question would rely on assumptions on the distribution of values and the information environment to estimate a detailed model, determine optimal reserve prices
using the seller’s first-order condition, and finally measure the revenue difference
between the optimally designed auction and a no-reserve auction (e.g. Paarsch
(1997); Li, Perrigne, and Vuong (2003); Krasnokutskaya (2011)).
We circumvent these steps by relying on a result from the auction theory literature. Under the assumptions of Bulow and Klemperer (1996), sellers raise expected
revenue more by adding another bidder than by designing the auction optimally.
When revenue is concave in the number of bidders, dropping a bidder has a larger
effect on revenue than adding a bidder, and the bidder exclusion effect is an upper bound on the revenue gains from improving the auction mechanism, and, in
particular, on setting an optimal reserve price. Calculating the bidder exclusion
effect thus allows the researcher to determine whether reserve prices are likely to
be important without expending the effort or imposing the assumptions necessary
to compute a more detailed structural model. Additionally, because the bidder exclusion effect is simple to compute, the magnitude of other estimated effects, such
as an experimental change in the auction process, can easily be compared to the
important benchmark of optimal mechanism design.

5The literature uses the term “potential bidders” to refer to bidders who could possibly choose to

enter a given auction, in contrast to “participating bidders”—those who actually do enter. Marmer,
Shneyerov, and Xu (2013) and Roberts and Sweeting (2013a) propose tests for selective entry based
on observing exogenous variation in the number of potential bidders.
6Li and Zheng (2009) estimate models with and without selective bidder entry, and select between
them on the basis of their predictive power. Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013b) provide
an alternative test of selective entry which is somewhat more complex than ours but which has the
advantage of not requiring observing multiple order statistics of bids.

6

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

We illustrate the uses of the bidder exclusion effect in two different applications.
Our first application uses data from US timber auctions from 1982-1989. We estimate that removing a single bidder at random would decrease revenue by approximately 13% on average. Under conditions discussed below, this implies that the
increase in expected seller revenue from using an optimal reserve price is bounded
above by 13%. Timber auctions are a setting in which much of the previous literature has modeled entry as being non-selective.7 We find evidence of selective entry
unconditionally, but after controlling for bidder types (loggers vs. mills), the evidence for selective entry appears weaker. This is suggestive that models relying
on exogenous variation in the number of bidders may be appropriate in timber
auction settings once the bidder type has been accounted for.
Our second application illustrates the use of the bidder exclusion effect in bounding the impact of optimal auction design when minimal data is available. We study
wholesale used-car auctions in which the number of bidders varies auction by auction but is unobserved to the econometrician. We estimate an upper bound on the
bidder exclusion effect, averaged over the unobserved realizations of the number
of bidders. By applying the Bulow-Klemperer theorem, we obtain an upper bound
on the revenue increase from an optimal reserve price. In our setting, the upper
bound is approximately $200. We illustrate how this bound can also be calculated
conditional on observable covariates, and we use it as a benchmark for other recently estimated effects at auto auctions (Tadelis and Zettelmeyer 2011; Lacetera,
Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor 2013; Hortaçsu, Matvos, Syverson, and Venkataraman
2013).
In the spirit of Haile and Tamer (2003) and Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint
(2013a), our empirical approach does not seek to point identify and estimate the
distribution of bidder values. Instead we draw inferences from functions of the
value distribution which are point, or partially, identified. To our knowledge, we
are the first to point out that a statistic which is straightforward—and in some cases
trivial—to compute has implications for modeling entry in auctions or evaluating
7See, for example, Haile and Tamer (2003) and Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013a).

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

7

the revenue impact of optimal mechanism design. More broadly, our approach ties
in closely to the recent literature on sufficient statistics for welfare analysis (Chetty
2009; Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen 2010; Jaffe and Weyl 2013), which focuses on
obtaining robust welfare or optimality implications from simple empirical objects
without estimating detailed structural models.
2. M ODEL AND E MPIRICAL S TRATEGY
Our modeling setup is standard, following Athey and Haile (2002). We consider
single-unit ascending auctions with risk-neutral bidders throughout.8 We assume
the auctions analyzed took place without a reserve price.9 Let N be a random variable denoting the number of auction participants and let n represent realizations
of N. Let Wi = (Vi , Si ) denote bidder i’s value and private signal, and Bi his bid.
With private values, Vi = Si for all i. With common values, for all i and j, Vi and S j
are strictly affiliated conditional on any χ ⊂ {Sk }k∈/ j , but not perfectly correlated.
For the subset of auctions which have exactly n bidders enter, let F n denote the
joint distribution of W ≡ ((Vi )i=1,...,n , (Si )i=1,...,n ). By bidder symmetry, we refer to
the case where F n is exchangeable with respect to bidder indices. Let V 1:n , . . . , V n:n
represent the bidders’ valuations ordered from smallest to largest. Similarly, let
B1:n , . . . , Bn:n represent their bids ordered from smallest to largest, with realizations of Bk:n denoted bk:n .
For k ≤ m ≤ n, let Bk:m,n represent the kth smallest bid in m bidder auctions,
where the m bidders are selected uniformly at random from the n bidders in auctions which had exactly n bidders enter. Some remarks on this quantity are in
order. We stress that this is counterfactual if m < n: it is common knowledge
amongst the remaining m bidders that n − m of the original n bidders have been
dropped, and that they are competing in an m-bidder auction, not an n-bidder auction. The distribution of Bk:m,m and Bk:m,n for m < n may be different, as different
8Appendix C contains extensions to first price auctions.
9Section 5 discusses analysis of counterfactual settings in which reserve prices are used, and Ap-

pendix B contains extensions of the paper to cases where the auctions analyzed took place with a
binding reserve price.

8

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

kinds of goods may attract different numbers of entrants, and bidders may value
goods sold in auctions with m entrants differently from those sold in auctions with
n entrants. Finally, Bk:m,m and Bk:m are the same random variable.
Our empirical strategy centers around three key quantities. The first is the bidder exclusion effect. We define the bidder exclusion effect in n bidder auctions with
no reserve price, ∆(n), as the expected fall in revenue produced by randomly excluding a bidder from those auctions. In ascending auctions, the bidder exclusion
effect is:
∆(n) ≡ E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1,n ),
that is, the expected second-highest bid in n bidder auctions, minus the expected
second-highest bid in n − 1 bidder auctions, where those n − 1 bidder auctions are
obtained by publicly dropping a bidder at random from n bidder auctions.
The second quantity, Γ(n), is the expected fall in revenue from dropping a bid at
random, assuming all other bids remain unchanged:
Γ(n) ≡

2
E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ).
n

This expression comes from the fact that with probability

2
n

one of the highest two

bids will be dropped, and revenue will drop to the third-highest bid of the original
sample, and with probability

n −2
n ,

one of the lowest n − 2 bids will be dropped,

and revenue will not change.
The third quantity, Ψ(n), is the difference in expected revenue between those
auctions in which n bidders choose to enter, and those in which n − 1 choose to
enter:
Ψ(n) ≡ E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1 ).
Unlike ∆(n), the quantities Γ(n) and Ψ(n) are not counterfactual and can always be estimated using data on the two highest bids and the number of auction
entrants. Section 3 gives conditions under which ∆(n) is equal to, or bounded

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

9

above by, Γ(n). As Section 4 describes, if entry is selective, then ∆(n) 6= Ψ(n).
Combining this with the results of Section 3, we have testable implications of selective entry in terms of the relation between Γ(n) and Ψ(n). Section 5 relates the
increase in revenue from an optimal reserve to ∆(n), and, by the results of Section
3, to Γ(n).

3. I DENTIFYING

AND

E STIMATING

THE

B IDDER E XCLUSION E FFECT

3.1. The Naı̈ve Approach. A naı̈ve approach to estimating the bidder exclusion
effect is to compare revenue between n bidder and n − 1 bidder auctions. This
approach is appropriate under two strong assumptions, both of which are frequently employed in the structural auctions literature: First, the number of bidders varies exogenously, and, second, the number of bidders is correctly observed.
While these assumptions greatly aid in identification and testing in many structural settings, they may not hold in practice.
An appealing alternative is an instrument variables approach.10 However, even
with valid instruments for bidder participation, instrumental variables estimates
would only capture the effect on revenue for those auctions in which the instrument causes more bidders to enter (Angrist and Imbens 1995). Our approach,
which we turn to next, does not require instruments or variation in the number of
bidders, and applies to all auctions, rather than a subset determined by the choice
of instrument.

3.2. The Basic Model: Point Identification. The following proposition demonstrates how the bidder exclusion effect can be expressed using only data from n
bidder auctions. The proof, and the proofs of all subsequent results, are in Appendix A.
10For example, Haile, Hong, and Shum (2003) use the numbers of nearby sawmills and logging

firms as instruments for the number of bidders at US timber auctions, in a test for common values.

10

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

Proposition 1. In ascending auctions with private values and no reserve price where
bidders bid their values, for all n > 2 the bidder exclusion effect ∆(n) = Γ(n) ≡
2
n−1:n
n E( B

− Bn−2:n ).

This expression for ∆(n) follows from the observation that with probability

2
n

one of the highest two bidders will be dropped, and revenue will drop to the thirdhighest bid of the original sample, and with probability

n −2
n ,

one of the lowest

n − 2 bidders will be dropped, and revenue will not change. This result holds with
asymmetric and correlated private values.
Estimating the bidder exclusion effect in this setting is trivial, as long as the
total number of auction participants and the second and third-highest bids are
observed. One simply forms the sample analog of Γ(n).11 Incorporating auctionlevel observables into estimation is also straightforward. For a vector of auctionlevel covariates X, one estimates the sample analog of
Γ(n| X ) ≡

2
E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n | X ),
n

(1)

using any standard parametric or nonparametric approach for estimating conditional means.
3.3. Extensions to the Basic Model. We now demonstrate that upper bounds on
the bidder exclusion effect are available with private values and low bidding, with
symmetric common values, and in settings where the number of entrants is unobserved but it is known be greater than some lower bound. Upper bounds are
more important than lower bounds for our applications. Models of selective entry
often imply that bidders’ valuations are increasing with the total number of entrants (Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint 2013a,b). An upper bound allows us
to detect sufficiently large increases in valuations with the number of entrants, in a
11Alternatively, if all bids are observed, one could estimate the bidder exclusion effect by removing

one bid at random from n bidder auctions and computing the average decrease in the secondhighest bid. This second alternative could not be used in ascending auctions, as the highest willingness to pay is never observed. Moreover, this alternative would be subject to more sampling
error, as it effectively involves simulating an indicator variable which is 1 with probability n2 (the
indicator for selecting one of the top two bids), rather than directly using the probability n2 .

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

11

sense which will be made precise. Similarly, to bound above the impact of optimal
mechanism design, an upper bound on the bidder exclusion effect is required. Appendices B and C describe further extensions, showing how the bidder exclusion
effect can be identified or bounded with binding reserve prices, and in first price
auctions.
3.3.1. Low Bidding. In the “button auction” model of ascending auctions with private values (Milgrom and Weber (1982)), bidders drop out at their values. As highlighted in Haile and Tamer (2003), in practice bidders’ (highest) bids may not equal
their values. For example, in English auctions, multiple bidders may attempt to bid
at a certain price but only the first bid the auctioneer sees may be recorded. The
researcher may be willing to assume that the bidder with the second-highest valuation bids his value, as there are only two bidders remaining at this stage. However
she may only be willing to assume that the remaining bids are lower than the bidders’ values. The following assumption is equivalent to an argument in Athey and
Haile (2002) and similar to an assumption in Haile and Tamer (2003):12
Assumption 1. Bidders have private values. The second-highest bidder bids his value,
and lower bidders’ bids are less than or equal to their values.
Our next proposition shows that this assumption can be used to obtain an upper
bound on the bidder exclusion effect.
Proposition 2. If in ascending auctions with no reserve price, Assumption 1 holds, then
for all n > 2 the bidder exclusion effect ∆(n) ≤ Γ(n) ≡ n2 E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ).
3.3.2. Symmetric Common Values. Under the assumptions of Proposition 1, the change
in auction revenue when one bidder is excluded can be computed by removing one
bidder’s bid, and calculating the fall in revenue assuming the other bids remain
unchanged. This is not true with common values, as removing a bidder changes
12Athey and Haile (2002) argue, “...for many ascending auctions, a plausible alternative hypothesis

is that bids Bn−2:n and below do not always reflect the full willingness to pay of losing bidders,
although Bn−1:n does (since only two bidders are active when that bid is placed).” Haile and Tamer
(2003) allow for Bn−1:n to also not represent the full willingness to pay of the first losing bidder.

12

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

the remaining bidders’ equilibrium bidding strategies. It follows from Theorem
9 of Athey and Haile (2002) that with symmetric common values, in the button
auction model of ascending auctions, the equality of Proposition 1 can be replaced
by an inequality.13 Removing one bidder’s bid and assuming other bids remain
unchanged overstates the decline in revenue from excluding a random bidder, because it does not account for the increase in bids due to the reduced winner’s curse.
The following assumption and proposition summarize this result:
Assumption 2. Bidders have symmetric common values, and bidding follows a button
auction format.
Proposition 3. If in ascending auctions with no reserve price, Assumption 2 holds, then
for all n > 2 the bidder exclusion effect ∆(n) < Γ(n) ≡ n2 E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ).
3.3.3. Unobserved Number of Bidders. In some settings the number of bidders may
not be known to the researcher. In ascending auctions, for example, not all potential bidders may place bids. A lower bound on the number of potential bidders
may be known, however, as in our used-car data application in Section 7. Let n
represent this lower bound, such that for all realizations n of the random variable
N, n > n. In this case the results of Propositions 2–3 extend to yield an upper
bound on the average bidder exclusion effect, E(∆( N )), where the expectation is
over the unobserved number of bidders N.
Corollary 1. In ascending auctions with no reserve price, if for all realizations n, 2 <
n ≤ n and either Assumption 1 or Assumption 2 holds, then E(∆( N )) ≤ n2 E( B N −1:N −
B N −2:N ).
Estimation in the case where n is unknown consists of computing the mean gap
between second and third order statistics and scaling this quantity by 2/n. The
expectation of this gap conditional on covariates can be estimated by standard
nonparametric or parametric techniques.
13Theorem 9 is used for a different purpose in Athey and Haile (2002). They show that, assuming

total bidder participation varies exogenously across auctions, private value models can be tested
against common value models.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

4. T ESTING I NDEPENDENCE OF VALUATIONS

AND

13

S IGNALS , AND N

If bidders’ valuations and signals do not vary systematically with the number
of auction participants, then n − 1 bidder auctions are just like n bidder auctions
with one bidder removed at random. This suggests a test of whether bidders’ valuations and signals are independent of the number of entrants. If the estimated
bidder exclusion effect is significantly different from the observed change in revenue between n and n − 1 bidder auctions, this is evidence against independence
of valuations and signals, and the number of entrants. We develop this test in
more detail below. Throughout this section, we assume that the econometrician
observes the total number of bidders as well as the second and third-highest bids
from all auctions.
Let Fmn denote the distribution of values and signals of a random subset of m
bidders, in auctions with n bidders, where the m ≤ n bidders are drawn uniformly at random from the n bidders. Following Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and
0

Quint (2013a), we say valuations and signals are independent of N if Fmn = Fmn for any
m ≤ n, n0 . With private values, we simply say valuations are independent of N, as
valuations and signals are equal.
When valuations and signals are independent of N, we have Fnn−1 = Fnn−−11 , i.e.
the distribution of valuations and signals among n − 1 bidders randomly selected
from n bidder auctions is the same as the distribution of valuations and signals
in auctions in which the realized number of participants was indeed n − 1. Thus
if valuations and signals are independent of N, it follows that E( Bn−2:n−1,n ) =
E( Bn−2:n−1,n−1 ) = E( Bn−2:n−1 ), and
∆(n) ≡ E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1,n )

(2)

= E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1 )

(3)

≡ Ψ ( n ).

(4)

14

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

If valuations or signals are not independent of N, we refer to entry as being selective. Selective entry may occur if bidders observe a signal of their value before
entering, so that the entry decision, and consequently the number of entrants, may
be correlated with bidder valuations (e.g. Roberts and Sweeting (2013a); Gentry
and Li (2013)).14 By contrast if bidders do not observe signals of their values before entering and play mixed entry strategies, then the variation in the number of
entrants is independent of valuations (e.g. Athey, Levin, and Seira (2011); Krasnokutskaya and Seim (2011)).
The previous section discusses estimating the bidder exclusion effect, ∆(n), when
it is point identified, and estimating an upper bound on ∆(n) when it is not. If the
econometrician observes auction revenue and the total number of auction participants, then Ψ(n) can be estimated by the difference in average revenue between
n and n − 1 bidder auctions. Comparing estimates of ∆(n) and Ψ(n) is the idea
behind the test for selective entry.

4.1. Testing for selective entry with private values. In private value settings where
bidders bid their values, by Proposition 1, ∆(n) = Γ(n) for n > 2. If in addition
valuations are independent of N, then ∆(n) = Ψ(n), implying that Γ(n) = Ψ(n).
We define T (n) as
T (n) ≡ Ψ(n) − Γ(n)

 2
= E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1 ) − E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n )
n


n − 2 n−1:n 2 n−2:n
=E
B
+ B
− E( Bn−2:n−1 ).
n
n

(5)

14Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013a) prove that in the entry model of Marmer, Shneyerov,

and Xu (2013) where potential bidders observe signals of their values when deciding whether to
enter, if the distribution of values and signals is symmetric and affiliated, and a symmetric equilibrium exists in cutoff strategies, then valuations are not independent of N (Theorem A3 of AradillasLópez, Gandhi, and Quint 2013a).

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

15

The first term in the final expression is the expected revenue in n bidder auctions
when one bidder is dropped at random, and the second term is the expected revenue in n − 1 bidder auctions.15
To assess whether valuations are independent of N (i.e. whether entry is not
selective) we test the null hypothesis T (n) = 0 for n > 2. For any given n this can
be implemented as a simple t-test.16 Let An represent the set of auctions with n
b(n), for this null by replacing expectations by
entrants. We form the test statistic, T
sample averages:
b(n) =
T

1
| An |

∑

j∈ An



n − 2 n−1:n 2 n−2:n
b
+ bj
n j
n



−

1

| A n −1 |

∑

j ∈ A n −1

(bnj −2:n−1 ).

A simple regression-based form of this test is as follows. Let y j =
2 n−2:n
n bj

(6)

n−2 n−1:n
n bj

+

if j ∈ An and y j = bnj −2:n−1 if j ∈ An−1 . Regress y j on a constant and an

b ( n ).
indicator 1( j ∈ An ). The coefficient on the indicator is T
b(n) is significantly different from 0, the test indicates the presence of selective
If T
entry. This test is consistent against all forms of selective entry which affect expected revenue, i.e. if Γ(n) 6= Ψ(n) then the test rejects with probability approaching 1 as the number of auctions goes to infinity. Appendix D provides Monte Carlo
evidence on the power of this test relative to simply comparing mean values in
n − 1 and n bidder auctions, in a model of selective entry which nests that of Levin
and Smith (1994). The bidder exclusion test is a reasonably powerful alternative to
the mean comparison test, given that it uses considerably less data. Moreover, the

15Athey and Haile (2002) propose a test of private vs. common values in which they assume val-

uations and signals are independent of N and point out that, under this assumption, T (n) < 0 in
a common values setting and T (n) = 0 in a private values setting. We discuss generalizations to
common values settings in Section 4.2.
16Standard techniques, like a Wald test or a Bonferroni correction, can be used to test T (n) = 0 for
all n in some finite set. Note also that this test only uses information on the second and third-highest
bids. If more losing bids are available and interpretable as the willingness-to-pay of lower-value
bidders, this test could be made more powerful by including information from these losing bids.
Intuitively, one could compare the revenue drop which would occur if k out of n bidders were
dropped at random to the actual revenue difference between n and n − k bidder auctions.

16

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

bidder exclusion test is implementable with ascending auction data whereas the
mean comparison test is not.17
4.2. Testing for selective entry with common values or low bidding. With symmetric common values or low bidding, Propositions 2 and 3 imply that ∆(n) ≤
Γ(n). If in addition valuations and signals are independent of N, then ∆(n) =
Ψ(n), implying that Ψ(n) ≤ Γ(n). We can test this null using the same statisb(n). Unlike private value settings where bidders bid their valtic as before, T
b(n) is significantly
ues, this test only indicates the presence of selective entry if T
greater than zero, and not if it is significantly less than zero. This test is consistent
against forms of selective entry in which bidders’ values are “sufficiently increasing” with N: precisely, if E( Bn−2:n−1,n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1 ) >

E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1,n ) .18

2
n−1:n
n E( B

− Bn−2:n ) −

4.3. Incorporating covariates. Testing is also possible if valuations and signals are
assumed independent of N conditional on a set of observable auction characteristics X rather than unconditionally. Under this assumption the null hypothesis
in private values auctions where bidders bid their values is T (n| X ) = 0, where
T (n| X ) is defined as

T (n| X ) = E

n − 2 n−1:n 2 n−2:n
B
+ B
X
n
n



− E( Bn−2:n−1 | X ).

(7)

With symmetric common values or low bidding, the null is T (n| X ) < 0. This
test can be performed nonparametrically, without assuming any particular form
for the conditional means. Chetverikov (2011); Andrews and Shi (2013) and Chernozhukov, Lee, and Rosen (2013) develop inference procedures which apply to this
setting.
17The bidder exclusion test uses the second and third-highest values in n bidder auctions and the

second-highest value in n − 1 bidder auctions, while the mean comparison test uses all n values in
n bidder auctions and all n − 1 values in n − 1 bidder auctions. The mean comparison test cannot
be implemented in ascending auctions because the highest valuation is never observed.
18This feature is shared by the test proposed in Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013b), which
the authors explain, “has power against a fairly wide class of ‘typical’ violations of [valuations
being independent of N].”

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

17

A simple parametric version of this test is as follows. For a fixed n, specify the
bidding equation for bidders in auction j as
b j = αn + βX j + ε nj ,

(8)

where X j represents a vector of observable characteristics of auction j and ε nj ⊥
⊥ Xj .
Then
n − 2 n−1:n 2 n−2:n
b
+ bj
= a1 + βX j + e1j ,
n j
n
bnj −2:n−1 = a2 + βX j + e2j ,

j ∈ An

(9)

j ∈ A n −1

(10)

−1
2 n−1:n
+ n2 εnnj−2:n ), a2 = αn−1 + E(εn(n−−2:n
), E(e1j ) = E(e2j ) =
where a1 = αn + E( n−
n ε nj
1) j

0 and e1j , e2j ⊥
⊥ Xj .
After controlling for observables, a1 determines the expected second order statistic (i.e. seller’s revenue) when a bidder is removed at random from n bidder auctions and a2 determines the expected second order statistic in n − 1 bidder auctions
when the actual number of bidders is indeed n − 1. In a private values framework,
testing the null hypothesis of equation (7) amounts to testing the null of a1 = a2 .
With common values or low bidding, the null is a1 < a2 .
We combine (9) and (10) as follows:
y j = a2 + ( a1 − a2 )1( j ∈ An ) + βX j + e3j ,
where if j ∈ An , then y j =

n−2 n−1:n
n bj

j ∈ A n ∪ A n −1 ,

(11)

+ n2 bnj −2:n and e3j = e1j , and if j ∈ An−1 ,

then y j = bnj −2:n−1 and e3j = e2j . This allows for a convenient regression-based test
of the null hypothesis that valuations (or valuations and signals, in the common
values case) are independent of N. When β = 0, this test nests the regression-based
test described in Section 4.1.

18

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

4.4. Bidder asymmetries. The approach to testing for selective entry with private
values described above does not require bidder symmetry. If bidders are asymmetric, the assumption of independence between valuations and N is less straightforward, and it less clear what it might mean if a test rejects the assumption. Intuitively, values may fail to be independent of N either because different bidders are
more likely to enter depending on N, or because the same bidders enter but the
value of the goods sold varies by N. We formalize and prove this statement in
Appendix E, following the setup of Coey, Larsen, and Sweeney (2014).

5. B OUNDING

THE I MPACT OF

O PTIMAL R ESERVE P RICES

The celebrated theorem of Bulow and Klemperer (1996) relates bidder entry to
optimal mechanism design.19 Under their assumptions, with symmetric bidders
and independent signals, an English auction with no reserve price and n + 1 bidders is more profitable in expectation than any mechanism with n bidders. When
bidders have affiliated signals, Bulow and Klemperer (1996) show that an auction
with n + 1 bidders and no reserve price still outperforms any “standard” mechanism with n bidders.20 On these grounds, they suggest that sellers may be better off trying to induce more entry than trying to implement a better mechanism.
As they acknowledge, this interpretation may be problematic if the new bidders
are weaker than the bidders who would have entered anyway (for example, if increased marketing efforts induce lower-value bidders to enter the auction).
19Following Bulow and Klemperer (1996) and most of the auction theory literature, we use “op-

timal” to mean optimal given a fixed set of participants. If entry is endogenous, then the mechanism’s design may affect the number of participants. Optimal reserve prices for fixed and for
endogenous entry may be different (McAfee and McMillan (1987); Levin and Smith (1994)).
20A “standard” mechanism in this context is one in which 1) losers pay nothing, 2) the bidder with
the highest signal wins (if anyone) and pays an amount which increases in his own signal given any
realization of other bidders’ signals. Bulow and Klemperer (1996) highlight a result of Lopomo’s
(1995), which shows that an optimal mechanism in this class is an English auction followed by a
final, take-it-or-leave-it offer to the high bidder (a reserve price). When bidders have correlated
values, Crémer and McLean (1988), McAfee, McMillan, and Reny (1989), and McAfee and Reny
(1992) have provided examples of non-standard mechanisms which extract all bidder surplus and
outperform an auction with a reserve price.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

19

We propose an alternative interpretation of their theorem, namely that it can be
used in empirical work to easily obtain upper bounds on the effect of improving
mechanism design, without having to fully estimate a detailed structural model.
Below we use the term “increasing marginal revenue” as it is defined in Bulow and
Klemperer (1996).21 We use the term “optimal reserve price” to refer to a take-it-orleave-it offer made to the final bidder—the last remaining bidder after the auction
ends—which maximizes the expected payment of that bidder.22 Throughout we
assume sellers are risk-neutral.
We make the following assumption before stating our main revenue-bounding
result:
Assumption 3. Expected revenue is concave in the number of bidders.
21Let (S , . . . , S ) denote the private signals of the n bidders in n bidder auctions. The n + 1th
n
1

bidder, were he to enter, has a private signal denoted Sn+1 . We denote the marginal distribution
of S j by Fjn , and the corresponding density by f jn . Define S ≡ (S1 , . . . , Sn+1 ), and S = S−(n+1) ,
that is, the signals of bidders other than bidder n + 1. Let Fjn (S j |S− j ) and f jn (S j |S− j ) represent the
distribution and density of bidder j’s signal conditional on competitors’ signals. Let v j (S) represent
the value to bidder j given all signals, and define v j (S) ≡ ESn+1 v j (S). Define MR j (S) and MR j (S)
as

−1
d 
MR j (S) ≡ n
v j (S)(1 − Fjn (S j |S− j ))
(12)
f j (S j |S− j ) dS j

−1
d 
MR j (S) ≡ n
v j (S)(1 − Fjn (S j |S− j ))
(13)
f j (S j |S− j ) dS j
We say bidders have “increasing marginal revenue” (as a function of their private signals) if
S j > Si ⇒ MR j (S) > MRi (S) and MR j (S) > MRi (S). Equivalently, bidders have decreasing
marginal revenue, when marginal revenue is considered to be a function of bidder “quantity” (i.e.
(1 − Fjn (S j |S− j )) and (1 − Fjn (S j |S− j ))) rather than of their private signals. In the independent private values case, this assumption simplifies to the function MR j (S) = MR j (S) = S j −

1− Fjn (S j )
f jn (S j )

being increasing in S j . For more on the interpretation of bidders’ marginal revenue, see Bulow and
Roberts (1989).
22
As discussed in Bulow and Klemperer (1996), with correlated bidder signals, expected revenue
will generally be greater when the reserve is set optimally conditional on the observed bids rather
than being set before the auction takes place. Note that Bulow and Klemperer (1996) used the term
“optimal reserve price” to refer to a take-it-or-leave-it offer made to the final bidder which maximizes the seller’s expected profit (i.e. the expected payment of the bidder if the offer is accepted
and the seller’s value of retaining the good if the offer is not accepted), and the authors focus on
cases where the seller always values the good less than buyers. We focus instead on expected bidder payments in order to generalize to cases in which the seller’s value lies above the lower bound
of the support of buyer valuations and where the mechanism designer is not the seller but rather an
intermediary (an auction house or platform) who is paid based on payments raised from bidders.
See Section 7. Additionally, data on seller valuations is uncommon.

20

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

Proposition 4. In ascending auctions with no reserve price, if i) either Assumption 1
or Assumption 2 holds, ii) Assumption 3 holds, and iii) bidders are symmetric and have
increasing marginal revenue, then for all n > 2 the increase in expected revenue from
using the optimal reserve price is less than Γ(n) ≡ n2 E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ).
The idea behind the proof is as follows. By the Bulow-Klemperer theorem, the
increase in expected revenue from the optimal reserve price is less than the increase
in expected revenue from adding another bidder, which by revenue concavity, is in
turn less than the bidder exclusion effect. The result then follows from Proposition
2, if Assumption 1 holds, and from Proposition 3, if Assumption 2 holds. Assumption 3, revenue being concave in the number of bidders, is natural in many
contexts, although it will not hold in all environments.23 In Appendix F we demonstrate that with independent private values (or conditionally independent private
values), symmetry and increasing marginal revenue (or conditionally increasing
marginal revenue) are sufficient to guarantee Assumption 3.24
Proposition 4 implies that an estimate of the bidder exclusion effect in n bidder
auctions provides an upper bound on the revenue increase from using an optimal
reserve price in these auctions. As pointed out by Bulow and Klemperer (1996),
even when signals are affiliated, an ascending auction with a optimal reserve yields
at least as much expected revenue as any standard mechanism (Lopomo (1995)).
Thus the increase in expected revenue from using any standard mechanism is also
less than Γ(n).25
23Dughmi, Roughgarden, and Sundararajan (2012) provided a counterexample where all bidders

have iid values, which are 1 with probability p and 0 otherwise. For sufficiently small p, the revenue
increase from one to two bidders is smaller than from two to three bidders. It can be proved
that, for any exchangeable value distribution F n+1 , a necessary and sufficient condition for the
revenue change from n − 1 to n bidders to be larger than from n to n + 1 bidders is 3( E(V n:n+1 ) −
E(V n−1:n+1 )) > E(V n+1:n+1 ) − E(V n:n+1 ).
24
We prove a special case of results already established by Dughmi, Roughgarden, and Sundararajan (2012) (Theorem 3.2). The specialization to our current single item auction setting allows us to
use only elementary mathematics, in contrast to Dughmi, Roughgarden, and Sundararajan (2012)’s
proof which relies on matroid theory.
25In later work, Bulow and Klemperer (2002) highlighted that the assumption of marginal revenues
increasing in signals may be more stringent in common values settings than in private values settings, and the authors provided examples of common values settings in which the original Bulow
and Klemperer (1996) result does not hold.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

21

The estimated bidder exclusion effect provides a bound on the impact of optimal
reserve prices for a fixed number of bidders, even if the data comes from auctions
with selective entry, as computation of the bidder exclusion effect (or its upper
bound) does not require exogenous variation in the number of bidders. When the
number of bidders is unknown, an upper bound on the average bidder exclusion
effect, as described in Section 3.3.3, provides an upper bound on the benefit to
improving auction design averaged over the (unobserved) realized values of N.
Section 7 illustrates this empirical application.

6. A PPLICATION 1: T ESTING

FOR SELECTIVE ENTRY AT TIMBER AUCTIONS

Our first application uses US timber auction data to illustrate how the bidder
exclusion effect can be used to distinguish between models of entry and bound
the impact of optimal auction design. The Forest Service’s timber auction data has
been used extensively in the empirical auctions literature, and is a natural context
to demonstrate the applications of the bidder exclusion effect. For example, Haile
and Tamer (2003) and Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013a) use timber auction data and develop bounds methods relying on the assumption that valuations
are independent of N (i.e. that entry is not selective). Below we test the validity
of this assumption. Optimal reserve prices have also been a major focus of timber auction work.26 By estimating the bidder exclusion effect and relating it to
the work of Bulow and Klemperer (1996), we are able to side-step the need for
a complex structural model and still obtain a simple estimate of the revenue improvement which would arise from an optimal reserve price.
Our data comes from ascending auctions held in California between 1982 and
1989 in which there were at least three entrants. There are 1,086 such auctions. The
data contains all bids, as well as information at the auction level, such as appraisal
variables, measures of local industry activity, and other sale characteristics.
26For example, both Haile and Tamer (2003) and Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2013a) study

optimal reserve prices.

22

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

By Propositions 2 and 3, with private values and low bidding, or in button auctions with symmetric common values, the bidder exclusion effect is smaller than
2
n−1:n
n E( B

− Bn−2:n ). We estimate the sample analog of this upper bound con-

ditional on the number of entrants in the auction but unconditional on auction
characteristics. Figure 1 shows the results, both as a percentage of revenue, and in
absolute terms.27 In our sample we estimate this upper bound on the bidder exclusion effect to be 12% of auction revenue, averaging over all values of n, with a
standard error of 0.4%. Under the conditions of Proposition 4, the average increase
in revenue from setting an optimal reserve price is therefore less than around 13%.
We now turn to the test for selective entry. We begin with the simplest version
of the test, without controlling for covariates. Table 1 displays the results of this
test using the timber auction data. In this table, a1 represents the expected second
order statistic when a bidder is removed at random from n bidder auctions, a2
represents the expected second order statistic in n − 1 bidder auctions when the
b(n) =
actual number of bidders is indeed n − 1, and the test statistic is given by T
b(n) is insignificant, although at n = 3 and n = 5,
a1 − a2 . For most n ∈ {3, ..., 8}, T
the test statistic is significant and positive, indicating that selective entry may be
a concern. Intuitively, a positive T (n) indicates that bidders’ values are higher in
n than n − 1 bidder auctions, as might be the case when attractive goods tend to
draw many entrants.
Table 2 shows the results of the selective entry test conditional on auction characteristics. The objects a1 , a2 , and T (n) are as in Table 1, but after controlling for covariates (following the parametric procedure described in Section 4.3). We control
for appraisal variables (quintiles of the reserve price, selling value, manufacturing
costs, logging costs, road construction costs, and dummies for missing road costs
and missing appraisals), sale characteristics (species Herfindahl index, density of

27The larger confidence interval for the n = 7 auctions in the right panel of Figure 1 is driven by an

outlier (an outlier in terms of its realization of Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n but not as a percentage of revenue,
( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n )/Bn−1:n , and thus in the left panel the effect is still precisely measured).

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

23

timber, salvage sale or scale sale dummies, deciles of timber volume, and dummies for forest, year, and primary species), and local industry activity (number of
logging companies in the county, sawmills in the county, small firms active in the
forest-district in the last year, and big firms active in the forest-district in the last
year).
There is stronger evidence for selective entry when controlling for auction characteristics than in the unconditional case. Conditional on auction characteristics,
average revenue when a bidder is removed at random from n bidder auctions is
higher than average revenue is n − 1 bidder auctions when n ∈ {3, 4, 5, 7}, and
this difference is significant at the 95% level. Again, this supports positive selection: bidders’ valuations appear to be higher in auctions with more entrants. With
n ∈ {6, 8} the difference is negative and insignificant, consistent with a setting
where valuations are independent of N. The joint null hypothesis of no selective
entry across all n ∈ {3, . . . , 8} can be rejected at the 99.9% level.
Some bidders in timber auctions may be stronger than others. One common
distinction in the literature is between mills, who have the capacity to process the
timber, and loggers, who do not. Mills typically have higher valuations than loggers (e.g. Athey, Levin, and Seira 2011; Athey, Coey, and Levin 2013; Roberts and
Sweeting 2013a). The evidence of selective entry above may be driven by differences in logger and mill entry patterns. We next turn to the question of whether
evidence of selective entry exists, even after restricting attention to a more homogeneous subset of bidders–in this case, loggers.28
Table 3 presents these results. The sample size is significantly smaller when restricting to auctions in which all entrants are loggers. At n = 4, the test still rejects
the null hypothesis that valuations are independent of N. However, the evidence
on the whole is much weaker in the loggers-only sample: at n ∈ {3, 5, 6} the difference is much smaller and insignificant, although the smaller sample size may
play a role. Taken together the results from Tables 2 and 3 suggest that selective
28There are too few auctions without logger entrants (only 21) to present the same analysis for

mills.

24

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

entry may be a feature of timber auctions but might be reasonably controlled for
by accounting for bidder types.
7. A PPLICATION 2: B OUNDING

THE IMPACT OF OPTIMAL AUCTION DESIGN AT
AUTO AUCTIONS

Our second application uses wholesale used-car auction data to illustrate how
the bidder exclusion effect can be used to bound the revenue impact of optimal
auction design. Recent studies report causal effects of various interventions at
used-car auctions, and our approach allows us to judge the economic relevance of
these effects by benchmarking them against the effect of optimal auction design, a
question to which much of the auction literature—both theoretical and empirical—
is dedicated. This setting also provides an illustration of bounding the bidder exclusion effect under minimal assumptions and minimal data requirements. Specifically, records from used-car auctions do not contain the number of bidders and
this number can vary from auction to auction, posing challenges for many structural auctions techniques, but not for our approach.
Our dataset contains the second and third-highest bids from 6,003 sales of used
cars. The data also records car characteristics. Summary statistics for these auction
sales are shown in Table 4. These cars are mostly late-model (two years old on
average), low-mileage cars (33,369 miles on average). The market thickness measure comes from a larger, nationwide sample of auto auction sales from which our
final sample is taken, and represents the total number of sales for a given makeby-model-by-age combination.29 Table 4 shows that, on average, a given make-bymodel-by-age combination sold over 1,000 times in the nationwide sample.
29This larger, nationwide sample contains 901,338 auction sales from 27 auction houses nationwide

between 2007 and 2010. For each auction in this larger sample, we observe a complete bid log of
all bids submitted. However, bid logs at wholesale auto auctions do not contain identities of floor
bidders (those who are physically present at the auction); the log simply records the identity as
“Floor” for any floor bidder. Therefore, we are only able to identify the third order statistic of bids in
cases where at least two of the last three bidders to place bids were online bidders (whose identities
are always recorded). This leaves a sample of 8,005 auction sales. We drop recreational vehicles
(including boats, motorhomes, motorcycles) or observations lying outside the first or ninety-ninth
percentiles of mileage, age, or the number of online bidders. This leaves 6,003 records.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

25

Multiple auctions take place in different lanes within the auction house simultaneously, and it is impossible to determine the number of participating bidders
(who may be physically present at the auction house or watching online) for any
given sale. The data does record the number of online bidders who have logged
in to the online console for a given lane at some point during the sale day, which
is 35 bidders on average. However, many of these online bidders may not actually
be participating bidders for a given sale. Based on personal observations at these
auction houses, we choose n = 5 in the following exercises as a lower bound on
the number of bidders present.
Table 4 also displays summary statistics for the second order statistic (the highest
observed bid), third order statistic (one bid increment beyond where the third-final
bidder dropped out), and the gap between the two. Following Section 3.3.3, when
the number of bidders is unobserved, an upper bound on the bidder exclusion effect, averaged over the unobserved values of n, is given by the mean of the gap
between second and third order statistics scaled by 2/n. This implies an unconditional estimate of the bidder exclusion effect upper bound of (2/5) × 425 = $170.
This provides an upper bound on the average revenue increase from implementing
an optimal reserve price.
Next, following Section 3.3.3, we estimate the upper bound on the average bidder exclusion effect conditional on covariates X, approximating the conditional
expectation using a kernel regression.30 Figure 2 displays the estimates with X being the vehicle’s mileage, the vehicle’s age, the number of online bidders, or the
market thickness measure. Panels A and B suggest that auctions of cars which are
lower in mileage or younger in age exhibit a lower bidder exclusion effect. That
is, excluding a random bidder from the auction does less damage to revenue in
these auctions than in auctions for older, higher mileage cars. This is consistent
with sales of newer, lower mileage cars being cases where demand is high and
many bidders participate, and hence optimal auction design is less important and
a no-reserve auction is likely to perform well. Similarly, Panels C and D suggest
30We use an Epanechnikov kernel and rule-of-thumb bandwidth.

26

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

that in cases where more bidders have logged in online or where the car is of a frequently sold make-by-model-by-age combination, the bidder exclusion effect and
the impact of an optimal reserve price are small.
The bidder exclusion effect also leads to bounds on the revenue from bidders
which could be expected in any auction, ranging from an efficient, no-reserve auction to an auction with an optimal reserve price, as a function of sale characteristics. For each observation j, let lower and upper bounds on revenue conditional
on observables X j be denoted π j ( X j ) and π j ( X j ), given by
n j −1:n j

π j (Xj ) = bj

n j −1:n j

π j (Xj ) = bj

(Xj )
(Xj ) +

(14)

2  n j −1:n j
n −2:n j
bj
(Xj ) − bj j
(Xj )
n

(15)

The lower bound is the observed second order statistic (the no-reserve revenue)
and the upper bound is the observed second order statistic plus the scaled gap between second and third order statistics (the expectation of this upper bound is an
upper bound on the optimal reserve revenue, under the conditions of Proposition
4). The shaded region in Figure 3 shows the area between the upper pointwise
95% confidence band for Ê(π j | X j ) and the lower pointwise 95% confidence band
for Ê(π j | X j ), where each conditional expectation is estimated using a kernel regression as above.
Panels A and B of Figure 3 demonstrate that the expected revenue is tightly
bounded, regardless of the seller’s choice of reserve price, for newer, high-mileage
cars. Similarly, Panels C and D show that the fraction of expected revenue which
could be manipulated through the use of reserve prices is much smaller for auctions of more popular cars or auctions in lanes where more online bidders have
logged in.
These estimates provide a benchmark for evaluating the relative economic significance of other effects measured in this industry. For example, Tadelis and
Zettelmeyer (2011), through a field experiment at a wholesale auto auction, found

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

27

that revealing information about the quality of the car through standardized condition reports led to a difference in revenue of $643.31 Similarly, Lacetera, Larsen,
Pope, and Sydnor (2013) studied auctioneers at wholesale auto auctions and found
that a one-standard-deviation improvement in auctioneer performance raised revenue by $348.32 Hortaçsu, Matvos, Syverson, and Venkataraman (2013) used wholesale auto auction data to study the impact of auto firms’ financial distress on prices,
and found that a 1,000 point increase in credit default swap spreads decreased
wholesale auction prices by approximately $68.33 The cars studied in these papers
have average mileage and age values which correspond to a bidder exclusion effect of approximately $200 in Figure 3.34 Therefore, a comparison to the bidder
exclusion effect suggests that information-disclosing reports or high-performing
auctioneers do more to increase revenues than would the use of an optimal reserve price. Similarly, swings in auction prices resulting from changes in firms’
perceived financial stability are at least one-third of the size of price changes which
the adoption of optimal reserve prices could generate.
8. C ONCLUSION
We developed a simple procedure for estimating the causal effect of removing a
random bidder on auction revenue—the bidder exclusion effect—without requiring instruments, a detailed structural model, or exogenous variation in the number
31Tables 2 and 3 of Tadelis and Zettelmeyer (2011) show that the probability of sale and expected

price conditional on sale for the treatment group, for which condition reports were posted, were
0.455 and $8,738.90, respectively, vs. 0.392 and $8,502.20 in the control group.
32Table 2, row 8 of Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor (2013) shows that one standard deviation
of the probability of sale among auctioneers is 0.023. Table 1 shows that the average price on cars
conditional on sale is $15,141. The product of these two numbers represents the increase in revenue
which would be expected by employing an auctioneer who performs at one standard deviation
above the mean, all else equal.
33This number represents the price conditional on sale, but Hortaçsu, Matvos, Syverson, and
Venkataraman (2013) focus primarily on cars which sell with very high probability (fleet/lease
cars). Therefore, the effect on the price conditional on sale is a good approximation for overall
effect of financial distress on revenue from bidders.
34The average odometer reading and age are 75,959 miles and five years old in Table 16 of Tadelis
and Zettelmeyer (2011); 56,237 miles and 4.4. years in Table 1 of Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor
(2013); and 44,270 miles in Table 4 of Hortaçsu, Matvos, Syverson, and Venkataraman (2013) (which
does not report age).

28

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

of bidders. Our approach is robust to a wide range of auction settings. The bidder exclusion effect is useful in testing the independence of bidders’ valuations
and the number of bidders participating, allowing the researcher to distinguish
between models of entry. Furthermore, we introduced a new empirical use for
the theoretical results of Bulow and Klemperer (1996), demonstrating that the bidder exclusion effect can be used to bound the revenue improvements achievable
through optimal auction design.
Given that our approach makes only weak assumptions on the auction setting,
it does not yield identification of some objects of interest. For example, while our
approach yields bounds on the revenue gain which an optimal reserve price could
achieve, stronger assumptions on the structure of bidders’ valuations or the underlying entry model would be required in order to obtain a recommendation of
the actual reserve price which should be implemented.
We believe that given the robustness and computational simplicity of the bidder exclusion effect it will prove a useful tool for empirical work in other settings
as well. Under certain assumptions, for example, the bidder exclusion effect provides a bound on the revenue loss a seller would face if bidders were to merge or
collude. Appendix G provides a brief discussion of this setting. The bidder exclusion effect also provides a simple specification check of whether bidders have
independent private values. Briefly, under the assumption of IPV, one can invert
the second-order statistic distribution to obtain an estimate of the underlying distribution of buyer valuations (Athey and Haile 2007) and simulate the revenue
increase under an optimal reserve price. If the simulated revenue increase exceeds
the bidder exclusion effect, the validity of either the assumption of independence
or the assumption of private values—or both—is in question.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

29

R EFERENCES
A NDREWS , D.,

AND

X. S HI (2013): “Inference based on conditional moment in-

equalities,” Econometrica, 81(2), 609–666.
A NGRIST, J. D.,

AND

G. W. I MBENS (1995): “Two-stage least squares estimation of

average causal effects in models with variable treatment intensity,” Journal of the
American statistical Association, 90(430), 431–442.
A RADILLAS -L ÓPEZ , A., A. G ANDHI ,

AND

D. Q UINT (2013a): “Identification and

inference in ascending auctions with correlated private values,” Econometrica,
81(2), 489–534.
(2013b): “A Simple test for moment inequality models with an application
to English auctions,” Working paper.
ATHEY, S., D. C OEY,

AND

J. L EVIN (2013): “Set-asides and subsidies in auctions,”

American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(1), 1–27.
ATHEY, S.,

AND

P. A. H AILE (2002): “Identification of standard auction models,”

Econometrica, 70(6), 2107–2140.
(2007): “Nonparametric approaches to auctions,” Handbook of Econometrics,
6, 3847–3965.
ATHEY, S., J. L EVIN ,

AND

E. S EIRA (2011): “Comparing open and sealed bid auc-

tions: Evidence from timber auctions*,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1),
207–257.
B AJARI , P., H. H ONG ,

AND

S. P. RYAN (2010): “Identification and estimation of a

discrete game of complete information,” Econometrica, 78(5), 1529–1568.
B AJARI , P.,

AND

A. H ORTACSU (2003): “The winner’s curse, reserve prices, and

endogenous entry: Empirical insights from eBay auctions,” RAND Journal of Economics, pp. 329–355.
B ALDWIN , L. H., R. C. M ARSHALL ,

AND

J.-F. R ICHARD (1997): “Bidder collusion

at forest service timber sales,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(4), 657–699.
B HATTACHARYA , V., J. W. R OBERTS ,

AND

A. S WEETING (2013): “Regulating bid-

der participation in auctions,” RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

30

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

B ULOW, J.,

AND

P. K LEMPERER (1996): “Auctions versus negotiations,” American

Economic Review, 86(1), 180–194.
(2002): “Prices and the Winner’s Curse,” RAND Journal of Economics, pp.
1–21.
B ULOW, J.,

AND

J. R OBERTS (1989): “The simple economics of optimal auctions,”

Journal of Political Economy, pp. 1060–1090.
C HERNOZHUKOV, V., S. L EE ,

AND

A. M. R OSEN (2013): “Intersection bounds:

Estimation and inference,” Econometrica, 81(2), 667–737.
C HETTY, R. (2009): “Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between
structural and reduced-form methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 1, 451–488.
C HETVERIKOV, D. (2011): “Adaptive test of conditional moment inequalities,”
Working paper.
C OEY, D., B. L ARSEN ,

AND

K. S WEENEY (2014): “Identification in ascending and

second price auctions with asymmetric bidders and common values,” Working
paper.
C R ÉMER , J., AND R. P. M C L EAN (1988): “Full extraction of the surplus in Bayesian
and dominant strategy auctions,” Econometrica, pp. 1247–1257.
D UGHMI , S., T. R OUGHGARDEN , AND M. S UNDARARAJAN (2012): “Revenue submodularity.,” Theory of Computing, 8(1), 95–119.
E INAV, L., A. F INKELSTEIN , AND M. R. C ULLEN (2010): “Estimating welfare in insurance markets using variation in prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3),
877–921.
G ENTRY, M.,

AND

T. L I (2013): “Identification in auctions with selective entry,”

Econometrica, 82, 315–344.
H AILE , P. A., H. H ONG , AND M. S HUM (2003): “Nonparametric tests for common
values at first-price sealed-bid auctions,” NBER Working Paper 10105.
H AILE , P. A., AND E. TAMER (2003): “Inference with an incomplete model of English auctions,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(1), 1–51.
H ENDRICKS , K.,

AND

R. H. P ORTER (2007): “An Empirical Perspective On Auc-

tions,” Handbook of Industrial Organization, 3, 2073–2143.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

31

H ICKMAN , B. R., T. P. H UBBARD , AND Y. S AGLAM (2012): “Structural Econometric
Methods In Auctions: A Guide To The Literature,” Journal of Econometric Methods, 1(1), 67–106.
H ORTAÇSU , A., G. M ATVOS , C. S YVERSON ,

AND

S. V ENKATARAMAN (2013): “In-

direct costs of financial distress in durable goods industries: The case of auto
manufacturers,” Review of Financial Studies, 26(5), 1248–1290.
J AFFE , S.,

AND

E. G. W EYL (2013): “The first-order approach to merger analysis,”

American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(4), 188–218.
K RASNOKUTSKAYA , E. (2011): “Identification and estimation of auction models
with unobserved heterogeneity,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 293–327.
K RASNOKUTSKAYA , E.,

AND

K. S EIM (2011): “Bid preference programs and par-

ticipation in highway procurement auctions,” American Economic Review, 101(6),
2653–2686.
K RISHNA , V. (2009): Auction theory. Academic press.
L ACETERA , N., B. L ARSEN , D. G. P OPE ,

AND

J. R. S YDNOR (2013): “Bid takers or

market makers? The effect of auctioneers on auction outcomes,” NBER Working
Paper 19731.
L EVIN , D., AND J. L. S MITH (1994): “Equilibrium in auctions with entry,” American
Economic Review, 84(3), 585–599.
L I , T., I. P ERRIGNE ,

AND

Q. V UONG (2003): “Semiparametric estimation of the

optimal reserve price in first-price auctions,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 21(1), 53–64.
L I , T., AND X. Z HENG (2009): “Entry and competition effects in first-price auctions:
Theory and evidence from procurement auctions,” Review of Economic Studies,
76(4), 1397–1429.
L OPOMO , G. (1995): “Optimality and robustness of the English auction,” New
York University, Stern School of Business Working Paper No. EC-95-03.
M ARMER , V., A. S HNEYEROV,

AND

P. X U (2013): “What model for entry in first-

price auctions? A nonparametric approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 176(1), 46–
58.

32

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

M C A FEE , R. P.,

AND

J. M C M ILLAN (1987): “Auctions with entry,” Economics Let-

ters, 23(4), 343–347.
M C A FEE , R. P., J. M C M ILLAN ,

AND

P. J. R ENY (1989): “Extracting the surplus in

the common-value auction,” Econometrica, pp. 1451–1459.
M C A FEE , R. P.,

AND

P. J. R ENY (1992): “Correlated information and mechanism

design,” Econometrica, pp. 395–421.
M ILGROM , P. R.,

AND

R. J. W EBER (1982): “A theory of auctions and competitive

bidding,” Econometrica, pp. 1089–1122.
M YERSON , R. B. (1981): “Optimal auction design,” Mathematics of Operations Research, 6(1), 58–73.
PAARSCH , H. J. (1997): “Deriving an estimate of the optimal reserve price: An application to British Columbian timber sales,” Journal of Econometrics, 78(1), 333–
357.
PAARSCH , H. J., AND H. H ONG (2006): “An Introduction To The Structural Econometrics Of Auction Data,” MIT Press Books, 1.
P INKSE , J., AND G. TAN (2005): “The affiliation effect in first-price auctions,” Econometrica, 73(1), 263–277.
R ILEY, J. G.,

AND

W. F. S AMUELSON (1981): “Optimal auctions,” American Eco-

nomic Review, pp. 381–392.
R OBERTS , J. W.,

AND

A. S WEETING (2013a): “Bailouts and the Preservation of

Competition,” Working paper.
(2013b): “When Should Sellers Use Auctions?,” American Economic Review,
103(5), 1830–1861.
TADELIS , S.,

AND

F. Z ETTELMEYER (2011): “Information disclosure as a match-

ing mechanism: Theory and evidence from a field experiment,” Working paper,
available at SSRN 1872465.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

33

15
10
0

5

Revenue ($/thousand board feet)

15
10
0

5

% of Revenue

20

20

F IGURE 1. Bounding the Bidder Exclusion Effect

3

4

5

6

Entrants

7

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

Entrants

Notes: Graphs show point estimates and 95% pointwise confidence intervals for
2
n−1:n − Bn−2:n ), for various values of n, the total number of entrants in the auction.
n E( B
Estimates in the left graph are expressed as a percentage of auction revenue. Estimates in
the right graph are expressed in dollars per thousand board feet.

34

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

0

120

140

100

160

200

180

300

200

220

400

F IGURE 2. Upper Bounds on the Bidder Exclusion Effect

0

50000

100000

150000

0

2

6

8

10

50

100

100

150

150

200

200

250

( B ) Age

250

( A ) Mileage

4

0

20

40

( C ) # Online bidders

60

80

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

( D ) Market thickness

Notes: Vertical axis in each panel represents upper bounds on the bidder exclusion effect in
dollars. Solid line represents bidder exclusion effect conditional on mileage (A), age (B), number
of online bidders (C), and market thickness (D). Estimates come from kernel regression with
Epanechnikov kernel and rule-of-thumb bandwidth. Dashed lines represent pointwise 95%
confidence bands.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

35

0

0

5000

10000

15000

5000 10000 15000 20000

F IGURE 3. Upper and Lower Bounds on Expected Revenue

0

50000

100000

150000

0

2

6

8

10

( B ) Age

0

0

5000

5000

10000

10000

15000

15000

( A ) Mileage

4

0

20

40

( C ) # Online bidders

60

80

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

( D ) Market thickness

Notes: Vertical axis in each plot represents expected revenue in dollars. Lower boundary of
shaded region is given by lower 95% confidence band about the conditional expectation of the
second order statistic. Upper boundary of shaded region is given by upper 95% confidence band
about the conditional expectation of the sum of the second order statistic and the scaled gap
between second and third order statistics (scaled by 2/n). Estimates are conditional on mileage
(A), age (B), number of online bidders (C), and market thickness (D), and come from kernel
regression with Epanechnikov kernel and rule-of-thumb bandwidth.

36

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

TABLE 1. Unconditional Tests for Selective Entry, All Auctions
Entrants
a1

3
4
5
6
7
8
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
78.15
92.34
119.75
125.64
123.16
147.24∗∗∗
(6.36)
(4.62)
(4.81)
(11.14)
(6.69)
(9.65)

a2

49.60∗∗∗ 78.37∗∗∗
(2.62)
(6.43)

T (n) = a1 − a2 28.55∗∗∗
(6.87)
Sample Size
497

13.97
(7.92)
496

89.09∗∗∗
(3.50)
30.66∗∗∗
(5.95)
456

119.66∗∗∗ 125.02∗∗∗ 130.46∗∗∗
(4.85)
(11.15)
(12.04)
5.98
(12.15)
350

-1.86
(13.00)
243

16.78
(15.43)
164

Standard errors in parentheses
∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Notes: Table presents results of test for selective entry unconditional on covariates, for
various levels of the number of entrants.

TABLE 2. Conditional Tests for Selective Entry, All Auctions
Entrants
a1

3
-44.52
(59.38)

4
-120.64
(74.72)

5
3.34
(24.72)

6
7
8
-95.81∗∗ -111.39 -172.47
(32.93) (71.81) (159.06)

a2

-64.84
(59.39)

-137.66
(75.24)

-10.47
(25.01)

-89.90∗∗ -124.05 -167.05
(31.83) (72.75) (145.70)

T (n) = a1 − a2 20.32∗∗∗ 17.02∗∗∗ 13.81∗∗∗
(5.33)
(4.21)
(3.63)
Sample Size
497
496
456

-5.91
(4.75)
350

12.66∗
(5.78)
243

-5.42
(17.94)
164

Standard errors in parentheses
∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Notes: Table presents results of test for selective entry conditional on covariates described
in Section 4.3, for various levels of the number of entrants.

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

37

TABLE 3. Testing for Selective Entry, Auctions with Only Loggers
Entrants
a1

3
4
5
6
-158.28 -183.18 26.03 -285.34∗∗
(108.96) (115.53) (42.50) (115.06)

a2

-172.28 -222.73
8.53
(105.59) (128.23) (43.13)

-266.30
(111.34)

T ( n ) = a1 − a2

14.00
(16.65)
149

39.54∗
(19.29)
138

-19.04
(25.66)
76

Sample Size

17.51
(9.92)
109

Standard errors in parentheses
∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Notes: Table presents results of test for selective entry conditional on covariates described
in Section 4.3, for various levels of the number of entrants, and only for auctions in which
all entrants are loggers.

TABLE 4. Wholesale auto auction data descriptive statistics
Mean

s.d.

Min.

Max.

33,369

29,601

13

163,036

Age

1.95

2.18

0

10

# Online bidders

34.71

16.71

4

76

2

8,465

Mileage

Market thickness 1,196.01 1,648.60
bn−1:n

15,429

7,733

300

55,100

bn−2:n

15,004

7,648

225

53,400

425

494

50

6650

bn−1:n − bn−2:n
Sample size

6,003

Notes: Age is in years. # Online bidders is the number of bidders who had logged into the lane the
car was sold in. Market thickness is the number of cars of the same make-by-model-by-age
combination as a given car. bn−1:n is the final auction price (second order statistic), bn−2:n is the
highest bid of the third-final bidder (third order statistic).

38

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

A PPENDIX A. P ROOFS
A.1. Proof of Proposition 1. Let (V1 , . . . , Vn ) be a random vector of values dise1 , . . . , V
en−1 ) be a random vector obtained by droptributed according to F n . Let (V
2 e n−2:n−1
ping a value uniformly at random from (V1 , . . . , Vn ). With probability n−
=
n ,V

e n−2:n−1 = V n−2:n and
V n−1:n and revenue is unchanged, and with probability n2 , V
revenue falls by V n−1:n − V n−2:n . The expected fall in revenue from dropping a
bidder at random is therefore n2 E(V n−1:n − V n−2:n ) = n2 E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ).
A.2. Proof of Proposition 2.
∆(n) = E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1,n )

= E(V n−1:n ) − E(V n−2:n−1,n )
2
E(V n−1:n − V n−2:n )
n
2
≤ E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ).
n

=

The first equality is true by definition of ∆(n). The second follows by Assumption
1. The third follows because with probability

2
n

dropping a value from (V1 , . . . , Vn )

uniformly at random will cause the second-highest value to drop from V n−1:n
to V n−2:n , and otherwise the second-highest value will be unchanged. The final
equality holds by Assumption 1.
A.3. Proof of Proposition 3. Athey and Haile (2002), Theorem 9 proves that for
button auction ascending auctions with symmetric common values, regardless of
the equilibrium played, E( Bn−2:n−1,n ) > n2 E( Bn−2:n ) +

n −2
n−1:n ).
n E( B

E( Bn−1:n ) − E( Bn−2:n−1,n ) < n2 E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ), as required.
A.4. Proof of Corollary 1.
E(∆( N )) ≤ E

≤



2 N −1:N
(B
− B N −2:N )
N

2
E( B N −1:N − B N −2:N ),
n



This implies

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

39

where the first inequality follows by Proposition 2 if Assumption 1 holds and from
Proposition 3 if Assumption 2 holds, and the second by n ≥ n for all realizations n
of the random variable N.

A.5. Proof of Proposition 4. Theorem 1 of Bulow and Klemperer (1996) implies
that the increase in expected revenue from using an optimal reserve price is less
than the increase in expected revenue from adding another bidder, which by Assumption 3, is less than the bidder exclusion effect. The result follows from Proposition 2 if Assumption 1 holds and from Proposition 3 if Assumption 2 holds.

A PPENDIX B. B INDING R ESERVE P RICES
We consider ascending auctions with private values where bidders bid their values, and where there is a reserve price below which bids are not observed. We
modify our notation accordingly: ∆(n, r ) denotes the fall in expected revenue produced by randomly excluding a bidder from n bidder auctions, when the reserve
price is r.
Proposition 5. In ascending auctions with private values and a reserve price of r where
bidders bid their value, for all n > 2 the bidder exclusion effect ∆(n, r ) =

2
n−1:n
n E( B

−

max( Bn−2:n , r )|r ≤ Bn−1:n ) Pr(r ≤ Bn−1:n ) + n1 r Pr( Bn−1:n < r ≤ Bn:n ).
Proof. If r ≤ Bn−1:n , then with probability
cause revenue to fall from Bn−1:n to

2
n dropping a bidder at random will
max( Bn−2:n , r ), so that in expectation revenue

falls by n2 E( Bn−1:n − max( Bn−2:n , r )|r ≤ Bn−1:n ). If Bn−1:n < r ≤ Bn:n , then with
probability

1
n

dropping a bidder at random will cause revenue to fall from r to 0.

If Bn:n < r, then dropping a bidder at random will not change revenue. These
observations imply the result.



This expression for ∆(n, r ) can be estimated given observed data, as it does not
depend on knowing the value of bids lower than the reserve price.

40

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

B.1. Applications of the Bidder Exclusion Effect with Binding Reserve Prices.
When the reserve price equals r in both n and n − 1 bidder auctions, the expected
revenue difference between those auctions is
E(max( Bn−1:n , r )|r ≤ Bn:n ) Pr(r ≤ Bn:n )

− E(max( Bn−2:n−1 , r )|r ≤ Bn−1:n−1 ) Pr(r ≤ Bn−1:n−1 ).

(16)

If valuations are independent of N, then Fnn−1 = Fnn−−11 = F n−1 and hence expression (16) equals the expression for ∆(n, r ) of Proposition 5. As in Section 4.1, we
can test this hypothesis with a t-test, where the test statistic is formed by replacing expectations by sample averages. This test is consistent against forms of selective entry which affect expected revenue, i.e. such that E(max( Bn−2:n−1,n , r )|r ≤
Bn−1:n−1,n ) Pr(r ≤ Bn−1:n−1,n ) 6= E(max( Bn−2:n−1 , r )|r ≤ Bn−1:n−1 ) Pr(r ≤ Bn−1:n−1 ).
This test can be adapted to incorporate covariates. The null hypothesis is:




n − 2 n−1:n 2
n−1:n
n−2:n
n−1:n
n:n n − 1
E 1(r ≤ B
)
B
+ max{ B
, r } + 1( B
<r≤B )
r X
n
n
n

= E(1(r ≤ Bn−1:n−1 ) max{ Bn−2:n−1 , r }| X ).

(17)

This states that, conditional on covariates, revenue in n bidder auctions when
one bidder is dropped at random equals revenue in n − 1 bidder auctions. The
regression-based test of Section 6 can be modified to test this restriction.
For the application to optimal mechanism design, we require an upper bound
on ∆(n, 0). Using the fact that bids are non-negative, we have
2
E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n |r ≤ Bn−2:n ) Pr(r ≤ Bn−2:n )
n
2
+ E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n | Bn−2:n < r ≤ Bn−1:n ) Pr( Bn−2:n < r ≤ Bn−1:n )
n
2
+ E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n | Bn−1:n < r ) Pr( Bn−1:n < r )
(18)
n
2
≤ E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n |r ≤ Bn−2:n ) Pr(r ≤ Bn−2:n )
n
2
+ E( Bn−1:n | Bn−2:n < r ≤ Bn−1:n ) Pr( Bn−2:n < r ≤ Bn−1:n )
n

∆(n, 0) =

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

2
+ r Pr( Bn−1:n < r )
n

41

(19)

The terms in (19) do not depend on knowing the value of bids lower than the
reserve price, and can be estimated given observed data.
A PPENDIX C. F IRST P RICE A UCTIONS
We now give upper and lower bounds on the bidder exclusion effect in first
price auctions with symmetric IPV, and symmetric conditionally independent private values (CIPV). Let b(Vi , F n ) denote bidder i’s equilibrium bid, as a function
of his value, Vi , and the distribution of bidders’ valuations, F n . We assume Vi is
continuously distributed on some interval [0, u]. In this section we use subscripts
to make explicit the distribution with respect to which expectations are taken, e.g.
expected revenue with no reserve price is EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) in n bidder auctions and
is EFnn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , Fnn−1 )) when one of the n bidders is randomly excluded. The
bidder exclusion effect is ∆(n) ≡ EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − EFnn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , Fnn−1 )).
Proposition 6. In first price auctions without a reserve price if i) bidders have symmetric independent private values, or ii) there is a random variable U common knowledge
to bidders such that bidders have symmetric independent private values conditional on
U, then EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − EFnn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , F n )) < ∆(n) < EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) −
EFnn−1 (b(V n−2:n−1 , F n )).
Proof. We first consider the case of symmetric independent private values. For the
lower bound, note that in symmetric independent private values settings, equilibrium bids are strictly increasing in n: b(vi , F n ) > b(vi , Fnn−1 ) (see, for example,
Krishna (2009)). This implies EFnn−1 b(V n−1:n−1 , F n ) > EFnn−1 b(V n−1:n−1 , Fnn−1 ), and
therefore EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − EFnn−1 b(V n−1:n−1 , F n ) < ∆(n).
For the upper bound, we have
EFnn−1 (b(V n−2:n−1 , F n )) < EFnn−1 (V n−2:n−1 )

= EFnn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , Fnn−1 )).

(20)
(21)

42

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

The inequality holds because equilibrium bids are strictly less than values. The
equality holds by revenue equivalence of first and second price auctions with
symmetric independent private values. It follows that ∆(n) < EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) −
EFnn−1 (b(V n−2:n−1 , F n )).
If values are symmetric and CIPV, then because U is common knowledge to
bidders these lower and upper bounds hold conditional on every realization of
U, and therefore hold unconditionally, taking expectations with respect to U. The
bounds thus extend to the conditionally independent private values case.



The lower bound above is the expected fall in revenue in n bidder auctions when
one bid is removed at random, assuming the good will be sold at a price equal to
the highest of the remaining bids. The upper bound is the expected fall in revenue
in n bidder auctions when one bid is removed at random, assuming the good will
be sold at a price equal to the second highest of the remaining bids. The following
corollary characterizes these bounds more explicitly in terms of the bids from n
bidder auctions.

Corollary 2. In first price auctions without a reserve price if i) bidders have symmetric
independent private values, or ii) there is a random variable U common knowledge to
bidders such that bidders have symmetric independent private values conditional on U,
then

1
n:n
n
n
−
1:n
n
EFn (b(V , F )) − EFn (b(V
, F )) < ∆(n)
n

(22)

and

n−2 
n:n n
n−1:n n
n
n
, F )) +
∆(n) <
EF (b(V , F )) − EF (b(V
n

2
EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − EFn (b(V n−2:n , F n )) .
n
Proof. For the lower bound, note that with probability

n −1
n

dom will not change the highest bid, and with probability

(23)

dropping a bid at ran1
n

the highest bid will

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

43

drop from b(V n:n , F n ) to b(V n−1:n , F n ). For the upper bound, note that with probability

n −2
n

the difference between the highest bid in the original sample and the

second-highest bid after one bid has been dropped at random is b(V n:n , F n ) −
b(V n−1:n , F n ), and with probability

2
n

it is b(V n:n , F n ) − b(V n−2:n , F n ).



Several remarks on these bounds are in order. The lower bound holds under
symmetric correlated private values too, as long as equilibrium bids are strictly
increasing in n.35 The upper bound holds if bidders are risk-averse, as first price
auctions raise more revenue than ascending auctions, with symmetric risk-averse
bidders in IPV environments (Riley and Samuelson 1981). In the CIPV case, if
U is not common knowledge amongst bidders, then bidders’ private information
is correlated conditional on what they know at the time of bidding. This affects
equilibrium bidding behavior and the argument of Proposition 6 does not hold.
Finally, the upper bound of Proposition 6 can be replaced by EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) −
0

EFn0 (b(V n−2:n−1 , F n )) for any n0 > n − 1, as bids are below values in n0 bidder
n −1

0

auctions too. Consequently, ∆(n) ≤ EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − supn0 EFn0 (b(V n−2:n−1 , F n )).
n −1

C.1. Applications of the Bidder Exclusion Effect in First Price Auctions. As with
ascending auctions, the bidder exclusion effect can be used to test for selective entry in first price auctions. Under the null hypothesis that entry is not selective,
for all n ≥ 2, Fnn−1 = Fnn−−11 = F n−1 . This implies that the bidder exclusion effect ∆(n) ≡ EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − EFnn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , Fnn−1 )) equals EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) −
EFn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , F n−1 )). If the sample analog of EFn (b(V n:n , F n )) − EFn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , F n−1 ))—
which is simply average revenue in n bidder auctions minus average revenue
in n − 1 bidder auctions—lies outside the sample analogs of the lower or upper
bounds of Corollary 2, this is evidence against the null hypothesis. This test is
consistent against violations of the null when values are “sufficiently” decreasing or increasing with n. Precisely, this is the case if EFn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , F n−1 )) >
EFnn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , F n )) or EFn−1 (b(V n−1:n−1 , F n−1 )) < EFnn−1 (b(V n−2:n−1 , F n )). Again,
35Pinkse and Tan (2005) give conditions for this to hold.

44

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

the regression-based test of Section 6 can be modified to test that the null hypothesis holds conditional on observable covariates, rather than unconditionally.
The application to optimal mechanism design also works for first price auctions.
The Bulow-Klemperer theorem is stated for ascending auctions, but by revenue
equivalence also applies to first price auctions when bidders have symmetric IPV
(or symmetric CIPV). Thus Proposition 4 extends to first price auctions, where the
upper bound on the effect on expected revenue of improving mechanism design is
given by Corollary 2.
A PPENDIX D. M ONTE C ARLO P OWER S IMULATIONS
For some evidence on how powerful our test of selective entry is, we compare
it to another test, which simply compares bidders’ mean values in n and n + 1
bidder auctions. This latter test requires the econometrician to observe all bidders’
values. Relative to our test based on the bidder exclusion effect, it requires more
data, and does not allow for low bidding. Furthermore, this mean comparison test
is not actually feasible in ascending auctions in practice given that the highest bid
is never observed.
In our simulation, there are 10 potential bidders, who have iid lognormal private
values drawn from ln N (θ, 1), where θ is itself a random variable. All potential bidders see a common signal δ = θ + e, and Bayes update on the value of θ given their
observation of δ. The random variables (δ, θ, e) are jointly normally distributed:
 
  

2
2
δ
0
1 + σe , 1, σe
 
  

 
  

(24)
θ  ∼ N 0 ,  1,
1, 0  .
 
  

e
0
σe2 ,
0, σe2
As σe increases, the ratio of noise to signal increases, and the variable δ becomes
less informative about the variable θ. To learn their value and bid in the ascending
auction, potential bidders must pay an entry cost of 0.5. They play mixed entry
strategies, entering with a probability p that depends on δ. In the limit as σe → ∞,
the signal δ is uninformative about θ and the entry probability p no longer varies

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

45

with δ. This limiting case corresponds to the entry model of Levin and Smith
(1994).
For each σe ∈ {1, 1.25, 1.5, . . . , 7}, and for n ∈ {3, 4}, we generate 1,000 datasets
with auctions in which n or n + 1 bidders choose to enter. Each dataset contains
500 n bidder auctions and 500 n + 1 bidder auctions. We calculate the probability
of rejecting the null hypothesis of no selective entry at the 5% level over the 1,000
datasets, for each value of σe and n, and for both bidder exclusion test, and the
comparison of means test. Figure 4 shows the rejection probabilities as a function
of σe . The comparison of means uses more data (in the case of Panel (A), all three
bids from n = 3 auctions and all four bids from n = 4 auctions; and, in the case of
Panel (B), all four bids from n = 4 auctions and all five bids from n = 5 auctions),
and is more powerful. The simulation results suggest that when not all bidders’
values are observed and the comparison of means test is infeasible (as in ascending auctions), the bidder exclusion based test is a reasonably powerful alternative,
especially when entry is more selective (corresponding in this model to low values
of σe .)

A PPENDIX E. A SYMMETRIC B IDDERS
We give sufficient conditions for valuations to be independent of N with asymmetric bidders and private values, following the setup of Coey, Larsen, and Sweeney
(2014). Let N be the full set of potential bidders. Let P be a random vector representing the identities of bidders participating in an auction, with realizations
P ⊂ N. Let N be a random variable representing the number of bidders participating in an auction, with realizations n ∈ N. When necessary to clarify the
number of bidders in a set of participating bidders, we let Pn denote an arbitrary
set of n participating bidders. Define F P to be the joint distribution of (Vi )i∈ P when

46

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

F IGURE 4. Monte Carlo Power Comparison
0.9

1
Bidder Exclusion Test
Mean Comparison Test

Bidder Exclusion Test
Mean Comparison Test

0.8

0.8

Probability of Rejecting Null

Probability of Rejecting Null

0.9

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

( A ) 3 and 4 Bidder Auctions

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

( B ) 4 and 5 Bidder Auctions

Notes: Figures show the simulated probability of rejecting the null hypothesis of no
selective entry for various levels of entry selectiveness (with greater σe corresponding to
less selective entry), for two tests: one based on a comparison of means between n and
n + 1 bidder auctions, and one based on the bidder exclusion effect computed on n and
n + 1 bidder auctions. The left panel shows the case of n = 3, and the right panel shows
the case of n = 4.

P is the set of participating bidders.36 As before, F n represents the joint distribution of values conditional on there being n entrants, but unconditional on the set
of participants. Therefore, F n (v1 . . . vn ) = ∑ Pn ⊂N Pr(P = Pn | N = n) F Pn (v1 . . . vn ).
0

For P0 ⊂ P, let F P | P denote the joint distribution of (Vi )i∈ P0 in auctions where P is
the set of participants. Finally, let FmP denote the joint distribution of values of m
bidders drawn uniformly at random without replacement from P, when the set P
enters.
0

0

Definition 1. Valuations are independent of supersets if for all P0 ⊂ P, F P | P = F P .
Definition 2. Bidder identities are independent of N if, for all Pn , Pr(P = Pn | N =
n) =

1
n +1

∑ Pn+1 ⊃ Pn Pr(P = Pn+1 | N = n + 1).

36We adopt the convention that bidders are ordered according to their identities, i.e. if P = {2, 5, 12}

then F P is the joint distribution of (V2 , V5 , V12 ), rather than, for example, the joint distribution of
(V5 , V2 , V12 ).

6

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

47

These definitions describe different kinds of exogeneity. Definition 1 requires
that conditional on some set of bidders participating, those bidders’ values are
independent of which other bidders participate (what Athey and Haile (2002) refer to as exogenous participation). Definition 2 requires that the distribution of
participating bidder identities in n bidder auctions is just like the distribution of
participating bidder identities in n + 1 bidder auctions, with one bidder randomly
removed.37 It restricts who participates, but not what their values are. The following proposition shows that together these conditions imply that valuations are
independent of N. Consequently, evidence of selective entry suggests either that
valuations are not independent of supersets, or that bidder identities are not independent of N.
Proposition 7. If valuations are independent of supersets and bidder identities are independent of N, then valuations are independent of N.
Proof. The proof follows Coey, Larsen, and Sweeney (2014), Lemma 3. It suffices to
prove that Fmn = Fmn+1 for any n ≥ m.
Fmn (v) =

∑ Pr(P = Pn | N = n) FmPn (v)
Pn

=∑

∑

Pn Pn+1 ⊃ Pn

=

1
Pr(P = Pn+1 | N = n + 1) FmPn (v)
n+1

∑ ∑

1
Pr(P = Pn+1 | N = n + 1) FmPn (v)
n+1

∑ ∑

1
P |P
Pr(P = Pn+1 | N = n + 1) Fmn n+1 (v)
n+1

Pn+1 Pn ⊂ Pn+1

=

Pn+1 Pn ⊂ Pn+1

=

∑ Pr(P = Pn+1 | N = n + 1) Fmn+1 (v)
P

Pn+1

= Fmn+1 (v)
37To see this, fix P and note that for each P
n
n+1 ⊃ Pn , Pn is obtained by dropping the bidder

Pn+1 \ Pn from Pn+1 . When bidders are dropped uniformly at random, this occurs with probability
1
n +1 .

48

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

The second equality follows because bidder identities are independent of N. The
fourth equality follows because F Pn = F Pn | Pn+1 , as valuations are independent of
supersets. The fifth equality follows because randomly selecting m bidders from
n + 1 bidders is the same as randomly selecting n bidders from n + 1 bidders, and
then randomly selecting m bidders from those n bidders.



A PPENDIX F. R EVENUE C ONCAVITY
In this section we give conditions for concavity of expected revenue in symmetric IPV (and CIPV) auctions. In the symmetric IPV case, a sufficient condition for
concavity of expected revenue is for bidders marginal revenue to be increasing in
their values. This is a special case of a result established by Dughmi, Roughgarden,
and Sundararajan (2012).
Proposition 8. In ascending auctions with symmetric independent private values and
no reserve price, if bidders’ marginal revenue is increasing in their values then expected
revenue is concave in the number of bidders.
Proof. We first prove that if Z1 , . . . , Zn+1 are iid random variables,
E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn }) − E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn−1 }) ≥
E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn+1 }) − E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn }).

(25)

For any z1 , . . . , zn+1 ∈ Rn+1 ,
max{0, zn+1 − max{z1 , . . . , zn−1 }} ≥ max{0, zn+1 − max{z1 , . . . , zn }},

(26)

implying
max{z1 , . . . , zn−1 , zn+1 } − max{z1 , . . . , zn−1 } ≥ max{z1 , . . . , zn+1 } − max{z1 , . . . , zn }.
(27)
Consequently for any random variables Z1 , . . . , Zn+1 ,
E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn−1 , Zn+1 }) − E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn−1 }) ≥

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn+1 }) − E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn }),

49

(28)

because (27) holds for every realization z1 , . . . , zn+1 of Z1 , . . . , Zn+1 . If the Zi are
iid, then E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn−1 , Zn+1 }) = E(max{ Z1 , . . . , Zn }), yielding (25).
The expected revenue from any mechanism is the expected marginal revenue
of the winning bidder (Myerson 1981). Ascending auctions assign the good to
the bidder with the highest valuation, and therefore highest marginal revenue,
because marginal revenue is increasing in valuations. It follows that expected revenue with n bidders is E(max{ MR(V1 ), . . . , MR (Vn )}). As MR(V1 ), . . . , MR(Vn+1 )
are iid random variables, we have
E(max{ MR(V1 ), . . . , MR(Vn )}) − E(max{ MR(V1 ), . . . , MR(Vn−1 )}) ≥
E(max{ MR(V1 ), . . . , MR(Vn+1 )}) − E(max{ MR(V1 ), . . . , MR(Vn )}),

(29)

implying that expected revenue is concave in the number of bidders.



When there exists a random variable U such that bidder values V1 , . . . , Vn are
iid conditional on U, if marginal revenue is increasing in values conditional on
each realization of U, then Proposition 8 applies conditional on each realization
of U. Taking expectations over U, it follows that expected revenue is concave in
CIPV environments if bidders’ marginal revenue curves are increasing in values
conditional on each value of U.

A PPENDIX G. B IDDER C OLLUSION AND M ERGERS
The bidder exclusion effect may also be used to bound above the expected fall
in revenue resulting from mergers or collusion between bidders. Consider first the
case of two random bidders forming a bidding ring.38 This bidding ring excludes
one bidder from the auction. If the bidder which is excluded is chosen randomly
between the bidders in the ring, and if the bidders were randomly matched when
38A bidding ring is a group of bidders in an auction who collude in order to keep prices down.

50

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

forming a ring, the setting is equivalent to one in which a bidder is randomly—
and legally—excluded from the auction. Under the conditions of Proposition 1,
the seller’s losses are given by ∆(n) = Γ(n) ≡ n2 E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ). In the case of
low bidding or symmetric common values, the seller’s losses are bounded above
by Γ(n).
The bidder exclusion effect also provides a bound on revenue losses due to
mergers between bidders with private values. This argument requires additional
steps given that mergers may result in increased production efficiencies and hence
an increased willingness to pay of the merged entity. If the merger does not decrease bidders’ values, revenue should be at least as great after a merger between
two random bidders as after excluding a random bidder. We state the result for the
general case of asymmetric bidders. In auctions where Pn ⊂ N is the set of participants, let (Vi )i∈ Pn denote values before a merger. When bidders i and j merge,
let Mk denote the value of bidder k 6= i, j, and Mi,j denote the value of the merged
entity.
Assumption 4. Mergers do not decrease values: When bidders i and j merge, Mk ≥ Vk
for all k 6= i, j, and Mi,j ≥ max{Vi , Vj }.
Proposition 9. In ascending auctions with private values and no reserve price where
Assumptions 1 and 4 hold, then for all n > 2, ∆(n) is greater than or equal to the decrease
in expected revenue from two randomly selected bidders merging.
Proof. We follow the notation from Appendix E. In addition, in auctions where
i∼ j

n
Pn is the set of entrants, if i, j ∈ Pn were to merge we let FnP−
2:n−1 denote the dis-

tribution of the second-highest value of the unmerged and merged entities, i.e. of

{ Mk }k6=i,j ∪ { Mi,j }.
Consider an n bidder auction with participants Pn . For any v ∈ R,
n
FnP−
2:n−1 ( v ) =

1
Pn \{i }| Pn
Fn−
∑
2:n−1 ( v )
n i∈ P
n

≥

1
1
∑
n i∈ P n − 1
n

∑

j∈ Pn \i

i∼ j

n
FnP−
2:n−1 ( v )

THE BIDDER EXCLUSION EFFECT

51

n
The first equality follows from the definition of FnP−
2:n−1 . The second equality fol-

lows because by the assumption that mergers do not decrease values, for every
j 6= i, the second-highest term in {Vk }k6=i is less than the second-highest term in

{ Mk }k6=i,j ∪ { Mi,j }. Therefore the distribution of the second-highest value after
dropping one of the n bidders in Pn uniformly at random is first order stochastically dominated by the distribution of the second-highest value when two bidders are selected to merge at random. It follows that the bidder exclusion effect
is greater than the decrease in expected revenue if two randomly selected bidders
merge. This holds conditional on each set of entrants Pn , so it also holds unconditionally, averaging over all Pn , yielding the result.



In practice it is likely that bidders are not randomly matched to merge or to
form bidding rings, and in these cases the loss in expected revenue may exceed
than the bidder exclusion effect.39 However, the expected loss in seller revenue
between a no-reserve auction with no collusion or mergers and one with collusion
or a merger of two non-random bidders is bounded above by the expectation of the
gap between the second and third order statistics of bids, E( Bn−1:n − Bn−2:n ). If the
number of bidders is unobserved, the average revenue loss due can be bounded
by averaging over all (unobserved) realizations of N.40
In the timber auctions example of Section 6—a setting in which Baldwin, Marshall, and Richard (1997) point out that accusations of collusion are historically
quite common—a bound on the fall in revenue from two random bidders colluding or merging is given by the bidder exclusion effect estimate of 13%. A bound on
the loss in seller revenue when instead two non-random bidders form a bidding
39Consider the example of bidders 1,2 and 3, with values 0,1, and 1. Assume bidders 2 and 3

merge, forming a bidder with value 1. The drop in revenue from the merger is 1, which is larger
than the bidder exclusion effect of 23 . Similarly, if bidders know their valuations prior to forming a
bidding ring, bidders among the n − 2 lowest values would have little incentive to collude among
themselves. Collusion among the two highest bidders, on the other hand, would lower the auction
price to the third order statistic.
40This approach to bounding the loss due to collusion or mergers does not allow one to estimate
the loss due to collusive actions or mergers which have already occurred, but rather counterfactual
impacts which additional collusion or mergers would entail. Also, the above approach extends
easily to bidding rings or mergers of size larger than two.

52

COEY, LARSEN, AND SWEENEY

ring can be recovered simply by scaling the values in Figure 1 by a factor of n/2,
yielding the expected gap between the second and third order statistics.

