                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PRECAUTIONARY SAVING OF CHINESE AND U.S. HOUSEHOLDS

                                             Horag Choi
                                           Steven Lugauer
                                           Nelson C. Mark

                                        Working Paper 20527
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20527


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Horag Choi, Steven Lugauer, and Nelson C. Mark. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Precautionary Saving of Chinese and U.S. Households
Horag Choi, Steven Lugauer, and Nelson C. Mark
NBER Working Paper No. 20527
September 2014
JEL No. E21,F4

                                              ABSTRACT

We employ a model of precautionary saving to study why household saving rates are so high in China
and so low in the US. The use of recursive preferences gives a convenient decomposition of saving
into precautionary and non precautionary components. This decomposition indicates that over 80 percent
of China's saving rate and nearly all of the US saving arises from the precautionary motive. The difference
in the income growth rate between China and the US is vastly more important for explaining saving
rate differences than differences in income risk. We estimate the preference parameters and find that
Chinese and US households are more similar in their attitude toward risk than in their intertemporal
substitutability of consumption.


Horag Choi                                           Nelson C. Mark
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Monash University                                    University of Notre Dame
900 Dandenong Road                                   434 Flanner
Caulfield East, VIC 3145                             Notre Dame, IN 46556
Australia                                            and NBER
horag.choi@monash.edu                                nmark@nd.edu

Steven Lugauer
Economics and Econometrics
University of Notre Dame
443 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
Steven.Lugauer.1@nd.edu
Figure 1: Historical Saving Rates




               26
Figure 2: Impulse Responses to Transitory Income Shock
(a) Income                                         (b) Consumption




 (c) Assets                                     (d) Saving-Income Ratio




                         27
Figure 3: Impulse Responses to Permanent Income Shock
(a) Income                                        (b) Consumption




(c) Assets                                    (d) Saving-Income Ratio




                         28
