NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEBT RELIEF AND DEBTOR OUTCOMES:
MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF CONSUMER BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Will Dobbie
Jae Song
Working Paper 20520
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20520
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

We are extremely grateful to Raj Chetty, Roland Fryer, Edward Glaeser, and Lawrence Katz at Harvard,
and Gerald Ray and David Foster at the Social Security Administration for their help and support.
We also thank Tal Gross, Matthew Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang for providing the bankruptcy data
used in this analysis, and Joseph Altonji, Sam Asher, Adrien Auclert, David Autor, Lanier Benkard,
David Deming, Joseph Doyle, John Friedman, Peter Ganong, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Joshua Goodman,
Adam Guren, Guido Imbens, David Laibson, Robert Lawless, Adam Levitin, Brigitte Madrian, Neale
Mahoney, Sendhil Mullainathan, Antoinette Schoar, Steven Shavell, Jörg Spenkuch, Jeremy Tobacman,
Danny Yagan, Crystal Yang, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions.
Elijah De la Campa, Kwabena Donkor, Rebecca Sachs, and Jessica Wagner provided outstanding
research assistance. Financial support from the Multidisciplinary Program on Inequality and Social
Policy, the Taubman Center for State and Local Government, and the Terence M. Considine Fellowship
through the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School is gratefully
acknowledged. Correspondence can be addressed to the authors by e-mail: wdobbie@princeton.edu
[Dobbie] or jae.song@ssa.gov [Song]. Any opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and
not those of the Social Security Administration. The authors declare that they have no relevant or material
financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Will Dobbie and Jae Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection
Will Dobbie and Jae Song
NBER Working Paper No. 20520
September 2014
JEL No. J22,K35
ABSTRACT
Consumer bankruptcy is one of the largest social insurance programs in the United States, but little
is known about its impact on debtors. We use 500,000 bankruptcy filings matched to administrative
tax and foreclosure data to estimate the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on subsequent
outcomes. Exploiting the random assignment of bankruptcy filings to judges, we find that Chapter
13 protection increases annual earnings by $5,562, decreases five-year mortality by 1.2 percentage
points, and decreases five-year foreclosure rates by 19.1 percentage points. These results come primarily
from the deterioration of outcomes among dismissed filers, not gains by granted filers.
Will Dobbie
Industrial Relations Section
Princeton University
Firestone Library
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
and NBER
wdobbie@princeton.edu
Jae Song
Social Security Administration
Office of Disability Adjudication
and Review
5107 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1400
Falls Church, VA 22041
jae.song@ssa.gov

“The Bankruptcy Act is...of public as well as private interest, in that it gives to the
honest but unfortunate debtor...a new opportunity in life and a clear field for future
effort, unhampered by the pressure and discouragement of pre-existing debt.”
- U.S. Supreme Court, Local Loan Co. v. Hunt, 292 U.S. 234 (1934)
In 2010, 1.5 million Americans filed for over $450 billion in debt relief through the consumer
bankruptcy system.1 American households receive more resources through the bankruptcy system
than through all state unemployment insurance programs combined (Lefgren, McIntyre, and Miller
2010), with nearly one in ten American households having filed for bankruptcy at some point
(Stavins 2000). The U.S. bankruptcy system is also among the most generous in the world, allowing
debtors to choose between Chapter 7 bankruptcy that provides debt relief and protection from wage
garnishment in exchange for a debtor’s non-exempt assets, and Chapter 13 bankruptcy that adds
the protection of most assets in exchange for a partial repayment of debt.
Despite providing billions of dollars in debt relief each year, it is not clear how bankruptcy protection impacts debtors. In theory, bankruptcy protection increases an individual’s incentive to work
and prevents any sharp drops in consumption that may have important long-term consequences,
such as becoming sick due to the lack of medical care or losing one’s home through foreclosure.
Yet, in practice, households work about the same number of hours (Han and Li 2007), accumulate less wealth (Han and Li 2011), and have less access to credit (Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump and
Montoriol-Garriga 2009) after receiving bankruptcy protection, leading some to conclude that the
benefits of debt relief have been overstated (Porter and Thorne 2006). The lack of demonstrable
benefits, combined with a rapid increase in the number of bankruptcy filings, led Congress to enact
new barriers to filing in the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act.
Empirically estimating the impact of bankruptcy protection has been complicated by two important issues. First, there is little information on the long-term outcomes of most bankruptcy filers.
Bankruptcy filers are not tracked in a systematic way after filing and datasets such as the PSID
and NLSY include only a few hundred bankrupt households. Second, most comparisons are biased
due to selection and endogeneity problems. Bankruptcy filers are likely to have had worse outcomes
even before filing, biasing cross-sectional comparisons (e.g. Han and Li 2007, 2011), and most proximate causes of bankruptcy such as job loss and health shocks also impact later outcomes, biasing
within-individual comparisons (e.g. Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2009). The
lack of an unbiased counterfactual control group may help explain why the previous literature has
found little evidence that bankruptcy protection benefits debtors.
In this paper, we use a new dataset linking 500,000 bankruptcy filings to administrative tax
records from the Social Security Administration (SSA) and administrative foreclosure records to
estimate the causal effect of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on subsequent earnings, mortality,
and home foreclosure. Our empirical strategy exploits the fact that most U.S. bankruptcy courts use
1

Non-business Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filing statistics are available at
http://www.uscourts.gov/uscourts/Statistics/BankruptcyStatistics/BAPCPA/2010/Table1A.pdf
http://www.uscourts.gov/uscourts/Statistics/BankruptcyStatistics/BAPCPA/2010/Table1D.pdf

1

a blind rotation system to assign cases to judges, effectively randomizing filers to judges within each
office. Moreover, while there are uniform criteria by which a judge may dismiss a bankruptcy filing,
there is significant variation in the interpretation of these criteria across judges (Sullivan, Warren,
and Westbrook 1994, Norberg and Compo 2007, Chang and Schoar 2008). As a result, otherwise identical filers are assigned to judges with substantially different rates of granting bankruptcy
protection.
Using these differences in judge leniency as an instrumental variable for bankruptcy protection,
we are able to identify the ex-post impact of Chapter 13 on the marginal recipient of protection –
filers whose bankruptcy decision is altered by the judge assignment due to disagreement on whether
or not they should receive bankruptcy protection. The identified parameter holds fixed any exante impacts of bankruptcy, such as over-borrowing, moral hazard in the workplace (White 2011),
entrepreneurial risk-taking (Fan and White 2003, Armour and Cumming 2008), or the crowding out
of formal insurance (Mahoney 2012). Our empirical strategy is similar to Kling (2006), which uses
the random assignment of judges to estimate the ex-post impact of sentence length on earnings, and
subsequent research that estimates the ex-post effects of foster care (Doyle 2007, 2008), juvenile
incarceration (Aizer and Doyle 2013), corporate bankruptcy (Chang and Schoar 2008), temporaryhelp employment (Autor and Houseman 2010), and Disability Insurance (French and Song 2011,
Maestas, Mullen, and Strand 2013).
In our empirical analysis, we find compelling evidence that Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection
benefits debtors. Over the first five post-filing years, Chapter 13 protection increases the marginal
recipient’s annual earnings by $5,562, a 25.1 percent increase from the pre-filing mean. Employment
increases by 6.8 percentage points over the same time period, an 8.3 percent increase. Five-year
mortality decreases by 1.2 percentage points, a 30.0 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mortality rate, and five-year home foreclosure rates decrease by 19.1 percentage points, a more than
100 percent decrease from the dismissed filer foreclosure rate. There is also evidence that Chapter
13 protection deceases the receipt of Supplemental Security Income (SSI), although there is little
to no impact on 401k contributions and the receipt of Disability Insurance (DI). Descriptive results
suggest that the estimated impacts come from the deterioration of outcomes among dismissed filers,
not gains by granted filers. Filers granted bankruptcy protection have similar pre- and post-filing
earnings. In contrast, dismissed filers experience large and persistent drops in earnings after filing
for bankruptcy.
We find evidence of two mechanisms through which bankruptcy protection benefits filers. First,
we find that the impact of Chapter 13 protection is larger when creditors are allowed to garnish a
debtor’s earnings. Exploiting within- and across-state variation in the marginal garnishment rate,
we find that the implied earnings elasticity with respect to potential garnishment is 0.94. These
results are consistent with the idea that bankruptcy protection maintains the incentive to work
by preventing an increase in the effective marginal tax rate on earnings. Second, we find results
suggesting that Chapter 13 protection helps to maintain economic stability by reducing foreclosures
and by reducing strategic moves to evade creditors. The marginal recipient of Chapter 13 protection

2

is 24.6 percentage points more likely to work in his or her pre-filing job, 23.8 percentage points more
likely to work in the same industry, and 15.3 percentage points more likely to work in the same
state.
There are three important caveats to our analysis. First, our identification strategy measures the
effect of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the marginal recipient. It is possible that the impact
of Chapter 13 protection is different for filers who are not on the margin of receipt. To partially
address this issue, we estimate marginal treatment effects (MTEs) that measure the change in
outcomes for the marginal recipient of bankruptcy protection as we move from more strict judges to
more lenient judges. The MTE results suggest that the effects of Chapter 13 protection are slightly
larger for less deserving filers. Second, we are only able to use our instrumental variables strategy in
bankruptcy offices that randomly assign filings to judges. While our instrumental variables sample
is broadly similar to the full sample of Chapter 13 filers, it is possible that the effect of bankruptcy
may differ in the two samples. To provide some evidence on this issue, we estimate the impact
of Chapter 13 in both samples using an event study methodology that does not rely on random
assignment. We find that the impact of Chapter 13 protection is similar in our instrumental variables
and full samples, though the point estimates are somewhat smaller in our full sample. Third, we are
unable to use our instrumental variables strategy to estimate the impact of Chapter 7 bankruptcy
protection, which make up approximately 75 percent of all bankruptcy filings. Using our event
study design, we find that the effect of Chapter 7 protection is more modest than that of Chapter
13 protection. Filers granted Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection earn $1,639 to $1,936 more than
dismissed filers over the first five post-filing years and are 2.7 percentage points more likely to be
employed over the same time period. Filers granted Chapter 7 also have five-year foreclosure rates
that are 1.7 percentage points lower than dismissed filers, but are neither more nor less likely to be
deceased after five years compared to dismissed filers.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I provides a brief overview of the
consumer bankruptcy system in the United States. Section II describes our data and provides summary statistics. Section III presents a stylized model that motivates our empirical exercise. Section
IV describes our empirical strategy. Section V estimates the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection on labor supply, mortality, and home foreclosure, and Section VI concludes.

I. Consumer Bankruptcy in the U.S.
A. Overview
Bankruptcy is the legal process to resolve unpaid debts. In the United States, individual debtors
are allowed to choose between Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection.2
2

The most commonly reported cause of bankruptcy is an unexpected income or expense shock. In a hand-collected
sample of bankruptcy filers, 67.5 percent of filers report job loss as a precipitating factor, 22.1 percent report family
issues such as divorce, and 19.3 report medical expenses (Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook 2000), with other work
suggesting a somewhat larger role for medical expenses (Domowitz and Sartain 1999, Warren, Sullivan, and Jacoby
2000, Himmelstein et al. 2009). Using similar data from PSID, Fay, Hurst, and White (2002) find that households
are more likely to file for bankruptcy protection when there are larger financial benefits to doing so, and that there

3

Under Chapter 7, debtors forfeit all non-exempt assets in exchange for a discharge of eligible
debts and protection from future wage garnishment. Nearly all unsecured debts are eligible for
discharge under Chapter 7, including credit card debt, installment loans, medical debt, unpaid rent
and utility bills, tort judgments, and business debt. Student loans, child support obligations, and
debts incurred by fraud cannot be discharged under Chapter 7, and secured debts such as mortgages,
home equity loans, and automobile loans can only be discharged if debtors give up the collateral. As
most debtors have little non-exempt wealth or can move all non-exempt wealth into exempt assets
before filing, the average repayment rate under Chapter 7 is only about one percent (Sullivan et
al. 1989). Chapter 7 is chosen by the majority of filers in the United States, with 79.8 percent of
debtors in our data filing under Chapter 7.
Chapter 7 cases begin with the debtor filing a bankruptcy petition, a statement of financial
affairs, a copy of his or her most recent tax return, executory contracts and unexpired leases, and
schedules of current income, expenditures, and assets and liabilities. The assigned bankruptcy
trustee then holds a meeting with the debtor to ensure that the debtor is aware of the potential
adverse consequences of bankruptcy and to flag any potential issues for the bankruptcy judge. The
bankruptcy judge will confirm or dismiss the application using the information from the filing and
the trustee’s report. If the filing is confirmed, the trustee liquidates the debtor’s property and splits
it among the creditors. If the filing is dismissed, the debtor must exit the bankruptcy system and
may not refile under either chapter for at least six years. In our data, 98.4 percent of Chapter 7
filings ending with a discharge of debt.
Under Chapter 13, filers propose a three- to five-year plan to repay part of their unsecured debt in
exchange for a discharge of the remaining unsecured debt, protection from future wage garnishment,
and protection of most assets. For example, Chapter 13 allows debtors to retain assets pledged as
collateral by including the collateral amount in the repayment plan. Chapter 13 also allows debtors
to avoid home foreclosure by including any mortgage arrears in the repayment plan, with the original
mortgage reinstated after completion of the plan. Seventy percent of dismissed Chapter 13 filers
report that avoiding foreclosure is their principal reason for choosing to file under Chapter 13 (Porter
2011), with 71 percent of filers from a sample of Delaware cases including mortgage arrears in their
repayment plans, 41 percent including car loans, and 38 percent including priority debt (White and
Zhu 2010).
Chapter 13 cases begin with the debtor filing a repayment plan and the paperwork described
above. After a meeting between the debtor and bankruptcy trustee, the bankruptcy judge decides
whether the repayment plan is feasible and meets the standards for confirmation set forth in the
Bankruptcy Code.3 If the judge confirms the repayment plan, the debtor makes regular payments
to the trustee until the plan is complete. The judge may dismiss or convert the case to Chapter 7 if
is little impact of adverse shocks such as unemployment or divorce of the filing after conditioning on the financial
benefits.
3
There is typically one Chapter 13 bankruptcy trustee that works with all judges in an office. If an office has
a particularly high Chapter 13 caseload, judges may have their own Chapter 13 trustee. Chapter 7 trustees are
randomly assigned in a process that is independent from the judge assignment.

4

the debtor fails to make any payments, fails to pay any post-filing domestic support obligations, or
fails to make required tax filings during the case. In our data, 48.8 percent of Chapter 13 filings end
with a discharge of debt. If a Chapter 13 filing is dismissed, debtors may refile for either Chapter 7
or Chapter 13 after only 180 days. While almost no dismissed Chapter 13 filers in our sample refile
under Chapter 13, approximately 20 percent choose to refile under Chapter 7. Thus, we estimate the
impact of receiving Chapter 13 protection relative to both no bankruptcy protection and protection
via Chapter 7. All of our estimates should be interpreted with this counterfactual in mind.
B. U.S. Bankruptcy Courts
There are 94 Federal bankruptcy courts in the United States, with at least one court in each state,
the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Each bankruptcy court hears all cases originating from
counties in its jurisdiction. Bankruptcy courts are often further divided into offices that hear all
cases originating from a subset of counties in the court’s jurisdiction. Appendix Figure 1 displays
the 72 courts and 205 offices that we have data for. The median court in our sample is divided into
three offices, with little systematic pattern to the number of offices in each office.
Bankruptcy judges are appointed to fourteen-year terms by the court of appeals in their judicial
district. Bankruptcy judges only hear cases filed in their court, but often hear cases across multiple
offices within their court. Within each bankruptcy office, cases are typically assigned to judges using
a random number generator or a blind rotation system.
The assigned bankruptcy judge decides any and all matters connected to a case, including
whether or not to dismiss the filing. The most common reason a filing is dismissed is that it
constitutes a “substantial abuse” of the bankruptcy process, typically meaning that a debtor should
be able to repay his or her debts without bankruptcy protection. Other common reasons for dismissal
include a filing missing important information, a Chapter 13 repayment plan being infeasible, or a
Chapter 13 repayment plan being too small (Hynes 2004). In Section IV, we discuss how we use
systematic differences in the probability that a judge dismisses a filing to estimate the causal impact
of bankruptcy protection. These measured differences in judge behavior are likely to be the result
of differences in how judges interpret the criteria listed above, implying that more lenient judges
may confirm repayment plans that are more generous to debtors or that are less feasible.
Despite the pivotal role of bankruptcy judges, debtors typically have only limited involvement
with the assigned judge. Chapter 7 filers do not appear before a judge unless a creditor or trustee
raises an objection. Chapter 13 filers appear before the bankruptcy judge at the plan confirmation hearing, but all other administrative aspects of the bankruptcy process are conducted by the
bankruptcy trustee, not the bankruptcy judge.
There is considerable variation in the number of bankruptcy judges in each bankruptcy court
and office, with courts serving more populous regions tending to have more judges. Appendix Figure
1 displays the number of Chapter 13 bankruptcy judges in each office that we have data for. Of the
205 offices in our sample, 110 have only one Chapter 13 judge, 52 have two Chapter 13 judges, 25
have three Chapter 13 judges, and 18 have four or more Chapter 13 judges.
5

C. Potential Benefits of Bankruptcy Protection
There are at least two reasons debtors may benefit from bankruptcy protection. First, bankruptcy
protection may maintain the incentive to work by protecting future wages from garnishment. Wage
garnishments occur when an employer is compelled by a court order to withhold a portion of an
employee’s earnings to repay a particular debt. Federal law limits the amount that may be garnished
in any one week to the lesser of 25 percent of weekly disposable earnings, or the amount by which
weekly disposable earnings exceed 30 times the federal minimum wage. Creditors are therefore able
to garnish 25 percent of each additional dollar of earnings above 40 times the federal minimum
wage, 100 percent of earnings between 30 and 40 times the federal minimum wage, and nothing
on earnings below 30 times the federal minimum wage.4 Bankruptcy protection stops all current
garnishment orders and prevents any future garnishment orders on discharged debt, increasing the
marginal return to work. Consistent with this mechanism, the U.S. Supreme Court argued in Local
Loan Co. v. Hunt (1934) that eliminating these wage garnishments is “[o]ne of the primary purposes
of the Bankruptcy Act,” as “[f]rom the viewpoint of the wage earner, there is little difference between
not earning at all and earning wholly for a creditor.”
Second, bankruptcy protection may prevent economic instability. Creditors have a number of
options to collect unpaid debts if a debtor has not filed for bankruptcy protection or after a case is
dismissed, including the wage garnishment orders discussed above, collection letters or phone calls,
in-person visits at home or work, and the seizing of assets through a court order (Hynes, Dawsey,
and Ausubel 2009). Debtors can make these collection efforts more difficult by ignoring collection
letters and calls, changing their telephone number, or moving without leaving a forwarding address.
Debtors can also leave the formal banking system to hide their assets from seizure, change jobs to
force creditors to reinstate a garnishment order, or work less so that their earnings are not subject
to garnishment. Thus, bankruptcy protection may prevent economic instability by helping debtors
avoid the kinds of sharp drops in consumption that have important long-term consequences, such as
losing one’s home through foreclosure or becoming sick due to the lack of medical care. Bankruptcy
protection may also reduce the incentive to strategically move across state lines or change jobs to
avoid creditors.
There are also many reasons to believe that bankruptcy protection will have little impact on
debtors. It is possible that financially distressed households have highly inelastic labor supply, or
that debt relief will reduce the incentive to work through the income effect. It is also possible that
debtors are able to avoid most debt collection efforts at a relatively low cost, or that garnishment
amounts are too low to impact labor supply decisions. Finally, it is possible that many bankruptcy
filers are in financial distress due to low human capital or poor health that the bankruptcy system
is unable to remedy.

4

Federal law allows garnishments of up to 50 percent of a debtor’s disposable earnings for payment related to
child support or alimony if the worker is supporting another spouse or child, and up to 60 percent if the worker is
not. An additional five percent may be garnished for court order payments more than 12 weeks in arrears.

6

II. Data
To estimate the impact of bankruptcy protection on debtors, we merge information from individual
bankruptcy filings, administrative tax records from the Social Security Administration (SSA), and
proprietary real estate records from the data aggregator DataQuick.
Bankruptcy records are available from 1992 to 2009 for the 72 federal bankruptcy courts that
allow full electronic access to their dockets. These data represent approximately three quarters of
all bankruptcy filings during this period. Each record in our bankruptcy data contains information
on the Chapter filed, filing date, court, office, outcome, the judge and trustee assigned to each
filing, whether the filing includes any assets, and whether the filing fee was paid immediately or
in installments. The data also contain information on each debtor’s name, address, and last four
digits of each debtor’s social security number.
We make five restrictions to our estimation sample. First, we drop 110 offices that only have
a single Chapter 13 bankruptcy judge, as there is no variation in judge leniency that allows us to
estimate the impact of Chapter 13 protection. Second, we drop all filings originating from counties
that assign all cases to a single judge, as these filings are not randomly assigned. Third, we drop
office by year bins where a retiring judge’s cases were reassigned with no documentation as to the
original judge. Fourth, we drop office by year by judge bins with fewer than ten cases. Finally, we
restrict the sample to first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 to ensure that we have five or more
years of post-filing outcomes for all debtors and that all filings occurred before the 2005 Bankruptcy
Reform Act came into effect.
These sample restrictions leave us with 534,980 Chapter 13 filings in 42 offices and 31 bankruptcy
courts. These data represent just over 26 percent of the available Chapter 13 filings in the analysis
period. The final sample includes 314 office by year observations, 112 office by judge observations,
and 758 office-year-judge observations. The number of cases in each office-year-judge bin ranges
from 13 to 3,423. The median number of cases in each office-year-judge bin is 1,048. Appendix
Table 1 provides additional details on each of the offices in our estimation sample. Appendix Figures
3 and 4 display the distribution of office-year-judge bins and office-year-judge leniency.
To explore the impact of bankruptcy protection on subsequent labor supply and mortality, we
matched the bankruptcy records to administrative tax records from the SSA. The SSA data are
remarkably complete and include every individual who has ever acquired a SSN, including those
who are institutionalized. Illegal immigrants without a valid SSN are not included in these data.
Information on earnings and employment comes from annual W-2s. Individuals with no W-2 in any
particular year are assumed to have had no earnings in that year. Individuals with zero earnings
are included in all regressions throughout the paper. All dollar amounts are in terms of year 2000
dollars.
We measure non-earnings outcomes using data from three sources. Information on annual 401k
contributions, job location, and firm characteristics comes from annual W-2s. Information on DI
and SSI receipt comes from the Master Beneficiary Record. Information on mortality comes from
the Death Master File that is compiled by the SSA, and covers deaths occurring anywhere in the
7

United States.
We match the bankruptcy data to the SSA records using last name and the last four digits of the
filer’s social security number. We were able to successfully match 91.6 percent of the bankruptcy
records, with nearly all of the unmatched records resulting from a shared name and last four digits
of the social security number in the SSA data. The probability of being matched to the SSA data
is not significantly related to judge leniency. Our estimation sample consists of the 490,216 filers in
the matched dataset.
To explore the impact of bankruptcy protection on home foreclosures, we also matched the
bankruptcy records to proprietary real estate data purchased from DataQuick. The DataQuick
files include information on the most recent county assessment, pre-foreclosure notices, and all
home transactions. The DataQuick files are compiled by county and year, with more complete
coverage for more urban areas and more recent years. There are 280,202 Chapter 13 bankruptcy
filers matched to the SSA data living in county by year bins covered by the DataQuick records. We
matched these filers to the DataQuick records using last name and filing address. We were able
to successfully match 48.5 percent of filers to either a past home transaction or a current home
assessment. In a random sample of approximately 3,000 Chapter 13 filings between 1999 and 2005,
Agarwal et al. (2010) find that 51 percent of Chapter 13 filers are homeowners, suggesting that we
are finding most homeowners in our data.5 Importantly, the probability of being matched to the
DataQuick data is not related to judge leniency.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 and our
estimation sample of first-time filers randomly assigned to judges between 1992 and 2005. Consistent
with previous research on bankruptcy filers, 98.4 percent of Chapter 7 filers in our data are granted
bankruptcy protection, compared to 48.8 percent of Chapter 13 filers. Sixty percent of Chapter 7
filers are male, 74.2 percent are white, and 13.3 percent are black. For Chapter 13, 63.4 percent of
filers are male, 55.8 percent are white, and 33.9 percent are black.
The typical bankruptcy filer earns far less than the average American worker. In the five years
before filing, 80.6 percent of Chapter 7 filers are employed on average, with average annual earnings
of just $21,090. Eighty percent of Chapter 13 filers are employed, earning $22,333 annually in the
five years before filing. Over the same five year time period, 4.7 percent of Chapter 7 filers receive
DI, and 9.7 percent receive SSI. Just over four percent of Chapter 13 filers receive DI, and 8.4
percent receive SSI.
Column 3 of Table 1 presents summary statistics for filers in our estimation sample. The
estimation sample is very similar to the full sample of filers. Forty-four point eight percent of
Chapter 13 filers in our sample are granted bankruptcy protection, 4.0 percentage points less than
the full sample. Sixty point nine percent of filers in our sample are male, 2.5 percentage points less
5
Filers are classified as homeowners if they list real property on Schedule A of the bankruptcy form. The Chapter
13 homeownership rate was provided directly by the authors. There is also evidence that the fraction of Chapter
13 filers who are homeowners has increased in recent years. Lawless et al. (2008) find that 69.6 percent of Chapter
13 filers are homeowners in a random sample of filers in 2007, with other, more selected survey samples suggesting
homeownership rates of between 70 and 96 percent in the post-2005 period (White and Zhu 2010, Porter 2011).

8

than the full sample. 401k contributions are also $33 per year higher in the estimation sample, while
average firm wages are $3,874 higher. Conversely, filers in our estimation sample are statistically
indistinguishable from the full sample with regard to age, ethnic background, employment, earnings,
job tenure, the probability of being matched to a home in the DataQuick files, and the probability
of receiving DI or SSI.

III. Model
In this section, we motivate our empirical analysis by describing a simple model of how consumer
bankruptcy functions as a social insurance mechanism. The model illustrates the trade-off between
the consumption smoothing benefits provided by bankruptcy protection with the increased borrowing costs that result from the higher risk of default. We then consider how the estimates of the
effect of bankruptcy protection on labor supply can shed light on those benefits and costs.
A. Bankruptcy as Social Insurance
Consider a continuum of risk averse agents who experience an expense shock π distributed π ∼ [π, π].
Each agent pays for the expense shock through an existing credit line at interest rate r. We assume
that agents borrow exactly π and that there is a single interest rate for all all agents.6
Agents who are not eligible for bankruptcy protection repay (1 + r)π to lenders. Agents who are
eligible for bankruptcy protection repay (1 + r)αb wl, where αb wl < π for all agents. We assume that
there are no other direct or indirect costs of bankruptcy, and that all agents eligible for bankruptcy
protection will file for bankruptcy.
Each agent’s utility is defined as U (c) − ψ(l), where consumption c equals wage earnings wl
minus debt repayment (1 + r)π or (1 + r)αb wl. We assume that U is concave and ψ is convex.
We begin with the assumption that l is fixed for all agents to highlight the insurance aspects of
bankruptcy protection. In the next section, we allow agents to choose labor supply to show how
bankruptcy protection may impact earnings. We assume wages w are fixed throughout.
The lending market is perfectly competitive, leading to no profits in equilibrium. We normalize
the shadow cost of bank funds to zero so that the expected cost of lending equals the expected
repayment amount:
Z

π

Z

π∗

π dπ =
π

Z

π

(1 + r)π dπ +
π∗

π

(1 + r)αb wl dπ

(1)

where π ∗ is the cutoff for bankruptcy eligibility chosen by the social planner. Equation (1) yields
the familiar result that a more restrictive bankruptcy system decreases borrowing costs as more
6

The assumption that agents borrow exactly π simplifies the model without affecting the key results. We further
simplify the model by assuming that agents only face expense risk that is unlikely to be covered by existing social
insurance mechanisms, such as Unemployment Insurance. Our model is therefore unable to shed light on the interaction of bankruptcy protection and these other forms of social insurance. The derivation of an optimal social insurance
system with conceptually distinct types of risk remains an important area for future work. See Jackson (1986) and
Posner (1995) for discussion of the relationship between bankruptcy and government safety net programs, and Rea
(1984) for discussion of why private consumption insurance does not exist in the United States.

9

individuals fully repay their debts:
(1 + r)(π ∗ − αb wl)
∂r
=
−
<0
R
Rπ
π∗
∂π ∗
π dπ + ∗ αb wl dπ
π

(2)

π

The sensitivity of borrowing costs to the bankruptcy eligibility cutoff is increasing in the difference
between what creditors are repaid by the marginal non-filer and marginal filer (π ∗ − αb wl). This is
because a larger change in r is needed to compensate creditors for the lost revenue associated with
a more lenient bankruptcy cutoff when the difference in the amount repaid is large. Conversely,
the sensitivity of borrowing
eligibility cutoff is decreasing in the expected
 R ∗ costsR to the bankruptcy

π
π
repayment amount
π π dπ + π ∗ αb wl dπ , as a smaller change in r is needed to compensate
creditors for the lost revenue associated with a more lenient bankruptcy cutoff when the total
repayment amount is large.
The social planner chooses the bankruptcy eligibility cutoff π ∗ , where agents are eligible for
bankruptcy protection iff π > π ∗ . Since all agents are identical ex-ante, the social welfare function
is the same as the representative consumer’s expected utility function:
Z

π∗

∗

Z

π

U (wl − (1 + r(π ))π) − ψ(l) dπ +
π

π∗

U (wl − (1 + r(π ∗ ))αb wl) − ψ(l) dπ

(3)

The first order condition for equation (3) equates the benefit of bankruptcy protection for the
marginal recipient with the marginal cost of providing bankruptcy:


 

U (wl − (1 + r)αb wl) − ψ(l) − U (wl − (1 + r)π ∗ ) − ψ(l) =
!
Z π∗
Z π
∂r
−
αb wlUc (wl − (1 + r)αb wl) dπ
(4)
πUc (wl − (1 + r)π) dπ +
∂π ∗
π∗
π

where Uc indicates the first derivatives with respect to consumption.
Equation (4) highlights the trade-off between the consumption smoothing benefits provided by
bankruptcy protection when shocks are large (π > π ∗ ) and the increased costs of self-insurance
when shocks are small (π < π ∗ ). This trade-off is at the heart of an important literature measuring
the effect of consumer bankruptcy on welfare using quantitative models of the credit market (e.g.
Athreya 2002, Li and Sarte 2006, Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt 2007, Chatterjee and Gordon
2012). An important limitation of this literature has been the lack of empirical evidence on the
magnitude of both the benefits provided by bankruptcy protection for the marginal recipient and
the costs associated with more expensive borrowing. There is also relatively little information on the
mechanisms through which bankruptcy protection benefits debtors, forcing the previous literature
to make strong assumptions, such as abstracting away from the production side of the economy (e.g.
Athreya 2002, Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt 2007), assuming that labor supply is only influenced
by the aggregate capital stock (e.g. Li and Sarte 2006), or assuming that labor supply is extremely
inelastic (e.g. Chatterjee and Gordon 2012).

10

B. Bankruptcy and Labor Supply
Next, we consider how estimates of the impact of bankruptcy protection on labor supply shed
light on the benefits and costs of the consumer bankruptcy system as described by equation (4).
In the simple setup described above, bankruptcy protection unambiguously decreases labor supply
through both substitution and wealth effects. However, the assumption that agents fully repay their
debts outside of the bankruptcy system is unlikely to hold in practice given that the majority of
debt write-offs occur outside of the bankruptcy system (Hynes, Dawsey, and Ausubel 2009). We
therefore make the more realistic assumption that agents who do not receive bankruptcy protection
default on their debt and are subject to wage garnishment at rate αg . The wage garnishment rate
is assumed to be larger than the bankruptcy repayment rate αg > αb , implying that bankruptcy
protection reduces the implicit tax on earnings associated with default. We also assume that the
amount repaid through garnishment (1 + r)αg wl is less than the amount borrowed π for all agents.
Each agent’s labor supply is described by the following first order condition:
w(1 − (1 + r)α) · Ul (wl(1 − (1 + r)α)) = ψl (l)

(5)

where Ul and ψl indicate first derivatives with respect to labor supply, and α is the implicit tax on
earnings associated with either wage garnishment or bankruptcy. Equation (5) yields the familiar
result that a reduction in the implicit tax rate α through bankruptcy protection has an ambiguous
impact on labor supply due to opposing substitution and wealth effects:
∂l
(1 + r)wUl
(1 + r)(1 − (1 + r)α)w2 lUlα
=
+
≶0
∂α
[(1 − (1 + r)α)w]2 Ull − ψll
[(1 − (1 + r)α)w]2 Ull − ψll

(6)

Thus, bankruptcy protection increases the earnings of the marginal recipient if the substitution
effect associated with the reduced tax on earnings dominates. Conversely, bankruptcy protection
decreases the earnings of the marginal recipient if the marginal non-recipient is not subject to wage
garnishment or the wealth effect dominates. The effect of bankruptcy protection on labor supply is
therefore an empirical question.
Labor supply estimates for the marginal recipient of bankruptcy protection influence the benefits
and costs of the consumer bankruptcy system in at least two ways. First, any labor supply response
will change the consumption smoothing benefits provided by bankruptcy protection. If bankruptcy
protection increases the marginal recipient’s earnings, the difference between consumption of the
marginal filer and marginal non-filer is increased, as are the consumption smoothing benefits of
bankruptcy protection. The reverse holds if bankruptcy has a negative impact on debtor earnings.
Second, any labor supply response will change the sensitivity of borrowing costs to bankruptcy
policy and the costs associated with bankruptcy protection. If bankruptcy protection increases
the marginal recipient’s earnings, the difference in the amount repaid to creditors by the marginal
filer and marginal non-filer is reduced, decreasing the sensitivity of borrowing costs to bankruptcy
policy and lowering the cost of the bankruptcy system. The reverse again holds if bankruptcy has

11

a negative impact on debtor earnings. Thus, a positive (negative) impact of bankruptcy protection
on earnings suggests that the bankruptcy system has larger (smaller) benefits and smaller (larger)
costs than implied by models with inelastic labor supply (e.g. Athreya 2002, Livshits, MacGee, and
Tertilt 2007, Chatterjee and Gordon 2012).7

IV. Research Design
Consider a model that relates post-filing outcomes such as earnings to bankruptcy protection:
yit = α + βXi + γBankruptcyi + εit

(7)

where i denotes individuals, t is the year of observation, γ is the causal impact of bankruptcy
protection, Xi includes controls such as race and gender, and εit is noise. The problem for inference
is that OLS estimates of γ may be biased if bankruptcy protection is correlated with the unobservable
determinants of later outcomes: E[εit |Bankruptcyi ] 6= 0. For example, the most proximate causes
of bankruptcy, such as job loss and health shocks, may also impact later outcomes, biasing both
cross-sectional (e.g. Han and Li 2007, 2011) and within-individual (e.g. Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump
and Montoriol-Garriga 2009) estimates of equation (7).
We identify the causal impact of bankruptcy on debtors γ using judge leniency as an instrument
for bankruptcy protection. Intuitively, we compare the post-filings outcomes of debtors assigned
to bankruptcy judges that have different propensities to grant Chapter 13 protection, interpreting
any differences as a causal effect of the change in the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection
associated with these propensities.
Formally, we estimate the causal impact of receiving bankruptcy protection through a two-stage
least squares regression using judge leniency as an instrumental variable for bankruptcy protection.
The second stage estimating equation is:
yit = α + αot + βXi + γBankruptcyi + εit

(8)

where αot are office by month-of-filing fixed effects and Xi includes race, gender, five-year age effects,
a five-year average of baseline employment, and a five-year average of baseline earnings. The first
stage estimating equation associated with equation (8) is:
Bankruptcyit = α + αot + βXi + δσj + εit

(9)

7
In a model with endogenous borrowing, the consumer bankruptcy system increases loan demand through lower
costs of default and improved risk sharing. Borrowing distortions from the lower costs of default are likely increasing
with the benefits of filing for bankruptcy protection. As the benefits of bankruptcy protection are increasing with
the magnitude of the labor supply estimates, the distortions to borrowing behavior are also likely to be increasing
with the magnitude of the labor supply estimates. Severino, Brown, and Coates (2014) provide more direct evidence
on this issue using within-state variation in asset exemptions, finding that increased protection under the Chapter
7 bankruptcy system increases unsecured borrowing without increasing the probability of default. These results
are consistent with the consumer bankruptcy system increasing borrowing through improved risk sharing, without
significantly increasing the prevalence of adverse selection and moral hazard.

12

where σj is the systematic component of judge behavior and δ represents the impact of that judge
behavior on the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. To account for any serial correlation
across filers at the level of randomization, we cluster standard errors at the office level in both the
first and second stage regressions. Results are qualitatively similar if we cluster at the office by
judge or office by month-of-filing level.
Using an exhaustive set of judge fixed effects as an instrument for bankruptcy protection yields
a consistent two-stage least squares estimate of γ as the number of filers i → ∞, but is potentially
biased in finite samples. This bias is the result of the mechanical correlation between a filer’s
own outcomes and the estimation of that filer’s judge fixed effects. There are several potential
solutions to this own-observation issue. Jackknife IV eliminates the bias by omitting a filer’s own
observation when forming the instrument (Angrist, Imbens, and Krueger 1999). Split-sample twostage IV addresses the own-observation issue by randomly splitting the sample into two groups,
using judge tendencies in one part of the sample as an instrument for bankruptcy protection in the
other part of the sample (Angrist and Krueger 1995). Limited information maximum likelihood
(LIML) eliminates the own-observation bias by collapsing the parameter space and using maximum
likelihood to obtain a consistent estimate of the effect of bankruptcy protection.
We address the own-observation problem by using a leave-one-out measure of judge leniency as
an instrument for bankruptcy protection (Kling 2006, Chang and Schoar 2008, Doyle 2007, 2008,
Autor and Houseman 2010, French and Song 2011, Aizer and Doyle 2013, Maestas, Mullen, and
Strand 2013). Our measure of judge leniency Zicjt is defined as the leave-one-out fraction of filings
granted by judge j in year t minus the leave-one-out fraction granted in his court c in year t:
Zicjt

1
=
ncjt − 1

ncjt
X

!
(Bk ) − Bi

k=1

1
−
nct − 1

nct
X

!
(Bk ) − Bi

(10)

k=1

where i again denotes individuals, c denotes courts, j is the assigned judge, t is the year of observation, Bi is an indicator for receiving bankruptcy protection, ncjt is the number of cases seen by
a judge in year t, and nct is the number of cases seen by a court in year t. This leave-one-out procedure is essentially a reduced-form version of jackknife IV that purges the mechanical correlation
between a filer’s own outcomes and our measure of judge leniency.8 Following the literature (Kling
2006, Chang and Schoar 2008, Doyle 2007, 2008, Autor and Houseman 2010, French and Song 2011,
Aizer and Doyle 2013, Maestas, Mullen, and Strand 2013), we do not adjust our standard errors to
account for the fact that the instrument is estimated.
Consistent with past research (Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook 1994, Norberg and Compo
2007), we find considerable variation in the treatment of Chapter 13 cases within an office. The
standard deviation of Zijct is 0.030 for Chapter 13 filers in our sample. There is also significant
persistence in our measure of judge behavior. Appendix Figure 4 plots current and lagged judge
8

Appendix Table 2 presents two-stage least squares, LIML, and Jackknife IV results using judge fixed effects as
instruments for bankruptcy protection. The results are qualitatively similar to our preferred estimates presented in
Table 4.

13

discharge rates, with each point representing a separate judge by year observation. Discharge rates
are highly correlated across time, with an OLS regression relating each judge by year discharge
rate to the lagged discharge rate yielding a coefficient of 0.814. These results suggest that we are
capturing systematic differences in judge behavior, not random year to year noise.
In contrast to Chapter 13, there is almost no variation in the treatment of Chapter 7 cases across
judges within an office. The standard deviation of Zijct for Chapter 7 filers is only 0.003 in our
data, likely because almost all Chapter 7 filings are granted. This lack of variation makes it difficult
to measure the effect of Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection using our instrumental variables strategy.
In Section VE, we use an event study strategy to estimate the impact of Chapter 7 protection.
Using our reduced form measure of judge leniency Zijct as an instrument for the receipt of
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, the identified two-stage least squares parameter from equation
(8) measures the local average treatment effect of Chapter 13 for filers whose bankruptcy outcomes
are altered by judge assignment. The conditions necessary to interpret these two-stage least squares
estimates as the causal impact of Chapter 13 protection are: (1) that judge assignment is associated
with bankruptcy protection, (2) that judge assignment only impacts debtor outcomes through the
probability of receiving bankruptcy protection, and (3) that the impact of judge assignment on the
probability of receiving bankruptcy protection is monotonic across filers.
The first assumption is empirically testable. Figure 1 plots average discharge vs. our leaveone-out measure of judge leniency. The estimation sample includes first-time filers between 1992
and 2005 in the 42 offices in the 31 courts that randomly assign Chapter 13 filings to judges.
To construct the plot, we calculate mean residuals from a regression of an indicator for receiving
Chapter 13 protection on office by month-of-filing fixed effects. We then add the mean discharge rate
to the mean residual in each judge by year bin to aid in the interpretation of the scale. The resulting
scatter plot provides a non-parametric representation of the conditional expectation function, but
does not show the underlying variance in the individual-level data. The solid line and corresponding
coefficient show the best linear fit estimated on the underlying individual-level data, controlling for
office by month-of-filing fixed effects and with standard errors clustered at the office level. Table 2
presents analogous individual-level estimates with and without additional controls.
First stage results from Figure 1 and Table 2 show a large and precisely estimated relationship
between judge leniency and the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. With no filer level
controls, a one percentage point increase in Zijct increases the probability that a debtor receives
bankruptcy protection by 0.749 percentage points. Controlling for gender, race, age, and baseline
earnings, a one percentage point increase in Zijct increases the probability that a debtor receives
bankruptcy protection by 0.731 percentage points. Thus, a one standard deviation (three percentage
point) increase in judge leniency increases the likelihood of receiving Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection by about 2.2 percentage points, a 4.9 percent change from the mean. To put these magnitudes
in perspective, black filers are 9.0 percentage points less likely to receive bankruptcy protection, a
one year younger filer is 0.5 percentage points less likely, and filers with baseline earnings that are
$10,000 lower are about 0.05 percentage points less likely.

14

The probability of receiving Chapter 13 protection does not increase one-for-one with our measure of judge leniency, likely because of measurement error that attenuates the effect toward zero.
For instance, judge leniency may drift over the course of the year or fluctuate with case characteristics, reducing the accuracy of our leave-one-out measure. Nevertheless, the results from Figure 1
and Table 2 confirm that judge leniency is highly predictive of case outcomes.
Our second identifying assumption is that judge assignment only impacts debtor outcomes
through the probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. This assumption would be violated
if judge leniency is correlated with unobservable determinants of future outcomes. Table 3 presents
a series of randomization checks to partially assess the validity of this exclusion restriction. Column
2 reports results from an OLS regression of judge leniency on a filer’s age, gender, race, an indicator
for being matched to a home at baseline, and baseline earnings, employment, self-employment earnings, self-employment, 401k contributions, receipt of Disability Insurance, job tenure, and average
employer wages. Each baseline measure is the average over the five years before filing. We control
for office by month-of-filing fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. Job tenure is
associated with judge leniency at the ten percent level. None of our other baseline variables are significantly related to judge leniency, and a joint F-test of the hypothesis that all baseline differences
are equal to zero has a p-value of 0.233.
Columns 3 adds controls for predicted earnings, employment, and mortality. We predict each
outcome over the first five post-filing years using gender, race, five-year age effects, and employment
and earnings in the sixth through tenth years before bankruptcy. Job tenure is the only significant
measures, and a joint F-test that all the baseline differences listed in column 3 are equal to zero has
a p-value of 0.252.9
Column 4 presents results from our final test of random assignment. We regress each baseline
measure on an exhaustive set of judge fixed effects. Each regression controls for office by monthof-filing fixed effects. We report the p-value from a joint F-test that the judge effects are jointly
different than zero, which provides an omnibus test for the null hypothesis that filer covariates do not
differ significantly among filers assigned to judges within an office by month-of-filing combination.
The joint F-test for age has a p-value of 0.051. None of the other joint F-tests in column 4 suggest
that there is systematic non-random assignment of filings to judges.
The exclusion restriction could also be violated if judge leniency impacts future outcomes through
channels other than bankruptcy protection. For example, the exclusion restriction would be violated
9

To put the magnitude of the age and tenure correlations in Table 3 in context, we compare the implied bias
in our reduced form earnings results reported in Section VA. Controlling only for office by month fixed effects, an
OLS regression of average earnings over the first five post-filing earnings on age suggests that being a year older
is associated with earnings that are $176.86 lower. Controlling for all of the covariates listed in Table 3, being a
year older is associated with earnings that are $252.70 lower. An additional year of job tenure is associated with
earnings that are $1,917.81 higher when controlling only for office by month fixed effects, and $1,265.64 higher when
controlling for all other covariates in Table 3. Thus, a one standard deviation (three percentage point) increase in
judge leniency is associated with a -$0.000037 to $0.000037 change in earnings due to the differences in age observed
in Table 3, and a $0.002885 to $0.004430 change in earnings due to the differences in job tenure observed in Table 3.
In contrast, our reduced form results plotted in Figure 3 show that a one percentage point increase in judge leniency
is associated with a $128.55 increase in post-filing earnings. Results are similar for employment, mortality, and home
foreclosure.

15

if more lenient judges are also more likely to provide financial counseling to debtors, and that
financial counseling has an independent impact on future outcomes. If judge leniency impacts
future outcomes through any other channels, then the resulting local average treatment effect would
incorporate any additional impacts associated with judge assignment. The assumption that judges
only systematically affect debtor outcomes through bankruptcy is fundamentally untestable, and
our estimates should be interpreted with this potential caveat in mind. However, we argue that this
exclusion assumption is reasonable in our setting. Recall that bankruptcy judges typically interact
with debtors only at the confirmation hearing, while the separately assigned court trustee handles
all pre- and post-filing issues. Thus, it seems unlikely that judges would confer significant benefits
to debtors other than through their ruling on the bankruptcy filing.
Our third identifying assumption is that there is a monotonic impact of judge assignment on the
probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. The monotonicity assumption implies that being
assigned to a more (less) lenient judge does not result in a decrease (increase) in the likelihood of
receiving bankruptcy protection. This monotonicity assumption would be violated if judges differ
in the types of filings they treat more leniently. For example, the monotonicity assumption would
be invalid if some judges treat women more leniently, while other judges do not treat women more
leniently. If the monotonicity assumption is violated, our estimates from equation (8) would still be
a weighted average of marginal treatment effects, but the weights would not sum to one (Angrist,
Imbens, and Rubin 1996, Heckman and Vytlacil 2005). The monotonicity assumption is therefore
necessary to interpret our estimates as a well defined local average treatment effect. The bias away
from this local average treatment effect is an increasing function of the number of individuals for
whom the monotonicity assumption does not hold and the difference in the marginal treatment
effects for those individuals for whom the monotonicity assumption does and does not hold. The
amount of bias is also a decreasing function of the first stage relationship described by equation (9)
(Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996).10
To partially test the monotonicity assumption, Appendix Figure 5 plots judge leniency measures
that are calculated separately for each judge by gender, race, baseline income, age, and home
ownership. We also report the coefficient and standard error from an OLS regression relating each
measure of judge leniency. Consistent with our monotonicity assumption, judges exhibit remarkably
similar tendencies across observably different filers. Regressing the judge leniency for male filers on
those for female filers yields a point estimate of 0.838. For white and non-white filers, the point
estimate is 1.005, for high and low baseline earnings the coefficient is 0.998, for filers older and
younger than 40 the coefficient is 1.104, and for those matched to a home and those not matched
to a home the coefficient is 0.889. None of the results suggest that the monotonicity assumption is
invalid in our setting.

10

Small and Tan (2007), Klein (2010), de Chaisemartin (2014), and Huber and Mellace (2011) establish conditions
under which it is possible to interpret the instrumental variables estimates as a LATE for a different population when
the monotonicity assumption is violated.

16

V. The Impact of Chapter 13 Bankruptcy Protection on Labor Supply,
Mortality, and Home Foreclosure
A. Labor Supply
As a benchmark for evaluating the causal effects described below, we begin with a descriptive
analysis of granted and dismissed filers. Figure 2 plots average pre- and post-filing earnings and
employment for our estimation sample. Earnings include both wage and self-employment earnings
including zeros.11 To aid in the interpretation of the results, we plot expected outcomes calculated
using a regression of the outcome five years before filing on controls for gender, race, a quadratic
in age, a quadratic in tenure, industry fixed effects, and earnings in the previous five years. We
then predict the outcome for the four years before filing and the five years after filing using age and
tenure coefficients.
Filers granted Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection earn $5,000 to $5,500 more than dismissed
filers in the years leading up to filing. Earnings for both groups fall two to three years before
filing, with a larger dip for dismissed filers.12 The post-filing earnings of dismissed filers dip further,
falling about $4,000 below the expected trajectory five years after filing. In contrast to the large
and permanent decline in earnings experienced by dismissed filers, individuals granted bankruptcy
protection appear to have no long-term earnings losses. These descriptive trends suggest that any
causal impacts of bankruptcy protection are likely to be driven by the deterioration of outcomes
among dismissed filers, as opposed to gains by granted filers. This interpretation suggests that
bankruptcy protection mitigates the long-term consequences of financial shocks that might otherwise
harm debtors, but does not confer any benefits in the absence of a financial shock.
Reduced form estimates of the impact of judge leniency on average earnings and employment
over the first five post-filing years are presented in Figure 3. Following our first stage results from
Figure 1, we construct each plot by regressing each outcome on office by month-of-filing fixed effects,
calculating residuals, and then adding the mean outcome to each residual to facilitate interpretation
of the scale. The solid line and corresponding coefficient show the best linear fit estimated on the
underlying micro data controlling for office by month-of-filing fixed effects, with standard errors
clustered at the office level.
Figure 3 shows that being assigned to a more lenient judge significantly increases post-filing
earnings and employment. A one standard deviation (three percentage point) increase in judge
leniency increases post-filing earnings by $128.55 relative to the baseline mean of $22,115. Employ11

Appendix Table 4 displays the same information in tabular form. Appendix Figure 6 plots mean and median
earnings with and without zeros included. Median earnings are lower than mean earnings for both granted and
dismissed filers, but the same qualitative trends exist before and after filing as in Figure 2. Mean and median
earnings without zeros included also follow the same trend as Figure 2. Two-stage least squares estimates that
condition on non-zero earnings are somewhat larger than those reported here (See Appendix Table 5).
12
The fall in pre-filing earnings is likely related to the “Ashenfelter dip” – the drop in earnings among participants
in job training programs – discussed by Ashenfelter (1978), Ashenfelter and Card (1985), and Heckman and Hotz
(1989). In our context, the negative earnings shocks before bankruptcy filing may result in OLS estimates with
a non-filing control group to overstate the true gains of bankruptcy if there is mean reversion in earnings, and to
understate the impact of bankruptcy if shocks have consequences that increase over time.

17

ment over the same time period increases by 0.2 percentage points relative to the baseline mean of
81.3 percent.
Figure 4 presents corresponding two-stage least squares results measuring the causal impact of
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on earnings and employment. We use judge leniency Zijct as an
instrumental variable for bankruptcy protection, and control for gender, race, five-year age effects,
a five-year average of baseline employment, a five-year average of baseline earnings, and office by
month-of-filing fixed effects. For treatment effects in the baseline period, we control for gender, race,
five-year age effects, office by month-of-filing fixed effects, and average employment and earnings in
the years prior to the baseline year under consideration. Standard errors are clustered at the office
level throughout. We estimate the impact of bankruptcy protection for each year separately. Table
4 presents estimates pooling outcomes across the first five post-filing years.
There is a large and precisely estimated impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on postfiling earnings and employment. In the first full year after filing, the marginal recipient of Chapter 13
protection earns $6,228 more than the marginal dismissed filer. The impact of Chapter 13 protection
remains both economically and statistically significant for the first five post-filing years. Pooling
outcomes across those five years, the marginal recipient of Chapter 13 earns $5,562 more than the
marginal dismissed filer, a 25.1 percent increase from the baseline mean. The earnings estimates
reported in Table 4 are similar to those suggested by the descriptive trends in Figure 2, and formal
event study estimates presented in Section VE. Conversely, our two-stage least squares estimates
are considerably larger than cross-sectional (e.g. Han and Li 2007, 2011) and within-individual
estimates (e.g. Cohen-Cole, Duygan-Bump and Montoriol-Garriga 2009) that do not use dismissed
filers as a comparison group.
Over the first five post-filing years, Chapter 13 also increases employment by 6.8 percentage
points, a 8.3 percent increase from the baseline mean. This point estimate suggests that approximately ($22, 115 · 6.8) = $1, 503, or 27 percent, of the earnings estimate can be explained by a
decline in labor force attachment.
Our two-stage least squares estimates can only be interpreted as the causal effect of bankruptcy
protection if judge leniency is not systematically related to unobserved filer characteristics. One way
to evaluate the validity of this assumption is to a estimate the impact of bankruptcy protection in
the years before a debtor files. Consistent with our identifying assumptions discussed above, there
is no systematic relationship between bankruptcy protection and either earnings or employment in
the pre-filing years, with the estimated coefficients being economically and statistically insignificant.
Appendix Table 2 presents estimates using a variety of specifications and instruments to assess
the robustness of our main results. Column 2 replicates our preferred estimates from Table 4 using
leave-one-out judge leniency as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection. Column 3 uses a leavemonth-out measure of judge leniency – where we calculate judge leniency only using cases in the
11 other months of the filing year – as an instrument for Chapter 13 protection. Measuring judge
leniency only using cases from the other 11 months purges any remaining correlation between a
filer’s outcomes and our instrument introduced by the estimation of the office by month-of-filing

18

fixed effects in our first and second stage regressions. Column 4 uses a leave-one-out measure of judge
leniency measured over the first 90 post-filing days as an instrument. Column 5 uses a randomly
selected subset of 50 percent of filers to calculate a leave-month-out measure of judge leniency that is
used as an instrument in the mutually exclusive subset of filers. Columns 6 through 8 present results
that use judge fixed effects as instruments for bankruptcy protection estimated using two-stage least
squares, LIML, and jackknife IV, respectively. All regressions control for gender, race, five-year age
effects, a five-year average of baseline employment, a five-year average of baseline earnings, and
office by month-of-filing fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the office level.
Our two-stage least squares estimates are robust to the choice of instrument and estimation
method. The impact of Chapter 13 protection on post-filing earnings is $5,602 in the leave-monthout specification, $9,126 in the 90-day judge leniency specification, $4,628 in the split sample specification, $4,445 in the two-stage least squares judge fixed effects specification, $4,263 in the LIML
specification, and $4,463 in the jackknife IV specification. Due to the relatively large standard
errors when using judge fixed effects as instruments, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimated treatment effects are identical to our preferred estimate of $5,562 for all of our estimates
except the 90-day judge leniency specification. The results follow a similar pattern for employment,
while the mortality and foreclosure results are larger when using judge fixed effects. None of the
point estimates for employment, mortality, and foreclosure are statistically distinguishable from our
preferred estimates in column 2 of Table 4.
Appendix Table 6 presents two-stage least squares results using our preferred specification for
the sixth through tenth post-filing years. We restrict the sample to filings originating between 1992
and 2000. Filings originating after 2000 are excluded because we do not observe post-filing outcomes
for all ten years for these individuals. In this sample of older filings, Chapter 13 protection increases
the marginal recipient’s annual earnings by $6,772 in the sixth through tenth post-filing years. These
results suggest that the impact of bankruptcy protection is persistent after the completion of the
repayment plan. The probability of being employed is also 6.6 percentage points higher in the sixth
through tenth post-filing years.
Table 5 presents two-stage least squares results from our preferred specification separately by
filer gender, race, age, baseline earnings, and being matched to a home. The effects of Chapter 13
protection on annual earnings are somewhat larger for female and non-white filers, though neither
difference is statistically significant. There are significantly larger impacts of Chapter 13 protection on younger filers, likely because older filers in our sample have already left the labor market.
Specifically, Chapter 13 increases the annual earnings of filers who are 25 to 40 years old by $7,833
and the annual earnings of filers who are 40 and 60 years old by $6,299, while having no discernible
effect on filers who are 60 or older at the time of filing. Chapter 13 protection also has a larger
impact on filers with above median earnings. Chapter 13 increases annual earnings by $8,650 for
filers with above median earnings, compared to an increase of $1,691 for filers with below median
earnings. The impact of Chapter 13 protection on employment is also 6.0 percentage points higher
for filers with above median baseline earnings. This may be the result of higher earning filers facing

19

a higher marginal rate of garnishment, or non-linearities in the elasticity of labor supply. In Section
VD, we show that the garnishment channel is at least partially responsible for the pattern of results
observed in Table 5.
Panel D of Table 4 presents results for additional labor supply outcomes available in the SSA
data. We estimate the impact of Chapter 13 protection on the average of each outcome over the
first five post-filing years. Among eligible filers, bankruptcy protection decreases the receipt of SSI
by 12.8 percentage points, though the point estimate is only significant at the ten percent level.
Bankruptcy protection also appears to have little impact on the receipt of DI or on annual 401k
contributions.
B. Mortality
The reduced form estimate of judge leniency on five-year mortality is presented in Figure 3, and the
corresponding two-stage least squares estimates are presented in Figure 4. The dependent variable
for each regression is an indicator for being deceased in or before the specified year. Trends in the
raw data are presented in Figure 2.
In the first full year after filing, only 0.3 percent of filers granted Chapter 13 protection are
deceased, compared to 1.15 percent of dismissed filers. Five years after filing, 2.1 percent of filers
granted Chapter 13 protection are deceased, compared to 4.0 percent of dismissed filers. These
statistics suggest that dismissed bankruptcy filers have extremely high mortality rates. The annual
mortality rate for individuals age 25-70 in the United States is about 0.45 percent, one-third to
two-fifths the mortality risk of dismissed filers. The annual mortality rate for a national population
with a similar age profile as our estimation sample is 0.3 percent, one-quarter to one-third the
mortality risk of dismissed filers (CDC 2014).13 The high mortality rates among dismissed filers
are consistent with the high rates of medical debt (Domowitz and Sartain 1999, Sullivan, Warren,
and Westbrook 2000, Warren, Sullivan, and Jacoby 2000, Himmelstein et al. 2009) and high levels
of self-reported stress (Porter 2011) among bankruptcy filers. The mortality rates among dismissed
filers are also consistent with the high mortality rates reported among displaced workers. Sullivan
and von Watcher (2009) find average annual mortality rates of 0.52 percent among displaced workers
age 28-57, nearly 30 percent higher than the national mortality rate for similarly aged individuals
during the same time period.
Turning to our causal estimates, the reduced form results from Figure 4 show that being assigned
to a more lenient judge decreases five-year mortality. A one standard deviation increase in judge
leniency decreases five-year mortality by 0.0003 percentage points relative to the dismissed filer
mean of 4.0 percentage points. Note that we use the dismissed filer mean as a reference point
13

The CDC reports the annual population, number of deaths, and mortality rates for five year age groups. We
calculate the annual mortality rate in 2011 for the 25 to 39 age group by dividing the number of deaths by the total
population of people in the combined 25 to 29, 30 to 34, and 35 to 39 age groups. A similar approach is used to
calculate the mortality rates for the 40 to 59 and 60 to 70 age groups, using the appropriate age groups from the
CDC. We adjust for the age profile of our sample by calculating a weighted average of mortality rates where weights
are proportionate to the size of the each age cohort in our sample.

20

because the deceased cannot file for bankruptcy protection, making the baseline mortality rate zero
by construction.
In the two-stage least squares results, Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection lowers five-year mortality by a statistically significant 1.2 percentage points, a 30.0 percent decrease from the control
mean. Aggregating the mortality effects across the first five post-filing years, our results imply that
the marginal recipient of Chapter 13 protection is alive for 0.053 more years than the marginal
non-recipient. In a sample of debtors filing between 1992 and 2000, Chapter 13 decreases ten-year
mortality by 1.5 percentage points, though the estimate is not statistically significant. We wish to
emphasize that due to the relative imprecision of our mortality estimates, the 95 percent confidence
intervals include both very small and implausibly large point estimates.
Panel B of Table 5 reports two-stage least squares results interacted by filer gender, race, age,
baseline earnings, and being matched to a home. The effect of Chapter 13 protection on mortality
is larger for filers who are white, have above median baseline earnings, and are not matched to a
home at baseline. However, the most striking pattern is by age. Chapter 13 protection decreases
five-year mortality by 10.9 percentage points for filers 60 and older at the time of filing, despite
having little to no impact on earnings for these filers. In contrast, Chapter 13 decreases five-year
mortality by only 2.2 percentage points for filers between 25 and 40, and 1.7 percentage points for
filers between 40 and 60.
C. Home Foreclosure
The reduced form estimate of judge leniency on five-year foreclosure is presented in Figure 3, and
the corresponding two-stage least squares estimates are presented in Figure 4. The sample includes
filings in our estimation sample in county by year bins covered by the DataQuick records. Home
foreclosure is an indicator for a filer’s home receiving a notice of default, receiving a notice of transfer
or sale, or having been transferred to a REO or a guarantor on or before the indicated year. Note
that we are unable to estimate the impact of bankruptcy protection on pre-filing foreclosure as we
only have address information for the year of filing, and were unable to match pre-filing transactions
to filers. Trends in the raw data are presented in Figure 2.
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection significantly lowers the probability of home foreclosure. In
the raw data plotted in Figure 2, five-year foreclosure rates are less than 2.5 percent for filers
receiving bankruptcy protection, compared to 14.9 percent for dismissed filers. This implies that
approximately one-third of dismissed filers matched to a home experience a home foreclosure within
the first five post-filing years. Note that we use the dismissed filer mean for reference, as we only
observe a filer’s address at the time of filing. Because the vast majority of foreclosures result in a
change of address, we are largely unable to measure the probability of foreclosure before filing.
Our reduced form results from Figure 3 show that being assigned to a more lenient judge has an
economically and statistically significant effect on post-filing foreclosure. A one standard deviation
increase in judge leniency decreases five-year foreclosure by 0.00459 percentage points relative to the
dismissed filer mean of 14.9 percentage points. In the two-stage least squares estimates, Chapter 13
21

protection decreases foreclosure by 11.9 percentage points in the first full post-filing year and 16.7
percentage points in the second post-filing year. Foreclosure rates are 19.1 percentage points lower
five years after filing, a 127.5 percent decrease from the dismissed filer mean. Conditional on being
matched to a home, Chapter 13 protection decreases five-year home foreclosure by 35.3 percentage
points.
In Appendix Table 5, we show that bankruptcy protection also significantly decreases voluntary
and short home sales. Distress sales, which include both foreclosures and short sales, are 22.2
percentage points lower after five years. Home sales, which include all types of housing transactions,
are 33.9 percentage points lower after five years.
Panel C of Table 5 reports subsample results. The effect of Chapter 13 protection on foreclosure
is larger for filers with low baseline earnings and filers who are 60 or older at the time of filing.
These results may be due to these filers being more at risk of foreclosure or having fewer alternatives
if a bankruptcy filing is dismissed. However, the precise mechanisms for this pattern of results are
unclear.
D. Discussion and Potential Channels
Why are there such large benefits of receiving bankruptcy protection? In this section, we first
explore whether protection from wage garnishment and reduced economic instability can explain
our labor supply results. We then conclude by considering potential explanations for our mortality
result.
One explanation for our results is that Chapter 13 maintains the incentive to work by protecting
future earnings from wage garnishment. In this scenario, dismissed filers reduce their labor supply
due to the tax on earnings imposed by wage garnishment. Table 6 partially tests this hypothesis
by estimating the impact of Chapter 13 protection interacted with proxies of garnishment risk.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 present results for filers in the four states that prohibit wage garnishment
– Florida, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Texas – and filers in states that allow at least some
wage garnishment. The impact of Chapter 13 on annual earnings over the first five post-filing years
is $5,635 in states that allow garnishment, compared to $3,193 in the four states that prohibit
garnishment. The pattern of results is reversed for employment, however, with larger impacts in
the four states that prohibit garnishment, though the difference is not statistically significant.
Columns 3 through 7 exploit both within- and across-state variation in garnishment laws to
estimate results for filers who are likely to be subject to different marginal garnishment rates.
Within each state, wage garnishments are a non-linear function of earnings. For example, in states
that follow the federal guidelines, creditors are allowed to garnish each additional dollar of disposable
earnings between 30 and 40 times the minimum wage, but only 25 cents of every additional dollar
after that point. There is also across-state variation in garnishment rates. Twelve states have lower
marginal garnishment rates, ten have lower caps on the total amount that can be garnished, and
four states prohibit wage garnishment altogether. In each of these states, the more stringent state
regulation takes precedence over the federal guidelines.
22

We exploit this variation in garnishment laws by estimating the impact of bankruptcy interacted
with the marginal garnishment rate a filer is likely to face under both state and federal law.14 Our
estimating equation is:
25
100
100
25
25
100
100
yit = α + αot + βXi + γ00 Bi G00 + γ25
Bi G25
25 + γ100 Bi G100 + γ0 Bi G0 + γ0 Bi G0 + εit

(11)

where Gyx is an indicator for a filer facing a marginal garnishment rate of x in his or her state of
filing and a marginal garnishment of y under federal law. We instrument for each Bi Gyx using the
interaction between judge leniency and the garnishment bin Zijct Gyx . We estimate the impact of
bankruptcy separately for filers facing different state and federal garnishment rates to control for
any differential effects of bankruptcy correlated with baseline earnings that are unrelated to the
marginal garnishment rate. For example, γ025 measures the impact of Chapter 13 protection on
filers with higher earnings who are exempt from garnishment in their state of filing, but who would
25 measures the impact of
have been subject to 25 percent garnishment under federal law, while γ25

Chapter 13 on filers with higher earnings in states that do not exempt them from garnishment.
Thus, γ025 measures the effect of bankruptcy without garnishment protections for higher-earning
25 measures the effect of Chapter 13 with garnishment protections for higher-earning
filers, while γ25

filers.
The effect of Chapter 13 protection is small and imprecisely estimated for filers unlikely to
face wage garnishment. The impact on annual earnings is negative $471 for filers subject to no
garnishment under both state and federal law, $5,607 for filers who would have been subject to
marginal garnishment of 25 percent had they lived in another state, and negative $1,759 for filers
who would have been subject to marginal garnishment of 100 percent had they lived in another
state. None of the point estimates are statistically significant at conventional levels.
In contrast, there is a large and precisely estimated impact of Chapter 13 on filers subject to
the 25 percent marginal garnishment rate in their state of filing. The impact on annual earnings
is $7,892 for filers subject to marginal garnishment of 25 percent under both state and federal law.
Due to the imprecision of the point estimates, the estimate is not statistically different than that
for filers subject to no garnishment under state law but 25 percent under federal law (p-value =
0.572). For filers subject to the 100 percent marginal garnishment rate, the impact is a statistically
insignificant $7,435. The difference between this estimate and the estimate for filers subject to no
garnishment under state law but 100 percent under federal law is marginally significant (p-value
= 0.10). However, if we take these estimates from columns 4 and 6 at face value, the implied
elasticity of earnings with respect to garnishment is about 0.94 for the 25 percent bracket.15 All of
14

We estimate disposable earnings using pre-tax earnings in the five most recent pre-filing years and the tax rate
implied by the NBER TAXSIM federal and state income tax calculator. We assume that all filers are the only earner
in their households, as we do not observe marital status in the bankruptcy or SSA data.
15
The earnings elasticity with respect to garnishment is equal to the log change in taxable earnings divided by the
log change in the net tax rate. We assume that the state and federal earnings tax rate is 20 percent, implying that
the net tax and garnishment rate is 1 − (1 − 0.2)(1 − 0.25) = 40 percent. Finally, we use the impact of bankruptcy
on filers facing no garnishment in their state of filing who would have faced a 25 percent garnishment under federal
law as a counterfactual impact. These assumptions imply an elasticity of earnings with respect to garnishment of

23

the results from Table 6 are broadly consistent with bankruptcy protection increasing the incentive
to work by lowering the effective marginal tax rate on earnings. Nevertheless, it is unlikely that
a lower marginal tax rate explains all of our results. Previous studies suggest that the intensive
marginal elasticity of earnings with respect to the net-of-tax rate is approximately 0.25 (e.g. Chetty
2012), implying that a 25 percent marginal tax cut should increase earnings by about 6.25 percent,
24.9 percent of our earnings estimate from Table 4. Our implied elasticity measure is likely to be
positively biased by other laws and regulations correlated with wage garnishment policies, such as
restrictions on third-party debt collectors. We also note that the standard errors in Table 6 are
large enough that the implied elasticity with respect to earnings includes a wide range of estimates.
A second explanation for the estimated effects is that bankruptcy protection maintains economic
stability. Bankruptcy protection discharges most debts, allows debtors to repay mortgage arrears,
and puts a hold on almost all debt collection efforts. These features of the bankruptcy code may
maintain economic stability by allowing debtors to avoid eviction or home foreclosure, reducing the
incentive to strategically move across state lines or change jobs to avoid creditors, or preventing
sharp drops in consumption that have important long-term consequences. Consistent with this explanation, our earnings result is of similar magnitude (in the opposite direction) to the estimated
effect of job loss (e.g. von Wachter, Song, and Machester 2009), suggesting that bankruptcy protection may be able to offset the adverse consequences of a financial shock such as job loss. This
interpretation is also consistent with our results from Figure 2, which show a significant deterioration
of outcomes among dismissed filers, but few gains for filers granted bankruptcy protection.
We present further evidence on this issue by examining filer mobility as proxied by firm EIN.
Table 7 presents estimates of the impact of Chapter 13 protection on the probability of working
in the same baseline job, industry, county, and state. We also present results for job tenure and
average firm wages. The sample is restricted to filers with at least one year of employment in both
the pre- and post-filing period.
Bankruptcy protection increases the probability of working in the same (2-digit NAICS) industry by 23.8 percentage points, a 42.7 percent change from the baseline mean of 55.7 percent, and
increases the probability that a filer stays at his or her baseline job by 24.6 percentage points, a 49.0
percent change from the baseline mean of 50.2 percent. There is also a large impact of bankruptcy
protection on geographic mobility, with bankruptcy protection increasing the probability that a filer
works in his or her baseline county by 22.9 percentage points, a 39.7 percent increase, and his or her
baseline state by 15.3 percentage points, a 24.4 percent increase. Job tenure and average firm wages
are also higher, suggesting that this increase in economic stability is beneficial for the worker. In
Appendix Table 7, we find some evidence that the mobility estimates are larger in states that allow
garnishment, though not all of the differences are statistically significant. The estimated impacts
also tend to increase with the marginal garnishment bracket, though the differences are not statistically significant and the estimated effects remain relatively large in the no garnishment bracket.
log(0.248)−log(0.189)
log(1−0.2)−log(1−0.4)

= 0.94 for the 25 percent bracket. Note that we are unable to calculate the elasticity for the 100
percent bracket, as log(0) is undefined.

24

Taken together with the foreclosure results, we interpret this pattern of results as suggesting that
Chapter 13 protection maintains economic stability both by reducing forced moves from evictions
and foreclosures and unforced, strategic moves to avoid creditors.
We conclude this section by considering potential explanations for our mortality results. In
a sample of Pennsylvania workers, Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) find that job displacement
increases five-year mortality by 1.2 percentage points. Thus, one potential interpretation of our
estimates is that bankruptcy protection can offset much of the increased mortality risk from financial
distress caused by events such as job loss. To partially test the hypothesis that the change in
mortality that we estimate is driven by a change in earnings, we follow Sullivan and von Wachter
(2009) and compare our two-stage least squares results for five-year mortality to the effect implied by
the cross-sectional correlation between five-year mortality and both earnings and employment in our
estimation sample. Our two-stage least squares results suggest that bankruptcy protection increases
annual earnings by $5,562 and employment by 6.8 percentage points. In a regression with postfiling earnings, employment, and no additional controls, the estimated correlation between five-year
mortality and average annual earnings (in $1,000s) is -0.00019, and the correlation between fiveyear mortality and average employment is -0.00996. Taken together, these results suggest that the
change in labor supply associated with Chapter 13 protection can explain a (0.068 · 0.00996 + 5.562 ·
0.00019) · 100 = 0.17 percentage point decrease in five-year mortality, or about 14.1 percent of our
estimated treatment effect of 1.2 percentage points. This result is in stark contrast to Sullivan and
von Wachter (2009), who find that approximately 50 to 75 percent of the impact of job displacement
on mortality is driven by the reduction in long-term earnings.
Further evidence that the change in earnings associated with bankruptcy protection plays little
to no role in explaining the mortality results comes from our subsample results reported in Panel
B of Table 5. Recall that Chapter 13 protection decreases five-year mortality by 10.9 percentage
points for filers 60 and older at the time of filing, despite having little to no impact on earnings for
these filers. In contrast, Chapter 13 decreases five-year mortality by only 2.2 percentage points for
filers between 25 and 40, and 1.7 percentage points for filers between 40 and 60.
There are several potentially relevant channels for our mortality result that we cannot examine
with our current data. For example, bankruptcy protection may decrease an individual’s stress
by reducing contact with creditors and allowing greater control over his or her financial future.
Consistent with this idea, 84 percent of debtors report being under extreme stress before filing for
bankruptcy, while only 35 percent report being under extreme stress after filing for bankruptcy
(Porter 2011). Dismissed filers may also lose their health insurance or change family environments
in a way that impacts health. Unfortunately, it is not possible to link information on morbidity,
health insurance, or family status to our data. The precise mechanisms for our estimated mortality
effect therefore remain unclear, and likely include a combination of these factors.

25

E. External Validity
In this section, we discuss the external validity of our results for Chapter 13 filers in our estimation
sample, Chapter 13 filers in our full sample, and Chapter 7 filers.
One potential caveat of our results is that we estimate the effects of Chapter 13 protection for
the marginal recipient of bankruptcy protection. Recall that our instrumental variable identification
strategy identifies the impact of Chapter 13 for filers whose bankruptcy decision is altered by judge
assignment due to disagreement on whether or not they should receive bankruptcy protection. This
local average treatment effect may or may not reflect the average treatment effect of bankruptcy for
all filers. To investigate heterogeneous treatment effects across unobservable debtor characteristics,
we estimate MTEs (Heckman and Vytlacil 2005). In our setting, the MTE estimates illustrate how
the outcomes for debtors on the margin of bankruptcy protection change as we move from more
strict to more lenient judges. Thus, the MTE estimates shed light on the types of filers who benefit
most from bankruptcy protection, and whether our local average treatment effects are likely to
apply to filers who are further from the margin.
To calculate the MTE function, we follow Doyle (2007) and predict the probability of bankruptcy
protection using a probit model with judge leniency Zijct as the only explanatory variable. We then
predict the relationship between each outcome and the predicted probability of receiving bankruptcy
protection using a local quadratic estimator with a bandwidth of 0.069.16 The first derivative of this
relationship is then evaluated at each percentile of the predicted probability of receiving bankruptcy
protection using the coefficients from the local quadratic regression. We calculate standard errors
using the standard deviation of MTE estimates from a bootstrap procedure with 250 iterations
adjusted for clustering at the office by filing month level.
Appendix Figure 11 reports the MTE of Chapter 13 protection for earnings, employment, fiveyear mortality, and five-year home foreclosure. The MTE function for earnings is increasing in the
predicted probability of bankruptcy protection, while the MTE function for mortality and home
foreclosure are decreasing in the predicted probability of bankruptcy protection. The upward slope
in the earnings MTE and downward slope in the mortality and home foreclosure MTEs suggest that
filers on the margin of bankruptcy who are assigned to the most lenient judges experience the largest
gains when granted bankruptcy protection. These are likely filers with unobservable characteristics
that make them the least likely to be granted bankruptcy in the first place, as the margin for
relatively lenient judges should entail relatively less deserving filers. This interpretation of the
estimates suggests that the impact of Chapter 13 on earnings is modestly larger for less deserving
debtors. Conversely, the MTE function for employment is flat, suggesting that the employment
effects do not differ systematically across unobservable characteristics.17
16

Following Doyle (2007), the pilot bandwidth was chosen by minimizing the sum of squared errors between the
local quadratic estimator and a fourth-degree polynomial model for each outcome. Larger bandwidths lead to more
linear relationships and flatter MTE estimates. We chose the minimum bandwidth across all outcomes to explore
variations from linearity. The local quadratic estimator was chosen as it is thought to have better properties when
evaluating first derivatives (Fan and Gijbels 1996). Results are nearly identical for higher and lower polynomials and
both larger and smaller bandwidths.
17
Appendix Figure 12 reports the MTE of Chapter 13 protection for 401k contributions, DI, and SSI, and Appendix

26

A second potential caveat is we are only able to use instrumental variables design in bankruptcy
offices that randomly assign filings to judges. Recall from Table 1 that our estimation sample is
broadly similar to the full sample of Chapter 13 filings. Yet, it is possible that the two groups of
filers differ in some unobservable way. We provide estimates of the impact of Chapter 13 protection
in our full sample using an event study methodology that compares the outcomes of granted and
dismissed filers. Our event strategy design is in the spirit of Bound’s (1989) analysis of accepted
and rejected DI applicants, and more recent work estimating the effects of job loss on subsequent
outcomes (Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan 1993, von Wachter, Song, and Manchester 2009, Sullivan
and von Wachter 2009).
Intuitively, our event study design uses granted filers as a treatment group and dismissed filers
as a control group. The key identifying assumption is that dismissed filers would have experienced
the same outcomes as granted filers had they been granted bankruptcy protection. However, recall
from Figure 3 that dismissed filers start with lower earnings and experience larger earnings shocks
before filing than granted filers. To account for the difference in pre-filing earnings between granted
and dismissed filers, we include individual fixed effects that control for time-invariant differences
across filers. To account for different earnings trends, we also include fixed effects for the decile of
predicted propensity score separate by event time. We estimate the propensity score using an OLS
regression of an indicator for bankruptcy protection on gender, race, five-year age bins, five-years
of baseline employment, five-years of baseline earnings, and office by month fixed effects. We then
group filers into deciles of the predicted probability of receiving bankruptcy protection. Thus, our
event strategy design compares the outcomes of granted and dismissed filers with similar predicted
probabilities of being granted bankruptcy protection.
Formally, we estimate various specifications of the following model:
yit = αi + αt +

5
X

βk P scoreki

k=−5

+

5
X

γk Bankruptcyik + εit

(12)

k=−5

where yit is our outcome of interest, αi are individual fixed effects that control for time-invariant
differences across filers, αt are year fixed effects that control for time-varying factors that affect all
filers similarly, and P scoreki is the decile of predicted propensity score separate by event time k.
Bankruptcyik is an indicator for being in the k-th period before or after filing interacted with having
been granted bankruptcy protection. The coefficients γk therefore measure the evolution of yit for
granted bankruptcy filers relative to dismissed filers. We omit effects for the year prior to filing, so
that all parameter estimates measure differences relative to this base year. For mortality and home
foreclosure where we do not observe differences in the year prior to filing, we omit the year of filing.
Figure 13 reports the MTE of the job mobility outcomes described in Table 7. Consistent with our main results, the
MTE functions for DI and SSI are decreasing in the predicted probability of bankruptcy protection and the MTE
functions for same state, same industry, same job, and average firm wage are increasing in the predicted probability
of bankruptcy protection. These results suggest that filers on the margin of bankruptcy who are assigned to the most
lenient judges experience the largest gains in stability when granted bankruptcy protection. The MTE functions for
401k contributions, same county, and job tenure are flat.

27

As a result, our event study estimates for these outcomes are likely attenuated towards zero as we
attribute any treatment effects in the year of filing to the effects of bankruptcy protection.
Appendix Figure 14 presents event study estimates of equation (12) for Chapter 13 filers in our
estimation sample and all Chapter 13 filers in our data. The “full” sample is restricted to a ten
percent random draw of first-time filers for the non-foreclosure results for computational reasons.
The home foreclosure sample includes all first-time filers in counties covered by DataQuick. Standard
errors are clustered at the individual level.
There is a large and statistically significant effect of Chapter 13 protection on all of our outcomes
in both the estimation sample and the full sample of Chapter 13 filers. Over the first five post-filing
years, filers receiving Chapter 13 protection earn $4,034 to $5,581 more than dismissed filers in
our estimation sample, and $3,783 to $5,114 more in our full sample. Employment is 2.6 to 8.1
percentage points higher in our estimation sample, and 2.3 to 6.7 percentage points higher in our
full sample. Five-year mortality and foreclosure are 2.0 and 10.9 percentage points lower in our
estimation sample, and 1.5 and 12.9 percentage points lower in our full sample. Thus, the impact
of Chapter 13 protection appears to be similar in our full and estimation samples.
A final concern is that our analysis has focused on Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which makes up about
25 percent of all bankruptcy filings. Recall that there is not enough variation in the treatment of
Chapter 7 cases to estimate the effects of Chapter 7 protection using our instrumental variables
strategy. Appendix Figure 14 presents results for Chapter 7 protection using our event study
methodology described above. We again restrict the non-foreclosure results to a ten percent random
draw of all first-time filers. The home foreclosure sample includes all first-time filers in counties
covered by DataQuick.
The effect of Chapter 7 protection is much more modest than the effect of Chapter 13 protection.
Over the first five post-filing years, filers granted Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection earn $1,639 to
$1,936 more than dismissed filers, and are 2.4 to 2.8 percentage points more likely to be employed.
Filers granted Chapter 7 protection are 1.7 percentage points less likely to experience a home
foreclosure after five years, but are no more or less likely to be deceased. The more modest impact
of Chapter 7 is somewhat surprising given the fact that, in principle, all Chapter 7 filers have the
option of filing under Chapter 13. The more modest benefits of Chapter 7 therefore seem likely to
be the result of the different composition of filers under each Chapter. There may also be important
impacts of Chapter 7 on other ex-post outcomes that we are not measuring here, such as credit
availability or cost, that compare more favorably with respect to Chapter 13. Finally, it is possible
that our event study design is less plausible for Chapter 7 cases. Less than two percent of Chapter
7 cases are dismissed, with these cases typically dismissed due to fraud or an inability to complete
the bankruptcy paperwork correctly. Thus, dismissed Chapter 7 filers may not be a suitable control
group for granted filers.

28

VI. Conclusion
In this paper, we estimate the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on subsequent labor
supply, mortality, and home foreclosure. We find that Chapter 13 increases the marginal recipient’s
annual earnings in the first five post-filing years by $5,562, a 25.1 percent increase from the baseline
mean. Employment increases by 6.8 percentage points over the same time period, an 8.3 percent
increase from the baseline mean. Five-year mortality is 1.2 percentage points lower, a 30.0 percent
decrease from the dismissed filer mortality rate, with five-year foreclosure rates falling by 19.1
percentage points, a more than one hundred percent decrease from the dismissed filer foreclosure
rate. We find evidence consistent with the results being driven by increased incentive to work and
increased economic stability following the receipt of bankruptcy protection. A descriptive analysis of
granted and dismissed filers further suggests the impacts are driven by the deterioration of outcomes
among dismissed filers as opposed to any gains by granted filers.
Our results provide new evidence on the ex-post benefits of debt relief. These results are particularly important in light of the on-going debate surrounding the use of debt relief and mortgage
modification to stimulate the economy. Work by Mulligan (2008), Hall (2011), and Eggertsson and
Krugman (2012) suggests that household borrowing constraints can help explain the severity of the
recession, while Mian and Sufi (2012) show that regional differences in debt overhang can explain
differences in unemployment. Our estimates also suggest that the restrictions on bankruptcy filing introduced by the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act may have
important adverse consequences on debtors.
The main limitation of our analysis is that we are not able to estimate the impact of bankruptcy
laws on ex-ante borrowing costs or behavior. There may also be important ex-post impacts of
bankruptcy protection on outcomes such as credit availability that we are unable to measure with
our data. Finally, our analysis has focused on Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which makes up about 25
percent of all bankruptcy filings. This paper should therefore be viewed as a first step towards
characterizing the impact of consumer bankruptcy protection on debtors.

29

References
[1] Aizer, Anna, and Joseph Doyle, Jr. 2013. “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future
Crime: Evidence from Randomly-Assigned Judges.” NBER Working Paper No. 19102.
[2] Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Robert McMenamin, and Paige Marta Skiba. 2010.
“Dismissal with Prejudice? Race and Politics in Personal Bankruptcy.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[3] Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Alan Krueger. 1999. “Jackknife Instrumental Variables
Estimation.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14(1): 57-67.
[4] Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal Effects Using
Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434): 444-499.
[5] Angrist, Joshua, and Alan Krueger. 1995. “Split-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates of
the Return to Schooling.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, American Statistical
Association, 13(2): 225-235.
[6] Armour, John, and Douglas Cumming. 2008. “Bankruptcy Law and Entrepreneurship.” American Law and Economics Review, 10(2): 303-350.
[7] Ashenfelter, Orley. 1978. “Estimating the Effect of Training programs on Earnings.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 60(1): 47-57.
[8] Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. 1985. “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to
Estimate the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 67(4): 648-660.
[9] Athreya, Kartik. 2002. “Welfare Implications of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1999.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 49(8): 1567-1595.
[10] Autor, David, and Susan Houseman. 2010. “Do Temporary-Help Jobs Improve Labor Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from “Work First.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 96-128.
[11] Bound, John. 1989. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.”
The American Economic Review, 79(3): 482-503.
[12] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Underlying
Cause of Death 1999-2011 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released 2014. Data are
from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1999-2011, as compiled from data provided by the
57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program. Accessed
at http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html on Aug 18, 2014.
[13] Chang, Tom, and Antoinette Schoar. 2008. “Judge Specific Differences in Chapter 11 and Firm
Outcomes.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[14] Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Grey Gordon. 2012. “Dealing with Consumer Default: Bankruptcy vs
Garnishment.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(15): S1-S16.
[15] Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 80(3): 969-1018.
[16] Cohen-Cole, Ethan, Burcu Duygan-Bump, and Judit Montoriol-Garriga. 2009. “Forgive and
Forget: Who Gets Credit after Bankruptcy and Why?” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
[17] de Chaisemartin, Clément. 2014. “Tolerating Defiance? Local Average Treatment Effects without Monotonicity.” Unpublished Working Paper.
30

[18] Domowitz, Ian, and Robert Sartain. 1999. “Determinants of the Consumer Bankruptcy Decision.” The Journal of Finance, 54(1): 403-420.
[19] Doyle, Joseph. 2007. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
Care.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1583-1610.
[20] Doyle, Joseph. 2008. “Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(4): 746-770.
[21] Eggertsson, Gauti, and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469-1513.
[22] Fan, Jianqing, and Irene Gijbels. 1996. Local Polynomial Modeling and Its Applications (Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability Number 66). London: Chapman and Hall.
[23] Fan, Wei, and Michelle White. 2003. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
Activity.” Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 543-567.
[24] Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle White. 2002. “The Household Bankruptcy Decision.”
American Economic Review, 92(3): 706-718.
[25] French, Eric, and Jae Song. 2011. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.”
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper WP-2009-05.
[26] Gross, Tal, Matthew Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. 2012. “Liquidity Constraints and Consumer Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates.” NBER Working Paper No. 17807.
[27] Hall, Robert. 2011. “The Long Slump.” American Economic Review, 101(2): 431-469.
[28] Han, Song, and Wenli Li. 2007. “Fresh Start or Head Start? The Effect of Filing for Personal
Bankruptcy on Labor Supply.” Journal of Financial Services Research, 31(2): 123-152.
[29] Han, Song, and Wenli Li. 2011. “Household Borrowing after Personal Bankruptcy.” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 43(2-3): 491-517.
[30] Heckman, James, and V. Joseph Hotz. 1989. “Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental
Methods for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 84(408): 862-874.
[31] Heckman, James, and Edward Vytlacil. 2005. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects and
Econometric Policy Evaluation.” Econometrica, 73(3):669-738.
[32] Himmelstein, David, Deborah Thorne, Elizabeth Warren, and Steffie Woolhandler. 2009. “Medical Bankruptcy in the United States, 2007: Results of a National Study.” American Journal
of Medicine, 122 (8): 741-746.
[33] Huber, Martin, and Giovanni Mellace. 2012. “Relaxing Monotonicity in the Identification of
Local Average Treatment Effects.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[34] Hynes, Richard. 2004. “Why (Consumer) Bankruptcy?” Alabama Law Review, 56(1): 121-179.
[35] Hynes, Richard, Amanda Dawsey, and Lawrence Ausubel. 2009. “The Regulation of NonJudicial Debt Collection and the Consumer’s Choice Among Repayment, Bankruptcy and
Informal Bankruptcy.” Virginia Law and Economics Research Paper No. 2009-13.
[36] Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers.” American Economic Review, 83(4): 685-709.
[37] Jackson, Thomas. 1986. The Logic and Limits of Bankruptcy Law. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

31

[38] Klein, Tobias. 2010. “Heterogeneous Treatment Effects: Instrumental Variables without Monotonicity?” Journal of Econometrics, 155(2): 99-116.
[39] Kling, Jeffrey. 2006. “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings.” American Economic
Review, 96(3): 863-876.
[40] Lawless, Robert, Angela Littwin, Katherine Porter, John Pottow, Deborah Thorne, and Elizabeth Warren. 2008. “Did Bankruptcy Reform Fail? An Empirical Study of Consumer
Debtors.” American Bankruptcy Law Journal, 82: 349-406.
[41] Lefgren, Lars, Frank McIntyre, and Michelle Miller. 2010. “Chapter 7 or 13: Are Client or
Lawyer Interests Paramount?” The B.E. Journal of Economic Policy and Analysis, 10(1):
Article 82.
[42] Li, Wenli and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. 2006. “U.S. Consumer Bankruptcy Choice: The Importance
of General Equilibrium Effects.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(3): 613-631.
[43] Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2007. “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh
Start.” American Economic Review, 97(1): 402-418.
[44] Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does Disability Insurance
Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
Receipt.” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1797-1829.
[45] Mahoney, Neale. 2012. “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[46] Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand
Channel.” NBER Working Paper No. 17830.
[47] Mulligan, Casey. 2008. “A Depressing Scenario: Mortgage Debt Becomes Unemployment Insurance.” NBER Working Paper No. 14514.
[48] Norberg, Scott, and Nadia Compo. 2007. “Report on an Empirical Study of District Variations,
and the Roles of Judges, Trustees and Debtor’s Attorneys in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy Cases.”
The American Bankruptcy Law Journal, 81(4): 431-493.
[49] Porter, Katherine, and Deborah Thorne. 2006. “The Failure of Bankruptcy’s Fresh Start.”
Cornell Law Review, 92(1): 67-128.
[50] Porter, Katherine. 2011. “The Pretend Solution: An Empirical Study of Bankruptcy Outcomes.”
Texas Law Review, 90(103): 104-162.
[51] Posner, Eric. 1995. “Contract Law in the Welfare State: A Defense of the Unconscionability
Doctrine, Usury Laws, and Related Limitations on the Freedom to Contract.” Journal of
Legal Studies, 24(2): 283-319.
[52] Rea, Samuel. 1984. “Arm-Breaking, Consumer Credit and Personal Bankruptcy.” Economic
Inquiry, 22(2): 188-208.
[53] Severino, Felipe, Meta Brown, and Brandi Coates. 2014. “Personal Bankruptcy Protection and
Household Debt.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[54] Small, Dylan and Zhiqiang Tan. 2007. “A Stochastic Monotonicity Assumption for the Instrumental Variables Method.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[55] Stavins, Joanna. 2000. “Credit Card Borrowing, Delinquency, and Personal Bankruptcy.” New
England Economic Review, (July): 15-30.
[56] Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Westbrook. 1989. As We Forgive Our Debtors:
Bankruptcy and Consumer Credit in America. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
32

[57] Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Westbrook. 1994. “The Persistence of Local Legal
Culture: Twenty Years of Evidence from the Federal Bankruptcy Courts.” Harvard Journal
of Law and Public Policy, 17(3): 801-865.
[58] Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Westbrook. 2000. The Fragile Middle Class: Americans in Debt. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
[59] Sullivan, Daniel, and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis
Using Administrative Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics Volume, 124(3): 1265-1306.
[60] U.S. Supreme Court. 1934. Local Loan Co. V. Hunt, 292 U.S. 234.
[61] von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2009. “The Role of Mass Layoffs in Explaining Trends in Instability and Inequality in the Labor Market.” Unpublished Working
Paper.
[62] von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2011. “Trends in Employment and Earnings
of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Program.”
American Economic Review, 101(7): 3308-3329.
[63] Warren, Elizabeth, Teresa Sullivan, and Melissa Jacoby. 2000. “Medical Problems and
Bankruptcy Filings.” Norton Bankruptcy Law Advisor, May 2000.
[64] White, Michelle. 2011. “Corporate and Personal Bankruptcy Law.” NBER Working Paper No.
17237.
[65] White, Michelle, and Ning Zhu. 2010. “Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy.” Journal
of Legal Studies, 39(1): 33-61.

33

.45

b = 0.749
(0.101)

.35

.4

Discharge

.5

.55

Figure 1
Chapter 13 Judge Leniency and Chapter 13 Bankruptcy Protection

−.1

−.05

0

.05

.1

Judge Leniency

Notes: This figure plots Chapter 13 discharge vs. our leave-one-out measure of judge leniency. The sample consists of
all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. Judge
leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus
the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the court in the same filing year. To construct the
binned scatter plot, we first regress an indicator for discharge on office by month-of-filing fixed effects and calculate
residuals. We then take the mean residual in each judge by year bin, adding the mean discharge rate to each residual
to aid in the interpretation of the plot. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated on the underlying micro data
estimated using OLS. The coefficients show the estimated slope of the best-fit line including office by month-of-filing
fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the office level reported in parentheses.

34

Figure 2
Labor Supply, Mortality, Home Foreclosure
for Granted and Dismissed Chapter 13 Filers
Employment
.85
.8
.7

.75

Employment

25000
20000
15000

Earnings

30000

Earnings

-10

-5

0

5

-10

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

Dismissed

0
Granted

5

Dismissed

Home Foreclosure

.1
.05
0

0

.01

.02

Home Foreclosure

.03

.04

.15

Mortality

Mortality

-5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

0

5

0

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Dismissed

Granted

Dismissed

Notes: These figures plot average labor supply, mortality, and home foreclosure for granted and dismissed bankruptcy
filers. The labor supply and mortality sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices
that randomly assign cases to judges. The foreclosure sample includes the subset of those filings originating in county
by year bins with foreclosure data coverage. Predicted earnings and employment are based on the fitted values from a
regression of earnings on gender, race, a quadratic in tenure, industry fixed effects, and earnings in the sixth through
tenth years before filing. Year 0 indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy protection. Earnings are winsorized
at the top and bottom one percent. Employment is an indicator for non-zero wage earnings on the W-2. All monetary
values are expressed in real 2000 dollars. Mortality is an indicator for being deceased in or before the indicated year
using information from the Death Master File. Foreclosure is an indicator for a filer’s home receiving a notice of
default, receiving a notice of transfer or sale, or being transferred to a REO or a guarantor in or before the indicated
year.

35

Figure 3
Chapter 13 Judge Leniency and Labor Supply, Mortality, and Home Foreclosure
Employment
.85

Employment

.75

.8

22000
20000

Earnings

24000

Earnings

b = 0.068
(0.023)

.7

18000

b = 4285.035
(1902.028)

−.1

−.05

0

.05

.1

−.1

Judge Leniency

−.05

0

.05

.1

Judge Leniency
®

®

Five-Year Home Foreclosure

.12
.1
.06

b = −0.010
(0.004)

.08

5−Year Foreclosure

.04
.02

5−Year Mortality

.14

.06

Five-Year Mortality

0

.04

b = −0.153
(0.032)
−.1

−.05

0

.05

.1

−.1

Judge Leniency

−.05

0

.05

.1

Judge Leniency
®

®

Notes: These figures plot earnings, employment, five-year mortality, and five-year foreclosure vs. our leave-one-out
measure of judge leniency. The earnings and mortality sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005
in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. The foreclosure sample includes the subset of those filings
originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of
granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting
bankruptcy protection for the court in the same filing year. To construct the binned scatter plot, we first regress
each outcome on office by month-of-filing fixed effects and calculate residuals. We then take the mean residual in
each judge by year bin, adding the mean discharge rate to each residual to aid in the interpretation of the plot. The
solid line shows the best linear fit estimated on the underlying micro data estimated using OLS. The coefficients
show the estimated slope of the best-fit line including office by month-of-filing fixed effects, with standard errors
clustered at the office level reported in parentheses. Earnings are winsorized at the top and bottom one percent.
Employment is an indicator for non-zero wage earnings on the W-2. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000
dollars. Mortality is an indicator for being deceased in or before the indicated year using information from the Death
Master File. Foreclosure is an indicator for a filer’s home receiving a notice of default, receiving a notice of transfer
or sale, or being transferred to a REO or a guarantor in or before the indicated year.

36

Figure 4
IV Estimates of the Impact of Chapter 13 Protection on
Labor Supply, Mortality, and Home Foreclosure
Employment

.05
-.05

-5000

0

0

Earnings

Employment

5000

.1

10000

Earnings

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Home Foreclosure

0
-.1
-.3

-.03

-.2

-.02

-.01

Home Foreclosure

0

.1

.01

Mortality

Mortality

-2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Notes: These figures plot two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on
earnings, employment, cumulative mortality, and home foreclosure. The earnings and mortality sample includes
all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. The foreclosure
sample includes the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage. We
instrument for bankruptcy protection using judge leniency and control for gender, race, five-year age effects, baseline
employment, baseline earnings, and office by month-of-filing fixed effects. The dashed lines are 95 percent confidence
intervals from standard errors clustered at the office level. Year 0 indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy
protection. Earnings are winsorized at the top and bottom one percent. Employment is an indicator for non-zero
wage earnings on the W-2. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars. Mortality is an indicator for being
deceased in or before the indicated year using information from the Death Master File. Foreclosure is an indicator
for a filer’s home receiving a notice of default, receiving a notice of transfer or sale, or being transferred to a REO or
a guarantor in or before the indicated year.

37

Demographics
Granted Bankruptcy
Age
Male
White
Black
Matched to a Home

Table 1
Summary Statistics
Chapter 7
Chapter 13
Full
Full
Judge
Sample
Sample Sample
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.984
0.488
0.448
41.813
42.530
42.847
0.603
0.634
0.609
0.742
0.558
0.528
0.133
0.339
0.361
0.386
0.455
0.485

Baseline Outcomes 5 Years
Employment
Self Emp.
Earnings
Wages
Self Earnings
401k Contributions
Disability Insurance
Sup. Security Income
Job Tenure
Firm Wages
Observations

Before Filing
0.806
0.060
21.090
20.586
0.504
0.260
0.047
0.097
3.413
22.424
7393983

0.802
0.061
22.333
21.725
0.608
0.283
0.042
0.084
3.612
22.983
1869772

0.813
0.061
22.115
21.529
0.585
0.316
0.041
0.086
3.624
19.109
490216

Difference
(4)
0.040∗
−0.317
0.025∗
0.030
−0.022
−0.030

−0.011
0.000
0.218
0.196
0.023
−0.033∗∗
0.001
−0.002
−0.012
3.874∗∗

Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The full sample consists of first-time filers between 1992 and 2005
in 72 bankruptcy courts. The judge sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices
that randomly assign filings to judges. Home match is calculated only for the subset of those filings originating in
county by year bins with home data coverage (N = 280202). Granted bankruptcy is an indicator for receiving a
discharge of debt. Home match is an indicator for being matched to a home in the DataQuick real estate data. Each
baseline outcomes is averaged over five pre-filing years. Earnings and employment outcomes come from 1978 - 2010
W-2s, where employment is an indicator for non-zero wage earnings and self employment is an indicator for non-zero
self employment earnings. 401k contributions come from annual W-2s. DI and SSI receipt come from the Master
Beneficiary File. Job tenure is calculated using firm EINs. Firm wages are averaged over all employees listing the
same EIN in the same calendar year. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000.

38

Table 2
Judge Leniency and Chapter 13 Protection
(1)
(2)
∗∗∗
Judge Leniency 0.749
0.731∗∗∗
(0.101)
(0.095)
Male
−0.015∗
(0.008)
Black
−0.090∗∗∗
(0.013)
Age
0.005∗∗∗
(0.000)
Earnings
0.005∗∗∗
(0.000)
Observations
490216
490216
Notes: This table reports first stage results. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1992
and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of
granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting
bankruptcy protection for the court in the same filing year. All regressions control for office by month-of-filing fixed
effects and cluster standard errors at the office level. See Table 1 for details on the data and variable construction.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

39

Table 3
Test of Randomization
Baseline
Mean
Judge Leniency
(1)
(2)
(3)
Age
42.847
0.000005 −0.000005
(16.374)
(0.000007) (0.000007)
Male
0.609
−0.000004 0.000028
(0.491)
(0.000120) (0.000103)
White
0.528
0.000045 0.000046
(0.499)
(0.000065) (0.000073)
Employment
0.813
0.000197 0.001479
(0.343)
(0.000291) (0.001414)
Self Emp. Earnings
0.585
−0.000012 −0.000010
(3.644)
(0.000012) (0.000012)
Earnings
22.115
0.000005 0.000009
(17.176)
(0.000007) (0.000009)
Self Employment
0.061
0.000112 0.000093
(0.183)
(0.000232) (0.000234)
Matched to Home
0.485
−0.000352 −0.000351
(0.448)
(0.000362) (0.000362)
401k Contributions
0.316
−0.000119 −0.000117
(0.855)
(0.000116) (0.000116)
Disability Insurance
0.041
0.000578 0.000573
(0.191)
(0.000561) (0.000563)
Job Tenure
3.624
0.000076∗ 0.000077∗
(3.735)
(0.000042) (0.000043)
Firm Wage
19.109
0.000002 0.000003
(18.387)
(0.000002) (0.000003)
Predicted Earnings
0.021
−0.000114
(0.012)
(0.011114)
Predicted Employment
0.753
−0.004109
(0.282)
(0.004583)
Predicted Mortality
0.032
−0.007110
(0.045)
(0.009418)
Joint F-Test
[0.233]
[0.252]
Observations
490216
490216
490216

F-test
p-value
(4)
[0.051]
[0.780]
[0.383]
[0.877]
[0.489]
[0.138]
[0.509]
[0.181]
[0.429]
[0.800]
[0.519]
[0.745]
[0.549]
[0.794]
[0.468]

Notes: This table reports reduced form results testing the random assignment of filings to judges. The sample
consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to
judges. Column 1 reports means and standard deviations for dismissed filers. Columns 2 - 3 report estimates from
an OLS regression of judge leniency on the variables listed and office by month-of-filing fixed effects, with standard
errors clustered at the office level. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection
for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the court in the same
filing year. The p-value reported at bottom of columns 2 - 3 is for a F-test of the joint significance of the variables
listed in the rows. Each row of column 4 reports a p-value from a separate OLS regression of only the pre-determined
variable listed in the corresponding row on judge and office by month-of-filing fixed effects. The p-value is for a F-test
of the joint significance of the judge fixed effects. Predicted earnings, employment, and mortality are formed using
all other variables listed. See Table 1 for details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent
level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

40

Table 4
IV Estimates of the Impact of Chapter 13 Protection on
Labor Supply, Mortality, and Home Foreclosure

Panel A: Labor Supply
Earnings
Employment
Panel B: Mortality
5-year Mortality
Panel C: Home Foreclosure
5-year Foreclosure
Panel D: Misc. Outcomes
401k Contributions
Disability Insurance
Sup. Security Income
Controls
Observations

Baseline
Mean
(1)
22.115
(17.176)
0.813
(0.343)

2SLS Results
(2)
(3)
5.721∗∗∗
5.562∗∗∗
(1.644)
(1.141)
0.091∗∗∗
0.068∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.013)

0.000
(0.000)

−0.013∗∗
(0.006)

−0.012∗∗
(0.006)

0.001
(0.019)

−0.190∗∗∗ −0.191∗∗∗
(0.034)
(0.035)

0.316
(0.855)
0.041
(0.191)
0.006
(0.073)
–
490216

0.055
(0.048)
0.000
(0.012)
−0.140∗
(0.081)
No
490216

−0.008
(0.044)
0.012
(0.012)
−0.128∗
(0.074)
Yes
490216

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The
sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges.
The foreclosure sample includes the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data
coverage (N = 280202). The SSI sample includes the subset of filers who are 65 or older (N = 53594). Column 1
reports the mean and standard deviation for the five years before filing. Columns 2 - 3 instrument for bankruptcy
protection using the reduced form measure of judge leniency described in the text. All specifications control for office
by month-of-filing fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. Column 3 adds controls for gender,
race, age, and the five year average of baseline employment and baseline earnings. All monetary values are expressed
in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000. See Table 1 for additional details on the data and variable construction. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

41

42

0.011
(0.063)
[0.370]
0.014
(0.016)
[0.041]
−0.135∗
(0.079)
[0.063]
Yes
290443

−0.191∗∗∗
(0.036)
[0.001]

−0.030∗∗∗
(0.010)
[0.000]

−0.069
(0.086)
[0.257]
−0.018
(0.030)
[0.039]
−0.235
(0.162)
[0.113]
Yes
186323

−0.184∗∗∗
(0.046)
[0.001]

−0.030
(0.025)
[0.000]

Female
(2)
6.806∗∗∗
(1.614)
[18.743]
0.114∗∗∗
(0.027)
[0.843]

−0.055
(0.062)
[0.373]
0.014
(0.013)
[0.040]
−0.089
(0.070)
[0.055]
Yes
258629

−0.200∗∗∗
(0.026)
[0.001]

−0.039∗∗∗
(0.009)
[0.000]

White
(3)
6.195∗∗∗
(1.092)
[24.491]
0.084∗∗∗
(0.018)
[0.825]

0.081
(0.074)
[0.253]
−0.007
(0.025)
[0.043]
−0.350∗∗∗
(0.126)
[0.120]
Yes
231587

−0.171∗∗
(0.069)
[0.001]

0.001
(0.011)
[0.000]

NonWhite
(4)
6.586∗∗∗
(1.700)
[19.460]
0.066∗∗
(0.030)
[0.800]

Yes
183523

–

0.148∗
(0.076)
[0.248]
−0.008
(0.014)
[0.012]

−0.192∗∗∗
(0.040)
[0.001]

−0.022∗∗∗
(0.006)
[0.000]

25 to 40
(5)
7.833∗∗∗
(1.405)
[22.403]
0.057∗∗∗
(0.016)
[0.908]

Yes
222750

–

−0.108
(0.085)
[0.440]
0.045∗∗
(0.022)
[0.048]

−0.174∗∗∗
(0.040)
[0.001]

−0.017∗∗
(0.008)
[0.000]

−0.108
(0.096)
[0.306]
−0.153∗∗
(0.067)
[0.161]
−0.153∗∗
(0.067)
[0.099]
Yes
34380

−0.315∗∗∗
(0.038)
[0.001]

−0.109∗∗
(0.050)
[0.000]

Age at Filing
40 to 60
60 and up
(6)
(7)
6.299∗∗∗
0.147
(1.362)
(1.725)
[26.574]
[15.907]
0.093∗∗∗
0.079
(0.018)
(0.069)
[0.840]
[0.597]

0.047
(0.064)
[0.595]
−0.036∗∗∗
(0.010)
[0.007]
−0.099
(0.085)
[0.007]
Yes
245108

−0.192∗∗∗
(0.034)
[0.001]

−0.027∗∗∗
(0.007)
[0.000]

High
Income
(8)
8.650∗∗∗
(1.430)
[35.723]
0.099∗∗∗
(0.015)
[0.978]

−0.136∗∗∗
(0.039)
[0.038]
0.094∗∗
(0.037)
[0.076]
−0.198∗∗
(0.096)
[0.094]
Yes
245108

−0.191∗∗∗
(0.044)
[0.001]

−0.027∗
(0.016)
[0.000]

Low
Income
(9)
1.691∗
(0.954)
[8.506]
0.039
(0.035)
[0.648]

−0.001
(0.043)
[0.390]
−0.014
(0.034)
[0.043]
−0.171
(0.106)
[0.087]
Yes
135955

−0.353∗∗∗
(0.059)
[0.002]

−0.015
(0.009)
[0.000]

Matched
to Home
(10)
6.740∗∗∗
(1.031)
[24.004]
0.068∗∗
(0.033)
[0.804]

0.004
(0.077)
[0.077]
−0.002
(0.020)
[0.020]
0.019
(0.121)
[0.121]
Yes
144247

−0.030∗
(0.017)
[0.017]

−0.038∗∗∗
(0.007)
[0.007]

Not
Matched
(11)
7.222∗∗∗
(1.322)
[1.322]
0.093∗∗∗
(0.022)
[0.022]

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection estimated separately by group. The sample consists
of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. The foreclosure sample includes the subset of those filings
originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage (N = 280202). The SSI sample includes the subset of filers who are 65 or older (N = 53594).
We instrument for bankruptcy protection using the reduced form measure of judge leniency described in the text. All specifications control for gender, race,
age, the five year average of baseline employment and baseline earnings, and office by month-of-filing fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the office level.
Outcomes are averaged over the first five years after filing. Baseline means for each group are reported in brackets. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000
dollars divided by 1,000. See Table 1 for additional details on the data and variable construction. Observations refer to the number of bankruptcy filers in the
indicated group. The number of observations in each regression is the sum of all groups. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
* = significant at 10 percent level.

Controls
Observations

Sup. Security Income

Disability Insurance

Panel D: Misc. Outcomes
401k Contributions

Panel C: Home Foreclosure
5-year Foreclosure

Panel B: Mortality
5-year Mortality

Employment

Panel A: Labor Supply
Earnings

Male
(1)
6.259∗∗∗
(0.943)
[25.302]
0.066∗∗∗
(0.015)
[0.832]

Table 5
Chapter 13 Results by Filer Characteristics

43
0.408
(0.519)
[0.273]
0.105
(0.130)
[0.035]
−1.652
(3.070)
[0.008]
62040

−0.239∗∗∗
(0.065)
[0.000]

−0.024
(0.060)
[0.000]

−0.021
(0.042)
[0.323]
0.009
(0.012)
[0.042]
−0.104∗
(0.063)
[0.005]
428176

−0.190∗∗∗
(0.035)
[0.001]

−0.011∗∗
(0.006)
[0.000]

−0.095∗∗
(0.040)
[0.006]
0.172∗∗∗
(0.039)
[0.124]
−0.263
(1.494)
[0.019]
135418
0.508
(0.663)
[0.439]
0.012
(0.161)
[0.007]
0.349
(5.449)
[0.000]
38071

−0.232
(0.218)
[0.000]

−0.072
(0.078)
[0.000]

−0.253∗∗∗
(0.077)
[0.036]
−0.060
(0.061)
[0.022]
−0.089
(9.240)
[0.001]
10122

−0.170∗∗∗
(0.061)
[0.001]

0.020
(0.042)
[0.000]

0.016
(0.056)
[0.490]
−0.044∗∗∗
(0.010)
[0.008]
−0.376
(3.037)
[0.000]
277726

−0.174∗∗∗
(0.038)
[0.001]

−0.027∗∗∗
(0.005)
[0.000]

0.091
(0.209)
[0.041]
0.113
(0.125)
[0.022]
−9.525
(103.351)
[0.001]
28879

−0.269
(0.206)
[0.000]

−0.016
(0.072)
[0.000]

State/Federal Marginal Garnishment Rate
0/25
0/100
25/25
100/100
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
5.607
−1.759
7.892∗∗∗
7.435
(3.849)
(3.185)
(1.363)
(5.267)
[29.552]
[11.630]
[31.761]
[11.859]
0.180
−0.095
0.098∗∗∗
0.177
(0.167)
(0.099)
(0.016)
(0.125)
[0.954]
[0.835]
[0.971]
[0.893]

−0.237∗∗∗
(0.042)
[0.001]

0.033
(0.020)
[0.000]

0/0
(3)
−0.471
(1.349)
[3.211]
−0.021
(0.041)
[0.432]

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection interacted with state and federal garnishment
laws. The sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. The foreclosure sample
includes the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage (N = 280202). The SSI sample includes the subset of
filers who are 65 or older (N = 53594). Columns 1 - 2 interact Chapter 13 with indicators for living in a state that does not allow any wage garnishment
and living in a state that does allow wage garnishment. Columns 3 - 7 interact Chapter 13 with indicators for binding garnishment bracket in the
filer’s state of filing and the non-binding federal bracket. Each column header refers to the marginal garnishment rate in the state/federal system. All
specifications control for gender, race, age, and the five year average of baseline employment baseline earnings, and office by month-of-filing fixed effects,
and cluster standard errors at the office level. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000. See Table 1 for additional details
on the data and variable construction. Observations refer to the number of bankruptcy filers in the indicated group. The number of observations in each
regression is the sum of all columns. Baseline means for each group are reported in brackets. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5
percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Observations

Sup. Security Income

Disability Insurance

Panel D: Misc. Outcomes
401k Contributions

Panel C: Home Foreclosure
5-year Foreclosure

Panel B: Mortality
5-year Mortality

Employment

Panel A: Labor Supply
Earnings

Garnishment in State?
No
Yes
(1)
(2)
3.193
5.635∗∗∗
(2.096)
(1.136)
[19.730]
[22.460]
0.114
0.066∗∗∗
(0.101)
(0.013)
[0.736]
[0.824]

Table 6
Chapter 13 Results by Wage Garnishment Regulations

Table 7
Chapter 13 Job Mobility Results

Work in Same County
Work in Same State
Work in Same Job
Work in Same Industry
Job Tenure
Firm Wages
Controls
Observations

Baseline
Mean
(1)
0.576
(0.399)
0.627
(0.405)
0.502
(0.386)
0.557
(0.396)
3.624
(3.735)
19.109
(18.387)
–
382385

2SLS Results
(2)
(3)
0.250∗∗∗ 0.229∗∗∗
(0.025)
(0.024)
∗∗∗
0.170
0.153∗∗∗
(0.024)
(0.024)
∗∗∗
0.272
0.246∗∗∗
(0.026)
(0.025)
0.262∗∗∗ 0.238∗∗∗
(0.030)
(0.026)
0.987∗∗∗ 0.820∗∗∗
(0.196)
(0.175)
∗∗∗
4.635
4.102∗∗∗
(1.347)
(1.096)
No
Yes
382385
382385

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The
sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges
that are employed for at least one time period post-bankruptcy. Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation
for the five years before filing. Columns 2 - 3 instrument for bankruptcy protection using the reduced form measure
of judge leniency described in the text. All specifications control for office by month-of-filing fixed effects, and cluster
standard errors at the office level. Column 3 adds controls for gender, race, age, and the five year average of baseline
employment and baseline earnings. Same county, state, job and industry are defined using the filer’s job in the year
prior to filing. Baseline means for each group are reported in brackets. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

44

Appendix Figure 1
The Geography of Consumer Bankruptcy
Number of Bankruptcy Offices in Each Court

Number of Chapter 13 Judges

Chapter 13 Filings Per Capita

Chapter 13 Discharge Rate

Variation in Chapter 13 Judge Leniency

Notes: These figures display summary statistics by bankruptcy office. The sample includes the 72 bankruptcy courts
that allow electronic access to their dockets. The number of Chapter 13 judges is based on 2003 filings. Per capita
Chapter 13 filings are calculated using the average annual number of filings between 2000 and 2004 divided by
population as reported by the 2000 census. The Chapter 13 discharge rate is calculated across all available years
between 1992 and 2005. The Chapter 13 judge leniency sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005
in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges.

45

.04
0

.02

Fraction

.06

.08

Appendix Figure 2
Distribution of Judge by Office Observations

0

1000

2000

3000

Judge x Office Observations

Notes: This figure displays the distribution of judge by office cell sizes in our estimation sample. The sample consists
of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. See text for
details.

46

.02
0

.01

Fraction

.03

.04

Appendix Figure 3
Distribution of Chapter 13 Judge Leniency

-.04

-.02

0

.02

.04

Judge Leniency

Notes: This figure displays the distribution of Chapter 13 judge leniency for the estimation sample. The sample
consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. Judge
leniency is defined as the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus
the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office in the same filing year.

47

.8
.6
.4
.2

b = 0.814
(0.020)

0

Discharge Rate in Year t

1

Appendix Figure 4
Persistence of Chapter 13 Judge Discharge Rates

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Discharge Rate in Year t - 1

Notes: This figure shows the correlation between judge specific Chapter 13 discharge rates in the current and lagged
years. The sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings
to judges. See text for details.

48

Appendix Figure 5
Chapter 13 Judge Leniency by Filer Characteristics
White vs. Non-White

.05
0

Whites

b = 1.005
(0.171)

−.05

0

b = 0.838
(0.112)

−.1

−.1

−.05

Males

.05

.1

.1

Male vs. Female

−.1

−.05

0

.05

−.1

.1

−.05

0

.1

Over vs. Under 40

b = 1.104
(0.182)

−.1

−.1

−.05

−.05

0

b = 0.998
(0.261)

0

Over 40

.05

.05

.1

.1

High vs. Low Earnings

High Income

.05

Non−whites

Females

−.1

−.05

0

.05

−.1

.1

−.05

0

.05

.1

Under 40

Low Income

0

b = 0.889
(0.300)

-.1

-.05

Home Owner

.05

.1

Matched to Home vs. Not Matched

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

Not Home Owner

Notes: These figures show the correlation between judge leniency for different groups of filers. The sample consists of
all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. Judge leniency is
defined as the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-oneout mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the office in the same filing year. We take the average leniency
for each group over all available years of data. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated using OLS relating
each judge leniency measure.

49

Appendix Figure 6
Mean and Median Earnings for Granted and Dismissed Chapter 13 Filers

0

30000

Earnings
-5

20000

-10

25000

25000
20000
15000

Earnings

35000

Non-Zero Mean Earnings

30000

Mean Earnings

5

-10

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

Dismissed

0
Granted

5

Dismissed

Non-Zero Median Earnings

0

15000

-5

5

-10

-5

0

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

25000

Earnings

15000
10000

-10

20000

20000

25000

30000

Median Earnings

Earnings

-5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Granted

Dismissed

Dismissed

Notes: These figures plot mean and median earnings for granted and dismissed bankruptcy filers. The sample includes
all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. Year 0 indicates
the year a debtor files for bankruptcy protection. See text for additional details.

50

Appendix Figure 7
401k Contributions, Disability Insurance, and Supplemental Security Income
for Granted and Dismissed Chapter 13 Filers
Disability Insurance

.08
.06

Disability Insurance

.02

.04

400
300
200
100

401k Contributions

.1

500

.12

401k Contributions

-10

-5

0

5

-10

-5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

0

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Dismissed

Granted

Dismissed

.1
.05

Sup. Security Income

.15

Sup. Security Income

-10

-5

0

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

Dismissed

Notes: These figures plot average 401k contributions, Disability Insurance, and Sup. Security Income for granted and
dismissed bankruptcy filers. The sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that
randomly assign cases to judges. The Sup. Security Income sample includes the subset of filers 65 or older. Year 0
indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy protection.

51

Appendix Figure 8
Chapter 13 Judge Leniency and 401k Contributions,
Disability Insurance, and Supplemental Security Income
Disability Insurance
.14
.12
.1
.06

b = 41.482
(38.391)

.08

Disability Insurance

400
300
200

401k Contributions

500

401k Contributions

.04

100

b = 0.000
(0.009)
−.1

−.05

0

.05

−.1

.1

−.05

0

.05

.1

Judge Leniency

Judge Leniency

®

®

.2
.1
0
−.1

Sup. Security Income

.3

Sup. Security Income

b = −0.117
(0.073)
−.1

−.05

0

.05

.1

Judge Leniency
®

Notes: These figures plot 401k contributions, Disability Insurance, and Sup. Security Income vs. our leave-one-out
measure of judge leniency. The sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that
randomly assign cases to judges. The Sup. Security Income sample includes the subset of filers 65 or older. Judge
leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus
the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the court in the same filing year. To construct the
binned scatter plot, we first regress each outcome on office by month-of-filing fixed effects and calculate residuals.
We then take the mean residual in each judge by year bin, adding the mean discharge rate to each residual to aid
in the interpretation of the plot. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated on the underlying micro data
estimated using OLS. The coefficients show the estimated slope of the best-fit line including office by month-of-filing
fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the office level reported in parentheses.

52

Appendix Figure 9
IV Estimates of the Impact of Chapter 13 Protection on
401k Contributions, Disability Insurance, and Supplemental Security Income
Disability Insurance

.05
-.05

0

Disability Insurance

100
0
-100
-200

401k Contributions

200

.1

300

401k Contributions

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

0
-.25
-.5

Sup. Security Income

.25

Sup. Security Income

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Notes: These figures plot two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The
earnings and mortality sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly
assign cases to judges. The Sup. Security Income sample includes the subset of filers 65 or older. We instrument for
bankruptcy protection using judge leniency and control for gender, race, five-year age effects, baseline employment,
baseline earnings, and office by month-of-filing fixed effects. The dashed lines are 95 percent confidence intervals from
standard errors clustered at the office level. Year 0 indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy protection.

53

Appendix Figure 10
Job Mobility Outcomes for Granted and Dismissed Chapter 13 Filers

.8
.4

.6

Work in Same State

.8
.6
.4
.2

Work in Same County

1

Work in Same State

1

Work in Same County

-10

-5

0

5

-10

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

Dismissed

5

Dismissed

1
.8
.6
.4
.2

.4

.6

.8

Work in Same Industry

1

Work in Same Industry

.2

Work in Same Job

0
Granted

Work in Same Job

-10

-5

0

5

-10

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

-5

0

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Dismissed

Granted

Dismissed

Work in Firm Wages

20000
18000

Firm Wages

3
1

14000

2

16000

4

5

22000

Job Tenure

Job Tenure

-5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-10

-5

0

5

-10

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing
Granted

-5

0

5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Dismissed

Granted

Dismissed

Notes: These figures plot average job mobility outcomes for granted and dismissed bankruptcy filers. The sample
includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges that
are employed for at least one time period post-bankruptcy. Year 0 indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy
protection. Same county, state, job, and industry variables are defined relative to the year before filing. Each variable
is therefore mechanically equal to one in year -1. See Table 7 for additional details.

54

Appendix Figure 11
Marginal Treatment Effects for Labor Supply, Mortality, and Home Foreclosure
Employment
.25
.2
.15
.1
0

.05

Marginal Treatment Effect

20000
10000
0
−10000

Marginal Treatment Effect

30000

Earnings

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.4

.5

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate

Predicted Discharge Rate

®

®

Home Foreclosure
0
−.1
−.2

Marginal Treatment Effect

−.3

0
−.01
−.02

−.4

−.03

Marginal Treatment Effect

.01

Mortality

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

.4

Predicted Discharge Rate

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate
®

®

Notes: These figures plot marginal treatment effects and associated 95 percent confidence intervals. The sample
includes first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. The foreclosure
sample includes the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage. We
predict the probability of bankruptcy protection using our leave-one-out measure of judge leniency. We then predict
the relationship between each outcome and the predicted probability of receiving bankruptcy protection using a local
quadratic estimator with bandwidth 0.069. The estimates of the first derivative of this relationship are then evaluated
at each percentile of the predicted probability. Standard errors are calculated using a bootstrap procedure with 250
iterations. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000. Earnings information comes
from the W-2, and is averaged over the first five post-filing years. Employment is an indicator for non-zero wage
earnings on the W-2, and is averaged over the first five post-filing years. Five-year mortality is an indicator for being
deceased within the first five post-filing years using information from the Death Master File. Five-year foreclosure is
an indicator for a filer’s home receiving a notice of default, receiving a notice of transfer or sale, or being transferred
to a REO or a guarantor within the first five post-filing years using real estate records from DataQuick.

55

Appendix Figure 12
Marginal Treatment Effects for 401k Contributions, Disability Insurance, and Sup. Security
Income
Disability Insurance
.05
−.05

0

Marginal Treatment Effect

200
0
−200
−400

Marginal Treatment Effect

400

401k Contributions

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.4

.5

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate

Predicted Discharge Rate

®

®

0
−.2
−.4
−.6

Marginal Treatment Effect

.2

Sup. Security Income

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate
®

Notes: These figures plot marginal treatment effects and associated 95 percent confidence intervals. The sample
includes first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. See Appendix
Figure X notes for details on estimation procedure and Table 1 notes for variable definitions.

56

Appendix Figure 13
Job Mobility Marginal Treatment Effects
Same State

.2

.3

.4

0

−.1

0

.1

Marginal Treatment Effect

.3
.2
.1

Marginal Treatment Effect

.4

Same County

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.4

.5

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate

Predicted Discharge Rate

®
®

Same Industry

.4
.3
0

0

.1

.2

Marginal Treatment Effect

.4
.2

Marginal Treatment Effect

.5

.6

Same Job

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

.4

.42

Predicted Discharge Rate

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate
®

®

Average Firm Wage

10
5
−5

0

Marginal Treatment Effect

2
1
0
−1

Marginal Treatment Effect

15

3

20

Job Tenure

.4

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

.4

Predicted Discharge Rate

.42

.44

.46

.48

.5

Predicted Discharge Rate
®

®

Notes: These figures plot marginal treatment effects and associated 95 percent confidence intervals. The sample
includes first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. See Appendix
Figure X notes for details on estimation procedure and Table 7 notes for variable definitions.

57

Appendix Figure 14
Event Study Estimates of Chapter 13 and Chapter 7 Protection

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

7500
5000

-5

-4

-3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

0

1

2

3

4

5

4

5

.1
.08

Employment

.08
.06
.02

.02

.04

Employment

.08
.06
.04
0

0

0

.02

-1

Employment
Ch. 7 Full Sample

.1

Employment
Ch. 13 Full Sample

.1

Employment
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

-2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

.06

-3

.04

-4

2500

Earnings

0

0

2500

Earnings

5000

5000

Earnings

2500
0

-5

Employment

Earnings
Ch. 7 Full Sample

7500

Earnings
Ch. 13 Full Sample

7500

Earnings
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-1

0

1

2

3

Mortality
Ch. 7 Full Sample

2

3

4

5

-.02
-.03

0

1

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

3

4

5

0

1

3

4

5

0

Home Foreclosure

-.05

0

Home Foreclosure
Ch. 7 Full Sample

-.15

-.15

-.15

-.1

Home Foreclosure

-.05
-.1

2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Home Foreclosure
Ch. 13 Full Sample

0

Home Foreclosure
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

Home Foreclosure

2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-.05

1

-.1

0

-.01

Mortality

-.01

Mortality
-.02
-.03

-.03

-.02

Mortality

-.01

0

0

Mortality
Ch. 13 Full Sample

0

Mortality
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

-2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

0

1

2

3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

4

5

0

1

2

3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

58

4

5

0

1

2

3

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

4

5

Appendix Figure 14 Continued
Event Study Estimates of Chapter 13 and Chapter 7 Protection

1

2

3

4

5

-4

-3

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-5

0

1

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

4

5

.01

Sup. Security Income

.01
0

-.02

-.02

-1

1

Sup. Security Income
Ch. 7 Full Sample

-.01

Sup. Security Income

.01
0
-.01

-2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

0

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Sup. Security Income
Ch. 13 Full Sample

-.02

-3

-4

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Sup. Security Income
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

-4

-1

-.05

-5

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-5

-2

.01

Disability Insurance

.01
-.01
-.05

-3

-3

Disability Insurance
Ch. 7 Full Sample

-.03

Disability Insurance

.01
-.01
-.03

-4

-4

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Disability Insurance
Ch. 13 Full Sample

-.05

Disability Insurance

-2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

Disability Insurance
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

-5

100
0

-5

-.01

0

-.03

-1

0

-2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

-.01

-3

-50

-50

-4

50

401k Contributions

100

401k Contributions

0

50

150
100
50

401k Contributions

0
-50

-5

Sup. Security Income

401k Contributions
Ch. 7 Full Sample
150

401k Contributions
Ch. 13 Full Sample
150

401k Contributions
Ch. 13 Judge IV Sample

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

59

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Year Relative to Bankruptcy Filing

3

Notes: These figures plot event study results of the impact of Chapter 13 and Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection.
The Judge IV sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign
cases to judges. The full sample includes a 10 percent random sample of all first-time filings between 1992 and
2005 in the 72 bankruptcy courts that allow electronic access to their dockets. The foreclosure sample includes all
filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage. We report the coefficient on an indicator for
receiving bankruptcy protection interacted with the specified year. We control for individual, year, and propensity
score decile by year fixed effects. The propensity score is using a probit regression of an indicator for discharge on
gender, race, five-year age bins, five years of baseline employment entered individually, five years of baseline earnings
entered individually, office fixed effects, and filing year fixed effects. We then split the sample into deciles and interact
each decile with year indicators for the five years before and after filing, omitting the year prior to filing. Standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. Year 0 indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy protection. All
monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars. Earnings information comes from the W-2. Employment is an
indicator for non-zero wage earnings on the W-2. Mortality is an indicator for being deceased in the indicated year
using information from the Death Master File. Foreclosure is an indicator for a filer’s home receiving a notice of
default, receiving a notice of transfer or sale, or being transferred to a REO or a guarantor. See text for additional
details.

60

Appendix Table 1
Bankruptcy Offices in Chapter 13 IV Sample
Court
Northern District of Alabama
Southern District of Alabama
Eastern District of Arkansas
Southern District of California
Southern District of Florida
Southern District of Florida
Northern District of Georgia
Northern District of Georgia
Southern District of Iowa
Southern District of Iowa
District of Idaho
Southern District of Indiana
Eastern District of Kentucky
District of Massachusetts
Eastern District of Michigan
Western District of Michigan
District of Minnesota
District of Minnesota
Eastern District of Missouri
Western District of Missouri
Middle District of North Carolina
District of New Mexico
District of Nevada
Southern District of Ohio
Southern District of Ohio
Southern District of Ohio
Northern District of Oklahoma
District of Oregon
District of Oregon
District of South Carolina
Eastern District of Tennessee
Middle District of Tennessee
Middle District of Tennessee
Middle District of Tennessee
Western District of Tennessee
Western District of Texas
District of Utah
Eastern District of Virginia
Eastern District of Virginia
Eastern District of Virginia
Western District of Washington
Eastern District of Wisconsin

Office
Birmingham
Mobile
Little Rock
San Diego
Fort Lauderdale
Miami
Atlanta
Rome
Davenport
Des Moines
Boise
Indianapolis
Lexington
Boston
Detroit
Grand Rapids
Minneapolis
St. Paul
St. Louis
Kansas City
Durham
Albuquerque
Las Vegas
Cincinnati
Columbus
Dayton
Tulsa
Eugene
Portland
Columbia
Chattanooga
Columbia
Cookeville
Nashville
Memphis
San Antonio
Salt Lake City
Alexandria
Newport News
Norfolk
Tacoma
Milwaukee

Years
1999-2005
2000-2005
1996-2001
1997-2005
1994-2005
1994-2005
2004-2005
2004-2005
1992-2001
1992-2001
1999-2005
2001-2005
1999-2005
1995-2003
2003-2005
1993-2005
1992-2005
1992-2005
2003-2005
2000-2005
2005
1999-2005
1996-2005
1997-2005
1992-2005
1992-2005
1997-2005
1995-2005
2000-2005
2003-2005
2002-2005
2000-2005
2000-2005
2000-2005
1997-2005
1997-2005
2003-2005
2000-2005
1997-2005
1997-2005
2000-2005
2003-2005

Judges
3
2
2
4
2
2
8
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
2
2
2
2
3

Discharge
0.312
0.447
0.467
0.411
0.335
0.437
0.296
0.401
0.552
0.608
0.519
0.495
0.585
0.344
0.291
0.518
0.462
0.485
0.405
0.478
0.558
0.315
0.396
0.598
0.573
0.592
0.486
0.503
0.495
0.751
0.424
0.437
0.437
0.467
0.277
0.452
0.334
0.507
0.523
0.551
0.503
0.456

σZ
0.032
0.006
0.012
0.022
0.019
0.012
0.035
0.011
0.019
0.042
0.022
0.015
0.033
0.028
0.007
0.023
0.009
0.030
0.015
0.021
0.017
0.024
0.010
0.014
0.049
0.030
0.030
0.027
0.158
0.021
0.017
0.031
0.047
0.017
0.007
0.010
0.019
0.013
0.035
0.021
0.017
0.020

Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics for the 42 offices in the 31 bankruptcy courts that randomly assign
filings to judges in our instrumental variables sample. σZ is the standard deviation of leave-one-out measure of judge
leniency described in the text.

61

62
0.316
(0.855)
0.041
(0.191)
0.006
(0.073)
490216

0.001
(0.019)

0.000
(0.000)

−0.008
(0.044)
0.012
(0.012)
−0.128∗
(0.074)
490216

−0.191∗∗∗
(0.035)

−0.012∗∗
(0.006)

−0.006
(0.040)
0.012
(0.012)
−0.130∗
(0.071)
490216

−0.189∗∗∗
(0.033)

−0.011∗∗
(0.005)
−0.010
(0.015)

−0.069
(0.110)
−0.002
(0.048)
−0.184
(0.150)
490216

0.043
(0.100)
0.017
(0.028)
−0.114
(0.097)
245019

−0.253∗∗∗ −0.207∗∗∗
(0.047)
(0.045)

−0.025
(0.025)

Split
Sample
(5)
4.628∗∗
(2.020)
0.024
(0.023)

−0.242∗∗
(0.122)

−0.023
(0.024)

−0.232∗∗
(0.113)

−0.023
(0.023)

−0.067
−0.116
−0.116
(0.077)
(0.106)
(0.104)
−0.041
−0.045
−0.042
(0.027)
(0.034)
(0.035)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
−0.183
−0.297
−0.197∗∗∗
(0.048)
(0.112)
(0.082)
490216
490216
490216

−0.201∗∗
(0.081)

−0.023
(0.021)

Judge Fixed Effects
2SLS
LIML
Jackknife
(6)
(7)
(8)
4.445∗∗∗
4.263∗∗
4.463∗∗
(1.593)
(1.912)
(1.812)
∗∗
∗∗
0.070
0.073
0.072∗∗
(0.030)
(0.035)
(0.038)

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares, LIML, and Jackknife IV estimates of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in the first five post-filing
years. The sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges. The foreclosure sample includes
the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage (N = 280202). Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation
for dismissed filers. Column 2 reports our preferred estimates from Table 4 using our leave-one-out measure of judge leniency as an instrument for bankruptcy
protection. Column 3 uses a leave-month-out measure of judge leniency as an instrument Column 4 uses a leave-one-out measure of judge leniency measured over
the first 90 post-filing days as an instrument. Column 5 uses a randomly selected subset of 50 percent of filers to calculate a leave-month-out measure of judge
leniency that is used as an instrument in the mutually exclusive subset of filers. Columns 6 - 8 use judge fixed effects as instruments for judge leniency estimated
using two-stage least squares, LIML, and Jackknife IV respectively. All specifications control for gender, race, age, five year averages of baseline employment and
baseline earnings, and office by month-of-filing fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the office level. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars
divided by 1,000. See Table 1 for additional details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
* = significant at 10 percent level.

Observations

Sup. Security Income

Disability Insurance

Panel D: Misc. Outcomes
401k Contributions

Panel C: Home Foreclosure
5-year Foreclosure

Panel B: Mortality
5-year Mortality

Employment

Panel A: Labor Supply
Earnings

Baseline
Mean
(1)
22.115
(17.176)
0.813
(0.343)

Appendix Table 2
Robustness of Chapter 13 Results
Judge Leniency
Leave
90-day
Leave
One Out Mth. Out Discharge
(2)
(3)
(4)
5.562∗∗∗
5.602∗∗∗
9.126∗∗∗
(1.141)
(1.065)
(1.779)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0.068
0.068
0.102∗∗
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.046)

Appendix Table 3
Additional Tests of Randomization
Baseline
Mean
Judge Leniency
(1)
(2)
(3)
Number of cases
1118.637
0.000012
(758.759)
(0.000016)
Earnings Decile 2
0.100
−0.000444
(0.300)
(0.000287)
Earnings Decile 3
0.100
−0.000193
(0.300)
(0.000147)
Earnings Decile 4
0.100
−0.000221∗
(0.300)
(0.000129)
Earnings Decile 5
0.100
−0.000136
(0.300)
(0.000137)
Earnings Decile 6
0.100
0.000084
(0.300)
(0.000259)
Earnings Decile 7
0.100
0.000044
(0.300)
(0.000143)
Earnings Decile 8
0.100
0.000078
(0.300)
(0.000250)
Earnings Decile 9
0.100
0.000355
(0.300)
(0.000350)
Earnings Decile 10
0.100
0.000147
(0.300)
(0.000207)
Joint F-Test
[0.468]
[0.288]
Observations
490216
490216
490216

F-test
p-value
(4)
[0.000]
[0.557]
[0.474]
[0.992]
[0.733]
[0.285]
[0.965]
[0.813]
[0.039]
[0.312]

Notes: This table reports reduced form results testing the random assignment of filings to judges. The sample
consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to
judges. Column 1 reports means and standard deviations for dismissed filers. Columns 2 - 3 report estimates from
an OLS regression of judge leniency on the variables listed and office by month-of-filing fixed effects, with standard
errors clustered at the office level. Judge leniency is the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection
for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the court in the same
filing year. The p-value reported at bottom of columns 2 - 3 is for a F-test of the joint significance of the variables
listed in the rows. Each row of column 4 reports a p-value from a separate OLS regression of only the pre-determined
variable listed in the corresponding row on judge and office by month-of-filing fixed effects. The p-value is for a F-test
of the joint significance of the judge fixed effects. See Table 1 for details on the data and variable construction. ***
= significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

63

64

Earnings
Granted Dismissed
(3)
(2)
20871.66 15052.29
21532.00 15779.59
22390.54 16523.13
23347.02 17433.49
24311.48 18343.05
25178.44 19323.27
25971.66 20264.19
26498.91 20868.53
26574.25 20934.64
26400.98 20314.23
26580.45 19359.44
27389.37 18778.57
27632.53 18374.64
27378.35 18255.57
26673.45 17674.69
25771.07 17309.49
219617
270599

Employment
Granted Dismissed
(4)
(5)
0.795
0.712
0.809
0.732
0.820
0.749
0.831
0.765
0.838
0.778
0.843
0.789
0.843
0.794
0.841
0.795
0.838
0.790
0.836
0.787
0.835
0.786
0.827
0.768
0.819
0.749
0.809
0.731
0.796
0.711
0.778
0.689
219617
270599

Mortality
Granted Dismissed
(6)
(7)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.001
0.004
0.004
0.012
0.007
0.019
0.011
0.028
0.016
0.035
0.021
0.040
219617
270599

Home Foreclosure
Granted Dismissed
(8)
(9)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.003
0.024
0.007
0.074
0.011
0.106
0.015
0.127
0.019
0.140
0.025
0.149
115806
164398

Notes: This table reports average labor supply, mortality, and home foreclosure for granted and dismissed bankruptcy filers. The labor supply and
mortality sample includes all first-time filings between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign cases to judges. The foreclosure sample
includes the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage. Year 0 indicates the year a debtor files for bankruptcy
protection. Dollar amounts are expressed in real 2000 dollars. See text for additional details.

Year Relative
to Filing
(1)
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Observations

Appendix Table 4
Labor Supply, Mortality, and Home Foreclosure for Granted and Dismissed Chapter 13 Filers

Appendix Table 5
Chapter 13 Results for Additional Outcomes

Panel A: Labor Supply
Self Emp. Earnings
Self Employment
Earnings with no zeros
Panel B: Mortality
Years Alive (out of 5)
Panel C: Home Sales
5-year Distress Sale
5-year Any Home Sale
Controls
Observations

Baseline
Mean
(1)
0.585
(3.644)
0.061
(0.183)
23.729
(24.307)
5.000
(0.000)
0.001
(0.021)
0.001
(0.031)
–
490216

2SLS Results
(2)
(3)
0.290
0.367
(0.271)
(0.299)
−0.005
0.001
(0.016)
(0.018)
7.109∗∗∗
4.416∗∗∗
(2.001)
(1.636)
0.057∗∗
(0.023)

0.053∗∗
(0.021)

−0.221∗∗∗ −0.222∗∗∗
(0.035)
(0.036)
∗∗∗
−0.335
−0.339∗∗∗
(0.046)
(0.048)
No
Yes
490216
490216

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The
sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges.
The home sample includes the subset of those filings originating in county by year bins with home sales data coverage
(N = 280202). Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation for the five years before filing. Columns 2 - 3
instrument for bankruptcy protection using the reduced form measure of judge leniency described in the text. All
specifications control for office by month-of-filing fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the office level. Column
3 adds controls for gender, race, age, and the five year average of baseline employment and baseline earnings. All
monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000. See Table 1 for additional details on the data
and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at
10 percent level.

65

Appendix Table 6
Chapter 13 Results for Years 6 - 10
Baseline
Mean
2SLS Results
Panel A:Labor Supply
(1)
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
Earnings
20.517
8.127
6.772∗∗∗
(16.147)
(1.949)
(1.603)
Employment
0.812
0.096∗∗∗
0.066∗
(0.340)
(0.029)
(0.035)
Panel B: Mortality
10-year Mortality
0.000
−0.026
−0.015
(0.000)
(0.024)
(0.028)
Panel C: Home Foreclosure
10-year Foreclosure
0.000
−0.272∗∗∗ −0.277∗∗∗
(0.010)
(0.040)
(0.042)
Panel D: Misc. Outcomes
401k Contributions
0.221
0.405∗∗∗
0.298∗∗
(0.686)
(0.147)
(0.140)
∗∗∗
Disability Insurance
0.033
−0.054
−0.034∗
(0.172)
(0.020)
(0.020)
Sup. Security Income
0.004
−0.209∗∗ −0.156∗
(0.065)
(0.089)
(0.088)
Controls
–
No
Yes
Observations
189100
189100
189100
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection over the
sixth through tenth post-filing years. The sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2000 in the 42
offices that randomly assign filings to judges. The foreclosure sample includes the subset of those filings originating in
county by year bins with foreclosure data coverage (N = 84181). Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation
for dismissed filers. Columns 2 - 3 instrument for bankruptcy protection using the reduced form measure of judge
leniency described in the text. All specifications control for office by month-of-filing fixed effects, and cluster standard
errors at the office level. Column 3 also includes controls for gender, race, age, and the five year average of baseline
employment and baseline earnings. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000. See Table
1 for additional details on the data and variable construction. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

66

67

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection interacted with state and federal garnishment
laws. The sample consists of all first-time filers between 1992 and 2005 in the 42 offices that randomly assign filings to judges that are employed for at
least one time period post-bankruptcy. Columns 1 - 2 interact Chapter 13 with indicators for living in a state that does not allow any wage garnishment
and living in a state that does allow wage garnishment. Columns 3 - 7 interact Chapter 13 with indicators for binding garnishment bracket in the
filer’s state of filing and the non-binding federal bracket. Each column header refers to the marginal garnishment rate in the state/federal system. All
specifications control for gender, race, age, and the five year average of baseline employment baseline earnings, and office by month-of-filing fixed effects,
and cluster standard errors at the office level. All monetary values are expressed in real 2000 dollars divided by 1,000. See Table 1 for additional details
on the data and variable construction. Observations refer to the number of bankruptcy filers in the indicated group. The number of observations in each
regression is the sum of all columns. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Appendix Table 7
Chapter 13 Job Mobility Results by Wage Garnishment Regulations
Garnishment in State?
State/Federal Marginal Garnishment Rate
0/0
0/25
0/100
25/25
100/100
No
Yes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Work in Same County −0.053
0.236
0.151
−0.033
0.351
0.236
0.294
(0.077)
(0.025)
(0.131)
(0.152)
(0.230)
(0.022)
(0.227)
[0.532]
[0.582]
[0.275]
[0.696]
[0.511]
[0.712]
[0.535]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Work in Same State
−0.012
0.157
0.109
−0.118
0.218
0.164
0.059
(0.084)
(0.026)
(0.158)
(0.149)
(0.272)
(0.028)
(0.311)
[0.588]
[0.633]
[0.312]
[0.762]
[0.609]
[0.766]
[0.601]
∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
Work in Same Job
0.143
0.249
0.206
0.207
0.252
0.251
0.226
(0.084)
(0.026)
(0.095)
(0.179)
(0.209)
(0.025)
(0.202)
[0.462]
[0.508]
[0.219]
[0.614]
[0.397]
[0.636]
[0.426]
Work in Same Industry −0.085
0.246∗∗∗
0.218
0.067
0.379∗∗
0.245∗∗∗
0.080
(0.066)
(0.025)
(0.138)
(0.164)
(0.172)
(0.025)
(0.172)
[0.515]
[0.564]
[0.249]
[0.683]
[0.458]
[0.701]
[0.489]
Job Tenure
1.027
0.814∗∗∗
0.217
1.355
−0.010
0.996∗∗∗
2.352∗∗∗
(1.102)
(0.176)
(0.195)
(1.281)
(0.498)
(0.245)
(0.817)
[3.333]
[3.666]
[0.965]
[4.801]
[2.412]
[4.900]
[2.695]
Firm Wages
2.438
4.153∗∗∗
−1.004
1.565
4.994
5.836∗∗∗
5.469
(3.343)
(1.115)
(1.039)
(4.266)
(5.101)
(1.384)
(6.029)
[16.443]
[19.496]
[5.237]
[23.680]
[12.638]
[26.059]
[13.568]
62040
428176
135418
38071
10122
277726
28879
Observations

