NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF POSTSECONDARY CREDENTIALS IN THE LABOR MARKET:
AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
David J. Deming
Noam Yuchtman
Amira Abulafi
Claudia Goldin
Lawrence F. Katz
Working Paper 20528
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20528
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014

This research is supported in part by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R305C110011 to Teachers College, Columbia University. We thank Olivia Chi, Natalia
Emanuel, Barbara Halla, Glenda Oskar, Megan Prasad, Lauren Reisig, Ali Rohde, Adela Soliz, Shichen
Wang, Jonathan Whittinghill and Wenyu Zhou for superb research assistance. We also thank seminar
participants at Harvard University, NYU, Princeton University, UC-Santa Barbara and the NBER
Summer Institute for helpful feedback. The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial
interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20528.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by David J. Deming, Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study
David J. Deming, Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 20528
September 2014, Revised January 2016
JEL No. I21,J24
ABSTRACT
We study employers’ perceptions of the value of postsecondary degrees using a field experiment. We
randomly assign the sector and selectivity of institutions to fictitious resumes and apply to real vacancy
postings for business and health jobs on a large online job board. We find that a business bachelor’s
degree from a for-profit “online” institution is 22 percent less likely to receive a callback than one
from a non-selective public institution. In applications to health jobs, we find that for-profit credentials
receive fewer callbacks unless the job requires an external quality indicator such as an occupational
license.
David J. Deming
Harvard Graduate School of Education
Gutman 411
Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
david_deming@gse.harvard.edu
Noam Yuchtman
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
yuchtman@haas.berkeley.edu

Claudia Goldin
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu
Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu

Amira Abulafi
National Bureau of Economic Research
abulafi@nber.org

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/262

The large increase in the U.S. college wage premium since 1980 strongly
suggests that the supply of educated labor has not kept pace with its demand
(Goldin and Katz 2008; Autor 2014). One impediment is that inflation-adjusted
state funding of postsecondary education has stagnated since the mid-1990s and
declined substantially in the last decade. The result is higher net tuition and fees
for college students in public institutions (Baum and Ma 2014). Somewhat
counteracting that trend is a marked increase in the generosity of federal Title IV
financial aid. The for-profit sector has taken advantage of federal government
largesse, as well as the increased demand for educated workers, to enlarge its
presence in the postsecondary education market. For-profit colleges offer highly
structured programs at convenient times and formats, and many have argued—at
least going back to Freeman (1974)—that the for-profits respond more rapidly to
changing employer demands than do public sector schools. For-profit institutions
have expanded recently in fast-growing areas such as health and information
technology.
For-profit colleges account for 42 percent of postsecondary enrollment growth
from 2002 to 2012, at which time they enrolled nearly one in seven U.S. college
students. 1 For-profits also have been major contributors to the emerging market
for online education and driven a rapid increase in online enrollment (e.g.,
Deming et al. 2015). The 23 largest for-profit institutions, owned by publicly
traded companies and offering postsecondary degrees entirely online, enrolled
more than 1.1 million students in 2012 and accounted for nearly 20 percent of the
growth of U.S. bachelor’s degrees (BAs) from 2002 to 2012. Yet little is known
about how employers value for-profit degrees and online credentials.
In this paper we experimentally assess employers’ perceptions of postsecondary
degrees from different types of institutions using a resume audit study design. We
1

These tabulations are based on authors’ calculations using the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS) downloaded from http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/.

-2-

draw upon a vast online bank of actual resumes of job seekers to construct
fictitious, but realistic, resumes that randomly vary the fictitious job applicant’s
characteristics including postsecondary institution. We use these resumes in
applying to job vacancies in five major U.S. metropolitan areas posted on a large,
nationally-recognized job search website. Our experiment asks the
straightforward question: Are employers more (or less) likely to express interest
in a job applicant when the credential is from a particular type of institution?
We examine differences in callback rates by the presence of a degree or
credential on the resume and by the type of postsecondary institution. We focus
on three main comparisons: for-profit institutions vs. public institutions; forprofits that are primarily online vs. “brick and mortar” for-profits with an
established local presence; and more-selective vs. less-selective public-sector
institutions.
The job vacancies to which our fictitious applicants apply are in the business
and health fields. The fictitious resumes have postsecondary credentials ranging
from short, industry-relevant certificates to BAs and our fictitious job seekers
have just completed their schooling. We select vacancies that request only
minimal work experience to highlight the salience of the postsecondary credential
to prospective employers.
We find that applicants with BAs in business from large online for-profit
institutions are about 22 percent (2 percentage points) less likely to receive a
callback than applicants with similar degrees from non-selective public schools,
when the job vacancy requires a BA. But applicants with BAs from smaller
“brick and mortar” for-profit colleges with a local presence are not significantly
less likely to receive a callback than are applicants with BAs from public
institutions. Although we find no overall difference in callback rates by public
university selectivity, we do find some evidence of higher returns to degrees from
more-selective institutions for higher-salaried jobs.

-3-

Business job openings that do not require a BA rarely list an associate’s degree
as a job requirement and more commonly have no degree requirement listed at all.
For business job openings that do not require a BA, we find no significant overall
advantage to having a postsecondary credential. Resumes with an associate’s
degree from a public or a for-profit institution are no more likely to receive a
callback than are resumes with identical work experience but no postsecondary
degree at all.
Turning to the health jobs, we find that resumes with certificates from for-profit
institutions are about 57 percent less likely to receive a callback than are those
with similar certificates from public institutions, when the posting does not
explicitly require a postsecondary certificate (primarily postings for medical
assistants). However, we find no significant difference in callback rates by type
of postsecondary institution for health jobs (such as practical nursing and
pharmacy technician) that require both a certificate and a valid occupational
license.
Although our experiment is not designed to directly disentangle alternative
causal mechanisms, we draw two broad lessons from the results. First, employers
appear to view for-profit postsecondary credentials as a negative signal of
applicant quality, particularly when objective measures of quality such as a
licensing exam are unavailable. Our findings echo those of MacLeod et al.
(2015), who find that making national college exit exam scores in Colombia
available to students and employers reduces the earnings return to college
reputation.
Second, we show that differences in callback rates across sector and institution
type are strongly related to differences in objective measures of school resources
and quality such as per-pupil spending and graduation rates. The pattern we find
is consistent with employers’ perceiving systematic value-added differences
across postsecondary sectors. However, employers could discriminate against

-4-

for-profit applicants based on demographics, work experience or other individual
productivity-related characteristics even if employers believe for-profit colleges
are as effective as public institutions. We designed our experiment to minimize
such concerns by making job applicants equal on every characteristic listed on the
resumes, including work experience, demographics, skills and residential address.
But we cannot fully rule out the possibility that employers infer pre-college
applicant quality from postsecondary sector even after conditioning on other
resume characteristics.
Few existing studies have attempted to estimate the labor market returns to a
for-profit college degree. Research on this question has been hampered by data
limitations and the lack of a credibly causal research design (Deming, Goldin and
Katz 2012; Lang and Weinstein 2013; Cellini and Chaudhary 2014).
Contemporaneous with our study, Darolia et al. (2014) conducted a field
experiment examining employer perceptions of sub-baccalaureate degrees from
for-profit versus public institutions. Although our studies differ in many respects,
when considering the range of jobs (business and health) and credentials (subbaccalaureate degrees and certificates) where the studies overlap, the results are
broadly similar. 2
There are four main differences between our study and Darolia et al. (2014).
First, we examine various levels of postsecondary qualifications including the
BA, whereas Darolia et al. (2014) limit their analysis to certificates and associates
degrees granted by for-profit institutions. Our inclusion of resumes with BAs
allows us to study jobs with higher skill qualifications and to examine variation in
impacts by the selectivity of four-year public institutions. Second, Darolia et al.
(2014) focus on for-profit institutions with a physical location in each labor
market, whereas we include a mix of in-person and online for-profit institutions
2

An exception is health jobs that do not require a degree, for which we find a large difference in
callback rates by postsecondary sector and Darolia et al. (2014) find none.

-5-

and test for differences across the two groups. Third, we study job openings and
credentials only in business and health, while Darolia et al. (2014) also include
administrative assistant and information technology openings. Finally, we collect
data from job titles and job descriptions that allow us to examine heterogeneity in
the effects of various qualifications by measures of job quality, such as the
average salary.
Our study follows a long tradition of resume audit studies examining how
employers respond to the characteristics of job seekers including race, gender,
age, immigrant status and nationality, work experience, and unemployment
duration (e.g. Riach and Rich 2002; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004; Lahey
2008; Oreopoulos 2011; Ghayad 2013; Hinrichs 2013; Kroft, Lange and
Notowidigdo 2013; Eriksson and Rooth 2014; Gaddis 2015). As in previous
work, our main outcome is employer contact (measured by callbacks) rather than
an actual job offer. Moreover, differences in callback rates are a measure of
employers’ perceptions of applicant quality, rather than of actual differences in
skill acquisition across educational institutions.
Nonetheless, our results suggest that employers value bachelor’s degrees and
certificates from public institutions more highly than they do those from for-profit
institutions. The finding is notable given the high cost of for-profit institutions,
both to students and to taxpayers. Yearly net tuition and fees at for-profit colleges
are about 80 percent higher than at public four-year institutions. 3 One study
estimates that the total cost of education (including public subsidies) is about 60
percent higher at for-profits compared to public institutions (Cellini 2012). Seven
of the ten largest distributors of Pell Grant dollars are online for-profit
institutions, and the for-profit sector overall receives about 25 percent of all

3

Authors’ calculations using the 2012 National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey (NPSAS),
accessed through the IES QuickStats web application
(http://nces.ed.gov/datalab/quickstats/default.aspx) on September 8, 2014.

-6-

Federal Title IV aid and is involved in about half of all Federal loan defaults
(Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I lays out the context for
our study with basic background information on for-profit and online higher
education, plus a discussion of the proper interpretation of our findings in light of
the resume audit design. Section II describes the details of the experimental
design, such as the labor markets studied and the jobs to which we applied, the
details of resume construction, and the logistics of applying to eligible job
vacancies. Section III presents the main results. Section IV provides additional
results on job quality and discusses the interpretation of the results. Section V
concludes.
I.

Background and Prior Research

The for-profit postsecondary education sector has tripled in size in the last 15
years, and in 2012 represented about 13.3 percent of all postsecondary
enrollments and 23.8 percent of all undergraduate completions in the United
States (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012). 4 The enormous increase in U.S. forprofit sector enrollment has been driven almost entirely by large “chain” schools,
many of which are owned by large, publicly-traded corporations (Deming, Goldin
and Katz 2012).
Rapid enrollment growth in the for-profit sector may have been fueled by
declining state government support for public higher education. Cellini (2009)
shows that for-profit colleges in California were more likely to open in local
markets after community college bond referenda failed to pass. From 2000-2001
4

Enrollment and completion figures are based on the authors’ calculations using IPEDS.
Undergraduate completions are defined as certificates or diplomas, associate’s degrees and
bachelor’s degrees. The share of completions is higher than the share of enrollments in part
because for-profits are more likely to offer short programs of study (Deming, Goldin and Katz
2012).

-7-

to 2010-2011, the share of public institutional revenues from federal and state
sources fell from 79 to 66 percent in two-year institutions and from 70 to 54
percent in four-year institutions, with net tuition and fees making up the
difference (Baum and Ma 2014). Time to degree has lengthened and completion
rates have declined as students receive fewer public resources per capita and face
difficulty enrolling in courses that are necessary for graduation (Pearson
Foundation 2011; Bound, Lovenheim and Turner 2012; Barr and Turner 2013;
Deming, Goldin and Katz 2013;).
Whereas public institutions receive subsidies from state and local governments,
for-profit colleges are more heavily reliant on federal student aid. Title IVeligible for-profit institutions relied on Title IV student aid (i.e., Pell Grants and
Stafford Loans) for about 76 percent of their total revenue in 2011-2012. 5 The
University of Phoenix alone accounted for $800 million in Pell Grants in 20122013, nearly four times the amount of the largest public institution. Cellini (2010)
shows that increases in the maximum Pell Grant award over the last decade
encouraged for-profit entry, and Cellini and Goldin (2014) document that forprofit Title IV eligible institutions charge higher tuition than comparable
institutions that are not Title IV eligible.
Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) document the most rapid enrollment growth
has occurred among a small number of very large “chain” for-profits that offer
programs and degrees online. Although many postsecondary institutions offer
courses online in some form, the largest for-profit institutions either have a
separate online campus or no physical campus at all. 6 In 2012, 23 large for-profit
5

Authors’ calculations using public disclosures of proprietary school revenue under the Higher
Education Act available at https://studentaid.ed.gov/about/data-center/school/proprietary. Nearly
all larger for-profit institutions, and all the schools studied here, are Title-IV eligible. Cellini and
Goldin (2014) discuss the non-Title IV for-profit postsecondary sector.
6
Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) define a school as “online” if no more than 33 percent of its
students are from a single U.S. state. In this paper we follow Deming et al. (2015) in using direct
survey questions about distance education that IPEDS began asking in 2012. IPEDS data are

-8-

online campuses awarded nearly 75,000 bachelor’s degrees (more than 5 percent
of the U.S. total), up from about 4,000 a decade earlier. Importantly, the forprofit share of both bachelor’s degrees and online enrollment has continued to
expand in spite of the negative press and increased regulatory attention paid to the
sector in recent years. 7 The rise of online campuses has occurred almost entirely
in the for-profit sector, but public institutions are increasingly competing for
students online, perhaps in response to cost pressures (Hoxby 2014). At the time
of writing at least four major public universities (University of Maryland, Arizona
State, Penn State and Colorado State) had enrolled students in online “global”
campuses.
The few studies that estimate the labor market returns to for-profit college
degrees and certificates focus on comparing observationally-similar students
across sectors (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012; Lang and Weinstein 2013; Cellini
and Chaudhary 2014). Since for-profit college students are more disadvantaged
on observed characteristics than students in public colleges, any observational
research design can lead to a downward-biased estimate of the returns to for-profit
college attendance relative to other types of institutions if there is similar sorting
on unobservables (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2013). Moreover, given the tight
link between public sector funding shortfalls and for-profit expansion, the
appropriate counterfactual for for-profit college attendance might be no college at
all. 8 Data and research design constraints have limited the ability of previous
work to examine heterogeneity in returns by degree level or field and prevented
the examination of the labor market returns to degrees awarded online.
collected at the campus level, so we can separate “University of Phoenix – Online Campus” from
the other brick-and-mortar branches, for example. This definition is conservative since some
students may be taking courses online despite being enrolled at a physical campus.
7
See Appendix Figures 1 and 2 for details.
8
Gilpin, Saunders and Stoddard (2013) find for-profit institutions expand enrollment in
occupations experiencing employment growth, but community colleges do not respond similarly.
Thus, marginal students might be choosing between a for-profit college and no college (or a
program in some other field).

-9-

Our research design circumvents these problems by experimentally varying the
information about job candidates observed by employers. Because we randomly
assign institution name and degree to otherwise identical resumes (in
expectation), any difference in callback rates (up to sampling error) represents a
causal difference in how employers perceive degrees from each type of
institution.
The audit study design has several important limitations, however. We
emphasize that we measure employers’ perceptions of applicant quality, not the
actual differences in human capital acquisition across sectors. We test whether
employers statistically discriminate against applicants with certain types of
degrees, potentially reflecting employer beliefs about both the quality of the
education provided and the ex ante attributes of the graduates themselves from
each sector. We choose institutions with name recognition and/or an established
local presence to minimize the risk that differences in callbacks result from
employer ignorance about a particular institution. Our hope is that an employer’s
decision whether to contact an applicant reflects past experience with graduates of
that institution.
A second limitation is that the outcome of interest is an employer callback
rather than the wages of the job or a job offer. If the probability of an interview
or job offer, conditional on a callback, differs by institutional type or degree, the
absence of information beyond a callback may be a concern. For example,
employers may perceive some degrees to have higher variance than others,
leading employers to be differentially likely to request an interview (and
eventually extend an offer) conditional on the expected mean quality of the
applicant (Heckman and Siegelman 1993; Neumark 2012). We address this
concern by examining whether our results differ when we consider only employer
contacts to set up an interview (an indicator of strong interest), rather than a
generic callback. Employers might also be concerned that an applicant is too

-10-

qualified and would not accept the job if offered. In this “reverse discrimination”
story, a lower callback rate would actually be evidence of higher perceived
quality. We address this concern by studying how callback rates by institution
type differ between high- and low-salaried jobs. We also note that in-person audit
studies typically find that group differences in callback rates for interviews
closely mirror group differences in job offer rates (Mincy 1993).
Another limitation of the research design is that our measure of employer
perceptions is limited to direct contact from unfamiliar applicants through an
online job board. Yet institutions may differ in their formal connections with
employers or in their ability to place students through informal channels
(Rosenbaum, Deil-Amen and Person 2006). Moreover, not all jobs are posted
online, and employers may differ in their willingness to fill job vacancies with
online applicants. Nevertheless, Internet job search is increasingly a viable
pathway toward employment. Carnevale, Jayasundera, and Repnikov (2014)
estimate that between 60 and 70 percent of all job vacancies are posted online,
with better coverage for jobs with higher education requirements. Kuhn and
Mansour (2014) show that the share of young unemployed workers who use the
Internet to look for a job increased from 24 percent in 2000 to 74 percent in 2009,
and that the unemployment durations of Internet searchers are about 25 percent
shorter than comparable workers who search only offline.
Additionally, we focus on resumes for students who have completed their
degrees and do not take into account differences in degree completion rates across
institutions that may impact the full returns to postsecondary schooling by sector.
Using a longitudinal sample of students who began in 2003 and were followed for
six years, Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) compare completion rates across
public and for-profit institutions controlling for student characteristics. Students
in for-profit institutions, they found, are more likely to complete a short certificate

-11-

program, equally likely to complete an associate’s degree program, but less likely
to complete a BA program, compared with similar students in public institutions.
Despite these limitations, we believe that our experiment is informative about
employer preferences for marginal students, meaning job applicants who could
plausibly have attended either a public or a for-profit institution, or no college at
all. Our experimental design tries to create resumes with characteristics drawn
from the “common support” across all types of institutions, and to reproduce an
important part of the actual job search process for newly-minted graduates at each
of those institutions.
II.
A.

Experimental Design

Study Setting: Degrees, Occupations, and Labor Markets

We focus on degrees and certificates awarded in the two largest occupational
categories by degree in the United States: business and health. 9 Table 1 lists the
programs and degrees in our study. The associate’s and bachelor’s degrees are in
two broad business programs (accounting/finance and customer
service/sales/marketing) and the certificates are in four different health
programs. 10 In 2012, about 43 percent of certificates and diplomas were awarded
in the health fields, and 12 percent of associate’s degrees and 21 percent of all
bachelor’s degrees were awarded in the business fields. These awards are spread
relatively evenly across postsecondary sectors. The business field accounts for 10
percent of all associate’s degrees and 16 percent of all bachelor’s degrees in
public institutions, as compared with 20 and 43 percent among for-profits. And

9

IPEDS groups degrees and certificates into occupational categories using the Classification of
Instructional Programs (CIP) coding scheme.
10
The “allied health” professions, defined as health support roles for nurses, doctors and
pharmacists, include ten of the 20 fastest growing occupations projected by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics from 2012 to 2022 (http://www.bls.gov/ooh/fastest-growing.htm).

-12-

33 percent of all certificates awarded by public institutions are in the health
category, whereas the figure is 53 percent for the for-profits.
[ Insert Table 1 Here ]
We group business jobs into two broad categories: jobs that require either no
degree or, in rare cases, an associate’s degree; and jobs that require a bachelor’s
degree. Although it is unusual for employers to require an associate’s degree,
bachelor’s degree requirements are common, and these jobs appear to be
qualitatively different from jobs that require less education. Col. (3) of Table 1
gives a sense for this distinction by listing sample job titles in each degree
category.
Among health occupations, Licensed Practical Nursing and Pharmacy
Technician jobs universally require a certificate from an accredited institution and
a valid occupational license. All of our resumes in these categories include these
credentials. Medical Assistant vacancies (both administrative and clinical) do not
always require a certificate or a specific license.
Our source of job openings is a large, nationally recognized online job search
website. 11 During March 2014, this website listed about 32,000 new vacancies per
day and about 60,000 new vacancies over successive three-day periods. Based on
a comparison between these numbers and data from the BLS Job Openings and
Labor Force Turnover Survey (JOLTS), we estimate that the job search website in
our study captured between 15 and 24 percent of all U.S. job openings in March
2014. 12 The average share of all full-time job vacancies on the online job search
website that fall into each occupation category is given in Table 1, col. (4). 13

11

Our IRB prohibits us from revealing the name of the site.
According to JOLTS, there were 4.17 million total nonfarm job openings (not seasonally
adjusted) in the U.S. in March 2014. We use the 72 and 24 hour windows as estimates of the lower
and upper bounds (respectively) of the number of new job vacancies per month posted on this job
12

-13-

We apply to jobs that require four or fewer years of work experience, including
entry-level positions. The focus on entry-level and early career positions has two
advantages for our study. First, the identity of the postsecondary institution is
arguably most salient to potential employers early in the career. All of our
resumes list a school award date of May 2014, maximizing the salience of the
credential to employers. Second, four years of post-high school work experience
is roughly consistent with the modal age (about 23) for students who obtain
degrees from for-profits and community colleges (Deming, Goldin and Katz
2012).
We conduct our study in five of the largest metropolitan labor markets in the
United States: Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, New York City and the San
Francisco Bay Area. 14 The labor markets in our study represent about 20 percent
of all postsecondary awards and about 16 percent of all full-time job vacancies in
the United States. We study large labor markets to ensure sufficient overlap of
degrees awarded and occupations across public and for-profit institutions. In
many smaller markets, just one or two institutions offer a majority of
postsecondary credentials, often within a single sector. Moreover, there are
returns to scale in applying to similar types of jobs within the same labor market.

website. Some of the jobs posted over successive 24 hour periods may be duplicate listings. It is
also common for employers to post job vacancies for only a day or two before pulling them down.
13
We compute this share by taking the ratio of the full-time job vacancies in the last 24 hours
within a particular occupation category (based on keyword searches) to all full-time job vacancies
in the last 24 hours. We do this for three consecutive days in March 2014 and take the average to
arrive at the shares in Table 1. Note that some vacancies may fall into multiple categories (e.g.,
customer service and finance) so the total shares across all categories could sum to more than one.
14
We search for jobs within the combined statistical area (CSA) definition of the labor market.
Appendix Table 1 lists the CSAs in our study and their importance for postsecondary awards and
job vacancies.

-14-

B.

Resume Construction and Experimental Design

Postsecondary Institutions.—The degrees in our study have been chosen to be
representative of the postsecondary credentials awarded within each of our sample
labor markets, occupations and sectors. We sampled from the larger programs in
each labor market so that our institutions are roughly proportional to the share of
degrees awarded in 2012, based on IPEDS data. In 2012, online institutions in the
for-profit sector accounted for 50 percent of associate’s degrees and 60 percent of
bachelor’s degrees, both in business.
Our definition of “online” institutions includes schools that offer some inperson degrees, although on-line degrees predominate. Since it is rare for
resumes to note that the degree was obtained online (e.g., “University of Phoenix
– Online Campus”), our fictitious resumes do not indicate specifically whether a
degree was obtained online or in-person. However, we think employers are likely
to consider degrees from these institutions as “online” degrees, for three reasons.
First, four of the seven “online” institutions in our sample do not have any inperson branches in the five labor markets we study. Second, while the other three
institutions do have local campuses, in-person enrollment at for-profit “chain”
institutions has been rapidly declining. In 2000, about 16 percent of enrollment at
the University of Phoenix was in the online campus. By 2010, the online campus
enrolled 80 percent of all University of Phoenix students. Third, many students
who are formally enrolled at in-person campuses take their classes online.
We adopt the convention that at least half of all for-profit degrees on resumes
that we sent to business jobs would come from online institutions, with the other
half coming from local brick-and-mortar institutions in rough proportion with
their 2012 enrollment. These local institutions were chosen because they have
little or no online degree presence. When no for-profit offering existed for an inperson program in the locality, all for-profit degrees on the resumes come from

-15-

online institutions.15 We use local public institutions (weighted by size) in all
cases. To increase the probability that employers were familiar with the degree
programs in our study, we impose the restriction that every institution operated in
the local labor market (or existed online) for at least eight consecutive years.
Our study includes four-year public institutions of varying selectivity. At least
half of all public bachelor’s degrees come from the least selective public
institutions in the combined statistical area (CSA) as measured by the 2012
Barron’s rankings, while the rest come from more selective institutions. 16 For
example, in the two California labor markets, less-selective institutions are Cal
State schools, and more-selective institutions are University of California schools.
All public two-year degrees come from local community colleges, in rough
proportion to 2012 enrollment in the local labor market. See Appendix Table 2
for a complete list of institutions that were included in the study.
Online institutions award a very small share of diplomas and certificates in
allied health. Therefore, all of our resumes for health jobs list local institutions in
rough proportion with their total share of certificates in each category.
Work Experience.—We populate our resumes with actual work histories, using
resumes drawn from a large employment website that contains more than two
million resumes for the five labor markets in our study. We find resumes of job
seekers in each labor market and occupation group who attended the degree
programs in our study and we collect their actual work experience profiles from
the years preceding their graduation from the program. 17 The process generates a
15

There was an established local for-profit college offering associate’s degrees in four of the five
labor markets, and bachelor’s degrees in two of the five labor markets. See Appendix Table 2 for
details.
16
The non-selective institutions are rated “Competitive” or “Less Competitive” (i.e., the bottom
50 percent and bottom 20 percent of the selectivity distribution), and the selective institutions are
rated “Very Competitive” or “Highly Competitive.”
17
Whenever possible, we use complete work histories prior to post-secondary schooling without
modification. In some cases we omit older jobs and we change employer names for small

-16-

manageable number of work history templates, to which we randomly assign
degrees from different institutions.
We assign four years of work experience to all of the resumes that we send to
health jobs and business jobs that do not require a degree (or only require an
associate’s), and six years of work experience for business jobs that require a
bachelor’s degree. In all cases, work experience contains no breaks and is
continuous from high school graduation and concurrent with the applicant’s
recently completed degree. 18
Broadly, we observe two distinct work history profiles for students in
bachelor’s degree programs. The first is full-time work, and the second is
intermittent full-time work with part-time jobs and internships. The former
profile is more common for those attending for-profit institutions, whereas the
latter is more common for students at public institutions. Therefore, our design
randomly assigns templates with both types of work history profiles to degrees
from each sector. When possible, we draw from the space of resume
characteristics with “common support” and pull actual work histories from the
“off-diagonal” groups (i.e., students who attended four-year publics but worked
full-time; for-profit students who worked part-time).
When submitting resumes that do not list any degree or certificate, we simply
hold work history constant (i.e., four or six years). Our research design gives an
estimate of the “return” to having a credential relative to an otherwise identical
resume. This does not include the opportunity cost of foregone employment. An
alternative approach is to add years of work experience equal to the length of the
employers. We draw an equal proportion of work histories from the resumes of individuals who
attended public and for-profit institutions.
18
When sampling from the online resume bank, we observe that the modal work history pattern
for students in certificate and associate’s degree programs is full-time work. This finding is
consistent with data from the 2012 National Postsecondary Student Aid study (NPSAS), which
shows that more than two-thirds of undergraduates at both public and for-profit institutions
worked for pay while enrolled in school.

-17-

degree, simulating the decision to continue working. Because of the increasing
prevalence of work during college, even among traditional undergraduates, we
decided to study the counterfactual that we believe is the more common and
relevant one (Scott-Clayton 2012).
Experimental Design.— We summarize the basic structure of the experiment in
Table 2. When applying to business vacancies that do not require a degree (or
that require an associate’s degree), we send four resumes that vary by credential:
no degree (high school diploma only); an associate’s degree from a for-profit
institution (either online or local); an associate’s degree from a public institution;
and a BA from an online for-profit institution. When applying to business
vacancies that require a bachelor’s degree, we send two resumes with a BA from
a for-profit and two resumes with a BA from a public institution. When possible,
half of the resumes have a BA from an online for-profit and half have a BA from
a local (brick and mortar) for-profit. In labor markets with no local for-profit that
awards a bachelor’s degree, all of the for-profits are online institutions. Similarly,
the resumes with BAs from a public institution are split evenly between lessselective and selective public institutions. Thus, our experimental design
generates within-vacancy variation both in for-profit college type (local vs.
online) and in public sector selectivity for business vacancies that require a BA.
[ Insert Table 2 Here ]
For health jobs that do not require a degree or credential, we send one resume
with a certificate from a local public institution, one resume with a certificate
from a local for-profit institution, and two resumes with high school only (see
Table 2, Health). To these four resumes we randomly assign two work history
templates with an externship plus three years of non-health or health uncertified
work experience, one with only non-health work experience, and one with non-

-18-

health work experience plus a single year of “relevant” health work experience.
The “relevant” work experience is constructed by lengthening the spells of the
externships on the resumes that include a credential and altering the description,
when necessary, so that it appears to be full-time work.
For health jobs that require a credential (in this case a certificate), we send two
resumes that list a certificate from a local public institution and two resumes that
list a certificate from a local for-profit institution. All of these resumes include
three years of non-medical, or “medical uncertified” work experience (e.g.,
working at the front desk in a doctor’s office, or unlicensed care jobs such as
home health aides). The resumes also include an externship completed
concurrently with the certificate program. Most accredited programs in allied
health require the completion of an externship of specified length (e.g., 75 hours,
160 hours) in a clinical setting. We draw these externships from actual resumes in
the online resume bank.
Our goal in selecting work history templates was to find the “common support”
across job seekers in a particular labor market and occupational category. We
wanted our work history templates to look reasonably representative of students
in each type of institution. We also wanted the work histories to be somewhat
similar in quality, so that employers would reasonably be using the educational
institution on the resume as a deciding factor in whom to select for an interview.
Although it is possible that resumes are better on average for actual students who
attend public (or for-profit) schools, our research design yields the impact of
postsecondary institution for the marginal student whose work experience profile
fits well at both types of institutions.
Because past work has shown that the race and gender of applicants predicts
employer callbacks, we randomize race and gender across job vacancies to
maximize power (Riach and Rich 2002; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004; Lahey
2008). Specifically, we randomly send either four white males; four white

-19-

females; four nonwhite males (either African-American or Latino); or four
nonwhite females to each vacancy. Postsecondary credentials are randomly
assigned to the four resumes within each vacancy, and thus within each race and
gender category. We follow past audit study conventions and signal
race/ethnicity and gender through first and last names (e.g., Bertrand and
Mullainathan 2004), choosing common names for each race/ethnicity and gender.
We use the data we collect from each vacancy to construct a measure of job
quality based on the salary associated with a given job title. 19 We can match
about 95 percent of business jobs to a salary, but we did not match health jobs to
salaries because health job titles (e.g., medical assistant) are often standardized
and produced little meaningful salary variation.
The study was conducted between April and November of 2014. 20 The
compressed time frame allowed us to apply for jobs with resumes that represented
soon-to-be or newly-minted graduates of various degree and certificate
programs. 21 Online Appendix A provides additional details about the
experimental protocol, resume construction and the job application procedure.

19

See Online Appendix B for a detailed description of the process by which we matched job titles
to salaries.
20
We sent business resumes between April and July 2014. At the end of July, we had our current
sample of business jobs (N = 8,110 resumes). We sent out health resumes from April to July 2014
as well. But the much smaller number of health job postings (N = 1,460 through July 2014) did
not provide us with adequate statistical power. Thus, we decided to send additional resumes in
health from September through November 2014. The additional months boosted our sample of
health job applications by more than 60 percent, and got us closer to our target for health jobs
(from our pre-analysis plan filed with the American Economic Association Randomized
Controlled Trial Registry on March 30, 2014). We pre-specified a study cutoff of December 1
based on our estimate of job flow and expected power, and did not analyze the results again until
after the study was closed.
21
All resumes listed the credential as having been or about to be completed in May of 2014.
Analogous resumes sent further from graduation could be (1) graduates with a potentially long
spell of unemployment altering the probability of callback (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo 2013);
(2) “off-cycle” graduates; or (3) students reentering the job market following or from a postgraduation job. Each could cloud the interpretation, so we elected to send resumes between April
and July except in the case of health jobs where the smaller number of listings required us to
extend the study through November.

-20-

III.

Main Results

Table 3 presents initial descriptive statistics for the experimental sample. We
sent a total of 10,492 resumes, and 8.2 percent received a callback. We define a
“callback” as a personalized phone or email contact by a potential employer (not
an email sent to all applicants, for example). Usually the callback is a request for
an interview, but employers also contact applicants asking for “more information”
or state that they “have a few questions.” 22
[ Insert Table 3 Here ]
Three important patterns can be seen in Table 3. First, there is considerable
variation in baseline callback rates by city (from 5.8 percent in Miami to 11.5
percent in Los Angeles). However, we find no consistent evidence of differential
callback rates across cities by type of postsecondary institution. Second, there is
considerable variation in callback rates by occupation, with customer service and
sales jobs having the highest callback rates (10 to 12.5 percent) and accounting
and finance (4.5 percent) the lowest. Different callback rates by occupation
reflect a pattern of lower callback rates for higher quality jobs. Vacancies
requiring a BA have lower callback rates than those not requiring a degree, as do
job titles that are associated with higher average salaries. Third, unlike Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2004), we find no consistent evidence of lower callback rates
for racial minorities. We also find a higher callback rate for females than males,
particularly for whites.
Figures 1 and 2 summarize the main results of the paper. Each figure presents
callback rates by postsecondary credentials for one of the four experimental

22

In Appendix Table 3, we report results using an alternative callback definition that is restricted
to the 50 percent of cases (4.1 percent of all resumes) where an employer used the word
“interview.” The main results are qualitatively unchanged when using this alternative definition.

-21-

designs in Table 2. To balance the comparison across treatment cells, we report
results from a regression of an indicator for receiving a callback on the credential
categories in each graph plus vacancy fixed effects, with no other covariates.
The left four bars of Figure 1 give the results for business job vacancies that do
not require a degree (or that require an associate’s degree). Little difference exists
in callback rates by the level or sector of postsecondary credentials. Resumes
with a bachelor’s degree from a for-profit institution are modestly (about 1
percentage point) more likely to receive a callback than identical resumes with no
postsecondary degree at all, and those with an associate’s degree show no
advantage over those with only a high school degree.
[ Insert Figure 1 Here ]
The right four bars of Figure 1 give results for business vacancies that require
applicants to have a bachelor’s degree. About 6.3 percent of resumes with a
bachelor’s degree from an online for-profit institution receive a callback,
compared with 8.5 percent of resumes from both non-selective and selective
public institutions—a difference of about 25 percent. The callback rate for
resumes with degrees from locally operated (“not online”) for-profits is 7.8
percent.
Figure 2 (left three bars) gives results for job vacancies in health that do not
require a credential. The callback rate for resumes with a public sector certificate
is about 8.9 percent, compared with 4.2 percent for resumes with a for-profit
certificate and 5.9 percent for resumes with no credential at all. Finally, the right
two bars of Figure 2 give results for job vacancies in health that require a
credential (all licensed practical nursing and pharmacy technician jobs, plus some
medical assistant jobs). We find a modestly higher callback rate for public
certificates compared with for-profit certificates (5.8 versus 4.9 percent).

-22-

[ Insert Figure 2 Here ]
Tables 4 and 5 present more detailed analyses and tests of differences in
callback rates by postsecondary credentials for business job openings. Each
column includes a different set of covariates. Since these covariates are also
randomly assigned, in some cases within vacancies, we can test for causal
differences in callback rates by a variety of characteristics. Each table follows a
similar structure: col. (1) includes only indicator variables for each postsecondary
treatment but no other covariates; col. (2) adds fixed effects for race, gender, labor
market, work history template, skill template and applicant name; and col. (3)
adds vacancy fixed effects (absorbing race, gender, and labor market variation)
and continues to include fixed effects for applicant name, work history and
skills.23 In Table 5 we also add whether a for-profit BA was done online. We
present p-values on F-tests for the hypotheses that important categories of
covariates (i.e., work history, race and gender) are equal to zero. In all cases,
standard errors are clustered at the vacancy level.
Table 4 presents results for business jobs that do not require a bachelor’s degree
and typically do not require any postsecondary credential (although some indicate
a preference or requirement for an associate’s degree). In all three specifications,
we find no statistically significant differences in callback rates among the four
treatments, including no postsecondary degree at all. The standard errors allow us
to rule out (with 95 percent confidence) an impact of having an associate’s degree
from either sector of more than 1.4 to 1.7 percentage points, relative to no degree.
There appears to be a modest (but not statistically significant) advantage in
callback rates of less than 1 percentage point for a for-profit BA from an online
23

Specifically, we include fixed effects for each work history and skill template, as well as fixed
effects for combinations of applicant initials (i.e. TD). Since race and gender are randomized
across vacancies, and since we use the same combinations of initials for all race and gender
combinations, fixed effects for applicant initials simply check whether particular initials in names
are systematically related to callback rates and their inclusion does not meaningfully impact the
other estimated coefficients. See Online Appendix A for details.

-23-

institution relative to no degree for business vacancies not requiring a bachelor’s
degree.
[ Insert Table 4 Here ]
Overall, for job openings that do not require a bachelor’s degree, having a
postsecondary degree does not significantly increase the likelihood of receiving a
callback. The results in Table 4 closely match the main findings of Darolia et al.
(2014), who also find no difference in callback rates for resumes having no
postsecondary education compared with a public or for-profit associate’s degree,
when applying to similar jobs.
Table 5 presents results for business vacancies that require applicants to have a
bachelor’s degree. Cols. (1) to (3) pool all for-profit institutions and also pool all
public institutions (with publics as the omitted category), and col. (4) allows
different impacts for for-profits by whether they are online or local and different
impacts for public institutions depending on selectivity (with less-selective
publics as the omitted category).
[ Insert Table 5 Here ]
Resumes with a bachelor’s degree from a for-profit institution are about 2
percentage points less likely to receive a callback than otherwise-identical
resumes with a degree from a public institution. Relative to the baseline mean of
9.1 percent for non-selective publics, the effect is a decrease of 22 percent in the
probability of callback. The results by disaggregated institution type, col. (4),
show that the negative impacts of for-profit bachelor’s degrees are concentrated
among large online for-profit institutions, although the difference within the forprofit sector is not statistically significant (p=0.263).

-24-

To increase the sample size, when comparing different types of for-profit
institutions, we estimate a pooled model that also includes the resumes sent to
business vacancies that do not require a degree. The pooled model with vacancy
fixed effects (shown in col. 2 of Appendix Table 4) yields a weak rejection at the
10 percent level (p=0.055) of the hypothesis that the callback rate is the same for
local and online for-profit institutions. 24
Returning to Table 5, we cannot reject the hypothesis that callback rates for
BAs from local for-profits and public institutions (both selective and lessselective) are equivalent in jobs requiring a BA. Perhaps surprisingly, we find no
mean impact of college selectivity on callback rates for resumes with bachelor’s
degrees from public institutions. The strong conclusion from these estimates is
that resumes with BAs from online for-profit institutions receive callbacks at a far
lower rate than those with BAs from public institutions, regardless of selectivity.
Table 6 presents results for health jobs. Cols. (1) and (2) cover health jobs not
requiring a certificate, and cols. (3) and (4) cover health jobs that require a
postsecondary certificate. We find that applicants with a certificate from a forprofit institution are about 5 percentage points less likely to receive a callback
than identical applicants with a certificate from a public institution. Applicants
with only a high school degree are about 3.5 percentage points less likely to
receive a callback than are applicants with a certificate from a public institution.
Notably, having a for-profit certificate is slightly worse than having no credential
at all, although the difference is not statistically significant (p=0.253, col. 2). In

24

When sending resumes to vacancies that did not require a degree, we did not directly build in
within-vacancy variation in whether the for-profit institution was local or online. Instead, we
elected to vary the degree type (AA or BA) as indicated in Table 2. Thus we present results with
and without vacancy fixed effects in Appendix Table 4. The point estimates are very similar in
both cases. An F-test for the hypothesis that online and local for-profits are equivalent yields a pvalue of 0.118 without vacancy fixed effects, and p=0.055 with vacancy fixed effects.

-25-

cols. (3) and (4), we find no statistically significant difference in callbacks for
health jobs that require a certificate. 25
[ Insert Table 6 Here ]
IV.
A.

Interpretation

Do Lower Callback Rates Reflect Employers’ Negative Assessments of
Applicants?

Broadly our results suggest that employers carefully screen resumes for signals
of applicant quality, including the applicant’s postsecondary credentials. In nearly
all of the models in Tables 4 through 6, we can strongly reject the hypothesis that
callbacks are equal across work history and skill templates. Thus, even in a
sample of resumes that was designed to appear as similar as possible, employers
are quite responsive to differences in resume characteristics.
Our main finding is that employers who post jobs that require a bachelor’s
degree are much less likely to call back applicants with degrees from online,
“chain” for-profit institutions. Does a lower callback rate necessarily imply a
more negative evaluation of a job applicant’s credentials? It is possible that
employers see applicants with for-profit degrees as too highly qualified. Overqualified applicants may not accept a job offer, or if they do accept they may
leave shortly thereafter for a better opportunity. In audit studies based on personal
characteristics such as race and gender, the concern is referred to as “reverse
discrimination” (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004).
We test for “reverse discrimination” by asking whether our results hold equally
for lower- and higher-quality jobs, with the expected salary of a job opening as a
proxy for job quality. Table 7 shows results for business vacancies that do not
25

Results for individual health occupations are shown in Appendix Table 7.

-26-

require a degree or that require an associate’s degree (median salary $36,000), and
Table 8 shows results for business jobs that require a bachelor’s degree (median
salary $51,000). The first three columns of Table 7 and first four columns of
Table 8 examine sub-samples divided by expected salary ranges. The final
column in each table uses the full sample of jobs and includes interaction effects
for post-secondary degrees and expected salary. All the specifications in Tables 7
and 8 include vacancy fixed effects plus the usual controls for name, work history
and skills templates.
[ Insert Table 7 Here ]
The evidence in Table 7 shows, if anything, a negative (but not significant)
gradient in the impact of an associate’s degree from either a for-profit or public
institution on callback rates relative to just a high school degree for business jobs
not requiring a degree. However, there is some evidence of “reverse
discrimination” against for-profit bachelor’s degree holders applying to jobs that
do not require a degree. We find a negative impact of having a for-profit BA on
callbacks for the lowest-paying jobs, but a positive (about 2.5 percentage points,
cols. 2 and 3) and borderline statistically significant advantage to resumes with a
for-profit BA for higher-paid business jobs. These findings suggest that the
overall impact of having a for-profit bachelor’s degree is driven down by lower
callback rates for low-salaried jobs. However, when examining the full range of
jobs, as in col. (4), there is a positive gradient by expected salary in the callback
differential for a for-profit BA, but one that is not statistically significant.
Table 8 shows no evidence of “reverse discrimination” against job applicants
with bachelor’s degrees from for-profit institutions when applying to jobs that
require a bachelor’s degree. We find lower callback rates for resumes with

-27-

bachelor’s degrees from online for-profits than for non-selective public
institutions in all salary ranges, not just in the low-salary jobs.
[ Insert Table 8 Here ]
We do, however, find that resumes with bachelor’s degrees from selective
public institutions have modestly lower callback rates at low salaries and
significantly higher callback rates (by almost 4 percentage points) at high salaries
(above $65,000). The full linear interaction specification in col. (5) indicates that
the callback rate advantage from college selectivity for those with bachelor’s
degrees from public institutions rises by 1 percentage point per each $10,000
increase in expected salary and the impact of public sector college selectivity
becomes significant and positive at around $75,000, which is around the 75th
percentile of the distribution for jobs that require a bachelor’s degree. We also
find a modest positive gradient in job quality for resumes with a bachelor’s degree
from a local for-profit relative to non-selective public institutions, although the
interaction term is not significantly different from zero.
Two recent surveys provide additional evidence that lower callback rates for
resumes with credentials from for-profit institutions reflect employers’ negative
assessments of the credentials. First, a survey of employers in four U.S. cities
found that although 46 percent of employers rated public universities and forprofits as “about the same” at “preparing students to work at your company,” 41
percent rated public universities higher as compared with only 5 percent in favor
of for-profits (Hagelskamp, Schleifer, and DiStasi 2014). The survey also found
that employer name recognition was higher for online “chains” compared to local
for-profits and similar to community colleges suggesting that our results are not

-28-

driven by lack of familiarity with the institution listed on the resume. 26
Second, a 2012 survey by the Chronicle of Higher Education found that
employers view recent graduates with bachelor’s degrees from public colleges to
be more desirable hires than those from for-profit colleges, with the graduates of
online colleges the least desirable (Chronicle of Higher Education, 2012).
B.

Postsecondary Institutions Serve as a Signal of Applicant Quality When
Objective Measures are Unavailable

Overall, the evidence suggests that employers infer resume quality based on the
postsecondary institutions attended by applicants, and that they statistically
discriminate against for-profit, “chain” institutions when the job requires a
bachelor’s degree. 27 If employers treat a degree from a for-profit institution as a
negative signal, why do we not find lower callback rates for for-profit credentials
across all categories of job vacancies?
One possible explanation is that the postsecondary credential becomes less
important when other job requirements can be used to screen applicants. As noted
earlier, most health jobs that require a certificate also require applicants to have a
valid occupational license. Practical/vocational nurses and pharmacy technicians

26
The survey found that 50 percent of employers had not heard of a randomly selected online,
“chain” for-profit, compared to 76 percent of local for-profits, 41 percent of community colleges
and only 13 percent of four-year public universities. Although name recognition was much greater
for public universities, the survey only listed the state flagship and did not include the local, nonselective institutions in our study (Hagelskamp, Schleifer and DiStasi 2014).
27
Another possible concern regarding the interpretation of our results is that differences in the
variance of expected productivity could lead to differences in callback rates between two groups
in an audit study, even if mean expected productivity is the same (Heckman and Siegelman 1993,
Neumark 2012). If employers offer scarce interview slots to applicants based on expected
productivity relative to a standard, then they will be more likely to contact higher-variance
applicants. In our context, the concern would be that the lower callback rate for for-profit degrees
is due to higher variance for applicants with degrees from public institutions. However, the
available evidence suggests a greater variance in the quality of students from for-profit
institutions, as well as greater variance in the experiences and qualifications of students that attend
them (e.g., Deming, Goldin and Katz 2013; Lang and Weinstein 2013).

-29-

(about 70 percent of the certificate-required sample) must pass a licensing exam
in all states in our study. Moreover, nearly all medical assistant programs require
the completion of an externship in a medical setting. Thus vacancies that require
a certificate in medical assisting also effectively require an externship that can
serve as a tool for employers to screen out lower-quality applicants, similar to a
license.
In contrast, health vacancies that do not require a certificate—mainly for
administrative or back-office medical assistant positions—must infer applicant
quality from other signals on the resume, including the postsecondary degree.
This interpretation, while speculative, can explain the large negative coefficient
on for-profit certificates for no certificate required jobs in cols. (1) and (2) of
Table 6 and the null results for certificate-required health jobs in cols. (3) and (4).
In the absence of objective information, employers infer applicant quality based
on a variety of resume characteristics including the applicant’s postsecondary
institution. Screening tools such as licensing exams, when available, provide a
signal of applicant quality that mitigates differences in employer perceptions
across postsecondary institutions or sectors. 28 Consistent with this hypothesis,
MacLeod et al. (2015) find that the introduction in Colombia of national college
exit exams, a new potential signal of skills, reduced the earnings return to college
reputation.
We also find some limited evidence that the negative impact of having a forprofit credential for jobs that require a bachelor’s degree is smaller for accounting

28

If we separately estimate results from col. (4) of Table 6 for jobs that require a license compared
to jobs that require a certificate but not a license, we obtain coefficients and standard errors of 0.0004 (0.0120) and -0.0107 (0.0125) on the for-profit indicator respectively. Our pre-analysis
plan specifically mentioned the possibility of differences in impacts by license and certificate
requirements, and we pre-specified our approach of separately analyzing results for allied health
occupations that required applicants to hold a license.

-30-

and finance jobs, compared to jobs in customer service, sales and marketing. 29
Since accounting and finance degrees produce competencies that appear to be
easier for employers to identify, this pattern is broadly consistent with the
hypothesis that employers use an applicant’s postsecondary institution as a signal
of quality when objective measures are unavailable.
Like Darolia et al. (2014), we find no differential callback rates by sector in the
business occupations not requiring a bachelor’s degree. Indeed, no qualification,
public or for-profit, was significantly associated with increased callback rates for
these positions. Perhaps this is not surprising given that so few employers require
applicants to have an associate’s degree. It is possible that employers posting
these largely low-paid, entry-level jobs may be looking for skills that are only
weakly correlated with degree receipt (e.g., “soft skills”).
Interestingly, we find a large and statistically significant (4.2 percentage point)
increase in callbacks among females compared with males for business jobs that
do not require a degree. The female callback advantage is especially pronounced
(5.1 percentage points) for customer service, sales and marketing jobs compared
with accounting and finance jobs (1.9 percentage points). One hypothesis is that
employers view women as more likely to possess the “soft skills” or “people
skills” required for these positions (e.g., Deming 2015).
C.

Are Employers’ Views of For-Profit Credentials Explained by College
Quality Differences?

The high cost to students and taxpayers of postsecondary credentials makes it
critical to understand differences across sectors in the production of human
29

We estimate a version of col. (4) of Table 5 with interactions between each sector indicator and
indicators for accounting/finance vs. customer services/sales/marketing. For all three types of
institutions, the coefficient is larger for accounting/finance jobs. However, the estimates are noisy
with the F-test for the difference between the accounting/finance coefficients and the customer
services/sales/marketing coefficients yielding a p-value of 0.166.

-31-

capital. The audit study design allows us to hold fixed all applicant characteristics
that commonly appear on a resume, but we cannot rule out the possibility that
employers statistically discriminate by using the applicant’s postsecondary
institution as a signal of unobserved pre-college determinants of productivity.
Employers may think that all degrees provide equal human capital, but that
applicants who attend for-profit colleges have characteristics that make them less
capable workers even prior to attending college. Deming, Goldin and Katz (2013)
find that for-profit college students are more disadvantaged than students in
public institutions across a variety of characteristics that may be correlated with
productivity.
Although our audit study design provides causal evidence that employers are
less likely to call back applicants with a bachelor’s degree from a for-profit
institution, we cannot definitively say the extent to which the difference in
callback rates reflects employer beliefs about sectoral differences in college
quality versus ex ante student quality. But we can examine the whether sectoral
differences in college quality indicators are correlated with our experimental
estimates of differences in callback rates.
Using data from the 2013 IPEDS, we calculate instructional spending per
enrolled student for each institution in the bachelor’s degree-required sample.
When weighted by the total number of resumes sent, online, “chain” for-profit
institutions in our sample spent about $1,258 per student on instruction in 2013.
Per-student instructional spending was $4,670 for the in-person for-profits in our
sample, compared with $5,257 for non-selective publics and $21,431 for the
selective publics respectively. The instructional spending differences line up well
with the results in Table 5. 30 Similarly, we also find some weak evidence that

30

If we replace the indicators for postsecondary sector with the natural log of instructional
spending per pupil in col. (4) of Table 5, we find a positive and statistically significant impact of
spending on callback rates. If we interact log spending with indicators for postsecondary sector,

-32-

differences in impacts across labor markets are correlated with differences in local
public institution quality. 31
Spending and quality differences across sectors may be driven by the market
incentives faced by for-profit institutions. For-profit firms have stronger
incentives to “shade” on the quality of services provided when quality is difficult
for customers to observe (Hansmann 1996).
Online for-profits also have substantially lower graduation rates than do other
sectors. According to the 2013 IPEDS, the online for-profits in our sample have a
weighted six-year graduation of 25.6 percent, compared with 55.1 percent for inperson for-profits, 42.8 percent for non-selective publics, and 79.2 percent for
selective publics. It is unclear how differences in graduation rates should affect
the interpretation of our results. Employers may infer that graduates from
institutions with low graduation rates are more capable on average. This
interpretation would suggest our results for online for-profits are biased upward
relative to inferences made about the average attendee. On the other hand,
employers may interpret graduation rates as an indicator of the institution’s
overall quality or the quality of the students who initially choose to attend. In that
case, our results would be biased downward relative to the average student.
Overall, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that sectoral differences
in callback rates reflect employers’ perceptions of sectoral differences in the
human capital provided by the institutions themselves. However, it is also
possible that our results are driven by employers’ perceptions of pre-existing
differences between students who attend different types of institutions. We
the coefficients are positive but not statistically significant suggesting that within-sector
differences in spending do not explain within-sector differences in callback rates.
31
In a pooled model with all business jobs, the coefficients on an indicator for for-profit status are
most negative in San Francisco, Los Angeles and Chicago and least negative in New York and
Miami. The pattern is broadly consistent with differences across labor markets in per-pupil
spending in the colleges in our sample, as well as with subjective measures of selectivity such as
the Barron’s or U.S. News and World Report rankings.

-33-

designed our experiment to reduce the scope for discrimination on observed
characteristics whenever possible—for example, by holding both gender and race
constant within job applications—but ultimately we cannot control for the
inferences employers make about the unobserved characteristics of applicants
across sectors.
We find no consistent pattern of differences in callback rates by race, unlike
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004). The possible reasons include differing study
settings, time periods, labor markets, application processes, employers, and job
quality. 32 We do find racial differences in the relative returns to resume quality,
similar to Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004). 33 In Appendix Tables 6 and 7, we
show that there is no systematic evidence of differential impacts of postsecondary
sector by gender or for different occupation groups within the business and health
categories.

32

We applied to vacancies posted on an online job board instead of to help-wanted ads in a
newspaper, and thus it is likely that the employers in our study are larger. Additionally, the jobs in
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) were often in clerical and administrative support occupations
(which tend to be lower-paid) and less so in accounting, finance and analytical positions (which
tend to be higher-paid). Finally, we note that a lack of explicit racial discrimination may actually
be due to the online, recordable nature of employer-employee contact. Large companies are
increasingly using Applicant Tracking System (ATS) software to winnow down large pools of
applicants based on customized sets of characteristics such as years of work experience and school
attended (See
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970204624204577178941034941330).
Discrimination at the callback stage would be easy to detect and record with ATS software.
However, we note that the use of these programs would not meaningfully affect the interpretation
of our results if employers make deliberate decisions to screen out some postsecondary
institutions.
33
In Appendix Table 5 we present results that allow the impact of postsecondary credentials to
vary by race. For both business and health vacancies that do not require a degree, we find a
significantly higher return to having a degree for whites compared to nonwhites. This is similar to
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), who find that the black-white gap in callbacks is increasing in
resume quality. In contrast, we find no difference in the returns to postsecondary credentials by
race when applying to jobs that require applicants to have a degree or a certificate.

-34-

V.

Conclusion

We have asked how employers value otherwise-identical job applicants who
obtained degrees and certificates from different types of postsecondary
institutions. Using a resume audit study in which resumes were submitted to
thousands of job openings posted online, we are able to identify causal effects of
various post-secondary qualifications on employer callback rates. In particular,
we are able to estimate the causal effects of degrees and certificates from forprofit institutions, including the rapidly growing online for-profit sector, for
which little evidence currently exists.
Our study has two clear findings. First, for business job vacancies that require a
bachelor’s degree, employers strongly prefer applicants with degrees from public
institutions as opposed to applicants with degrees from for-profits. Callback rates
differ by more than 20 percent. Importantly, the penalty for having a bachelor’s
degree from a for-profit college varies across types of institutions. Applicants
with degrees from local “brick and mortar” for-profits are not as severely
penalized as are applicants with degrees from large, online “chain” institutions
that have grown rapidly during the last 15 years. These online, for-profit colleges
have been responsible for 21 percent of the growth in all bachelor’s degrees and
33 percent of the growth in bachelor’s degrees in business from 2002 to 2012. In
comparison, the share of postsecondary enrollment in local, independent forprofits has been relatively constant since 2000 (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012).
Yet it is precisely the bachelor’s degrees granted by the fastest-growing set of
institutions that are associated with the worst callback outcomes, in our study, for
jobs requiring a bachelor’s degree.
Our second main finding is that employers hiring for health jobs with no
certificate or license requirements (primarily medical assistant jobs) strongly
prefer applicants with certificates from public institutions, compared with

-35-

applicants with a for-profit certificate or no credential at all. Although many of
these jobs are entry-level and are relatively low paid, they are also entry points for
job seekers who hope to acquire additional, more highly compensated credentials
while working within a large health organization. In contrast, we find no
differences in callbacks for health jobs that require a certificate and a valid
license. One explanation for this result is that passing the licensure exam (which
is content-based) provides a stronger signal of skill to employers than the
applicant’s postsecondary institution.
More generally, our results support the idea that employers view a credential
from a for-profit institution as a negative signal of applicant quality in the absence
of objective measures. Since per-pupil instructional spending and graduation rates
are much lower in online, “chain” for-profits compared with public institutions,
one interpretation is that these results reflect employers’ perceptions about
sectoral differences in human capital provision (or college quality). Our results
are also consistent, though, with a role for statistical discrimination based on
employers’ perceptions of the unobserved characteristics of applicants.
Our study can potentially inform the decisions of “marginal” students who must
make cost-benefit calculations about where to enroll in college and whether to
enroll at all. The findings do not support the notion that a for-profit degree is a
good investment relative to one from a public institution. We cannot easily
translate a difference in callback rates into a difference in wages. But because
yearly tuition at a for-profit college typically greatly exceeds that at a public
university and for-profit degrees seem to be less valued by employers, the forprofit degree appears to be the less attractive investment. It is important to note
that the comparison assumes the availability of both public and for-profit options.
A defense of for-profits is that public colleges are often overcrowded and that
for-profits may be able to move into expanding fields not well-served by public
institutions. In that case, the most appropriate comparison would be between a

-36-

for-profit credential and no credential. With one exception (the returns to a forprofit BA relative to no degree for high-salaried jobs), we find no evidence that
obtaining a for-profit credential will improve the job prospects of workers who
would otherwise not attend college at all.

-37-

REFERENCES
Autor, David H. 2014. “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality
among the ‘Other 99 Percent.’” Science 344(6186): 843-51.
Barr, Andrew and Sarah Turner. 2013. “Expanding Enrollments and Contracting
Budgets: The Effect of the Great Recession Higher Education,” The ANNALS of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 650(1): 168-93.
Baum, Sandy and Jennifer Ma. 2014. Trends in College Pricing 2013. Princeton,
NJ: The College Board.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “Are Emily and Greg More
Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market
Discrimination.” American Economic Review 94(4): 991-1013.
Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Increasing Time
to Baccalaureate Degree in the United States.” Education Finance and Policy
7(4): 375-424.
Carnevale, Anthony P., Tamara Jayasundera, and Dmitri Repnikov. 2014.
Understanding Online Job Ads Data: A Technical Report. Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2009. “Crowded Colleges and College Crowd-Out: The
Impact of Public Subsidies on the Two-Year College Market.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2): 1-30.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2010. “Financial Aid and For-Profit Colleges: Does Aid
Encourage Entry?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 29(3): 526-52.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2012. “For-Profit Higher Education: An Assessment of
Costs and Benefits.” National Tax Journal 65(1): 153-80.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Latika Chaudhary. 2014. “The Labor Market
Returns to a For-Profit College Education.” Economics of Education Review 43
(December 2014): 125-40.

-38-

Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Claudia Goldin. 2014. “Does Federal Student Aid
Raise Tuition? New Evidence on For-Profit Colleges.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Chronicle of Higher Education. 2012. “The Role of Higher Education in Career
Development: Employer Perceptions.” Last accessed September 15, 2014.
https://chronicle.com/items/biz/pdf/Employers%20Survey.pdf.
Darolia, Rajeev, Cory Koedel, Paco Martorell, Katie Wilson, and Francisco
Perez-Arce. 2014. “Do Employers Prefer Workers Who Attend For-Profit
Colleges? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” University of Missouri Working
Paper 14-11.
Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. “The For-Profit
Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 26(1): 139-64.
Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2013. “For-Profit
Colleges.” The Future of Children 23(1): 137-63.
Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, Lawrence F. Katz, and Noam Yuchtman.
2015. “Can Online Learning Bend the Higher Education Cost Curve?”
American Economic Review 105(5): 496-501.
Deming, David J. 2015. “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor
Market.” NBER Working Paper No. 21473.
Eriksson, Stefan and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2014. “Do Employers Use Unemployment
as a Sorting Criterion When Hiring? Evidence from a Field
Experiment.” American Economic Review 104(3): 1014-39.
Freeman, Richard B. 1974. “Occupational Training in Proprietary Schools and
Technical Institutes.” Review of Economics and Statistics 56(3): 310-18.
Gaddis, S. Michael. 2015. “Discrimination in the Credential Society: An Audit
Study of Race and College Selectivity in the Labor Market.” Social Forces
93(4): 1451-79.

-39-

Ghayad, Rand. 2013. “Why Is It So Hard for Job-Seekers with Valuable
Experience to Find Work? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Northeastern
University Working Paper.
Gilpin, Gregory, Joe Saunders, and Christina Stoddard. 2013. “Why Have ForProfit Colleges Expanded so Rapidly? The Role of Labor Market Changes in
Student Enrollment and Degree Completion at Two-Year Colleges.”
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2279688.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and
Technology. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Hagelskamp, Carolin, David Schleifer, and Christopher DiStasi. 2014. “Profiting
Higher Education? What Students, Alumni and Employers Think About ForProfit Colleges.” Public Agenda. http://www.publicagenda.org/pages/profitinghigher-education.
Hansmann, Henry. 1996. The Ownership of Enterprise. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Heckman, James and Peter Siegelman. 1993. “The Urban Institute Audit Studies:
Their Methods and Findings.” In Clear and Convincing Evidence:
Measurement of Discrimination in America, edited by Michael Fix and
Raymond Struyk, 187-258. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
Hinrichs, Peter. 2013. “What Kind of Teachers Are Schools Looking For?
Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.” Georgetown University
(November).
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2014. “The Economics of Online Postsecondary Education:
MOOCs, Nonselective Education, and Highly Selective Education.” American
Economic Review 104(5): 528-33.
Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew Notowidigdo. 2013. “Duration
Dependence and Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 1123-67.

-40-

Kuhn, Peter and Hani Mansour. 2014. “Is Internet Job Search Still Ineffective?”
The Economic Journal 124(581): 1213-33.
Lahey, Joanna N. 2008. “Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study.”
Journal of Human Resources 43(1): 30-56.
Lahey, Joanna N. and Ryan A. Beasley. 2009. “Computerizing Audit Studies.”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 70(3): 508-14.
Lang, Kevin and Russell Weinstein. 2013. “The Wage Effects of Not-for-Profit
and For-Profit Certifications: Better Data, Somewhat Different Results.”
Labour Economics 24(October): 230-43.
Lanning, Jonathan. “Opportunities Denied, Wages Diminished: Using Search
Theory to Translate Audit Pair Study Findings into Wage Differentials.” B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 13(2): 921-58.
MacLeod, W. Bentley, Evan Riehl, Juan E. Saavedra, and Miguel Urquiola. 2015.
“The Big Sort: College Reputation and Labor Market Outcomes.” NBER
Working Paper No. 21230.
Mincy, Ronald B. 1993. “The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their Research and
Policy Context.” In Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of
Discrimination in America, edited by Michael Fix and Raymond Struyk, 16586. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
Neumark, David. 2012. “Detecting Discrimination in Audit and Correspondence
Studies.” Journal of Human Resources 47(4): 1128-57.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2011. “Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor
Market? A Field Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(4): 148-71.
Pearson Foundation. 2011. Second Annual Pearson Foundation Community
College Student Survey. Washington: D.C.: Pearson Foundation.
Riach, Peter A., and Judith Rich. 2002. “Field Experiments of Discrimination in
the Market Place.” Economic Journal 112 (November): F480-F518.

-41-

Rosenbaum, James E., Regina Deil-Amien, and Ann E. Person. 2006. After
Admission: From College Access to College Success. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation Press.
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2012. “What Explains Trends in Labor Supply among U.S.
Undergraduates?” National Tax Journal 65(1): 185-210.

-42-

TABLE 1—PROGRAMS/ OCCUPATIONS AND SAMPLE JOB TITLES

(1) Program/ Occupation
Category

(2) Degree
Required

(3)
Sample Job Titles

(4)
Share of All
Full-Time
Vacancies

Business
None or AA
Accounting / Finance
BA

Customer Service / Sales /
Marketing

None or AA
BA

Payroll Manager, Billing / Collection
Specialist

0.111

Business Analyst, Accountant (non-CPA)
Customer Care Rep, Sales Associate

0.344

Account Executive, Product Representative

Allied Health
Medical Assistant:
Administrative
Medical Assistant: Clinical

None or
Certificate
None or
Certificate

Medical Biller, Medical Secretary
Medical Assistant, Clinical Support

Practical/Vocational
Nursing

Certificate

Licensed Practical Nurse

Pharmacy Technician

Certificate

Pharmacy Technician

0.050
0.036
0.012
0.011

Source: A nationally recognized online job search website (our IRB prohibits revealing the name). Searches
were performed from March to July 2014 for Business and Health and, in addition, from September to
November 2014 for Health.
Notes: Program/occupation categories are based on the Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) codes.
Certificates include postsecondary awards of less than one year and awards of more than one but less than two
years. Sample job titles are pulled from the job search website using the occupation and keyword searches
described in the text. The share of full-time job vacancies is computed by dividing the total number of vacancies
posted for particular keyword search by the total number of all vacancies posted on the job search website. We
compute this share for three consecutive 24-hour periods and report the average.

-43-

TABLE 2—EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

Occupation

Degree or Credential
Required

Resume Structure

Business

None (or AA)

1: High School only
2: For-profit AA
3: Public AA
4: For-profit BA (online)

BA

1: BA, public, not selective
2: BA, public, selective
3: BA, for-profit, online
4: BA, for-profit, local in-person (if available)

Health

None

1: Public Certificate
2: For-Profit Certificate
3: High School only
4: High School only

Certificate

1: Public Certificate
2: Public Certificate
3: For-Profit Certificate
4: For-Profit Certificate

-44-

TABLE 3—SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR THE RESUMES USED IN THE AUDIT STUDY

Callback Rate

Number of Resumes

0.082

10,484

Chicago

0.082

2,036

Los Angeles

0.115

1,580

Miami

0.058

2,480

New York City

0.083

2,284

San Francisco Bay

0.083

2,104

AA, Accounting/Finance

0.045

1,084

AA, Customer Service/Sales

0.125

2,920

BA, Accounting/Finance

0.044

1,928

BA, Customer Service/Sales

0.104

2,172

Licensed Practical Nurse

0.057

804

Pharmacy Technician

0.070

200

Medical Assistant (Administrative)

0.046

1,016

Medical Assistant (Clinical)

0.078

360

White female

0.092

2,620

White male

0.066

2,456

Nonwhite female

0.090

2,680

Nonwhite male

0.077

2,728

less than $35,000

0.105

2,497

$35,000 to $49,999

0.109

2,468

$50,000 to $64,999

0.080

1,254

$65,000 or more

0.048

1,448

No salary data

0.048

437

Total
By city

By occupation and degree requirements

By race and gender

By Average Salary (business jobs only)

Notes: The callback rate is the share of resumes that received a personalized callback (by phone or email) from
a potential employer.

-45-

TABLE 4—CALLBACK REGRESSIONS FOR BUSINESS JOBS (THAT DO NOT REQUIRE A BACHELOR’S DEGREE)

For-profit (AA)

For-profit (BA)

Public (AA)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Callback

Callback

Callback

-0.0041

-0.0014

-0.0019

(0.0070)

(0.0069)

(0.0066)

0.0054

0.0086

0.0088

(0.0105)

(0.0100)

(0.0083)

-0.0001

0.0031

0.0026

(0.0070)

(0.0066)

(0.0071)
White male

-0.0443**
(0.0226)

Nonwhite female

0.0170
(0.0258)

Nonwhite male

-0.0233
(0.0238)

High School-only callback rate

0.104

0.104

0.104

Number of observations

4,004

4,004

4,004

F(FP AA = FP BA)

0.460

0.434

0.387

F(FP AA = Public AA)

0.547

0.498

0.503

F(Pub AA = FP BA)

0.624

0.621

0.562

F(Names)

0.812

0.780

F(Work histories and Skills)

0.000

0.444

F(Labor markets)

0.008

F(White=Nonwhite)

0.260

F(Male=Female)

0.013

F(Race and Gender)

0.051

Vacancy fixed effects

X

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for any personalized callback from the potential
employer. No postsecondary degree is the omitted education category, and white female is omitted for
race/gender. Col. (2) includes indictor variables for labor market. Cols. (2) and (3) include fixed effects for
skill template, work history template, and names (applicant initials). Standard errors are clustered at the
vacancy level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

-46-

TABLE 5—CALLBACK REGRESSIONS FOR BUSINESS JOBS (THAT REQUIRE A BACHELOR’S DEGREE)

For-profit BA

(1)
Callback

(2)
Callback

(3)
Callback

-0.0199***

-0.0191***

-0.0200***

(0.0052)

(0.0051)

(0.0052)

For-profit BA, online

(4)
Callback

-0.0213***
(0.0058)

For-profit BA, local

-0.0074
(0.0121)

Selective public BA

0.0007
(0.0095)

White male

-0.0143
(0.0195)

Nonwhite female

-0.0098
(0.0194)

Nonwhite male

0.0015
(0.0198)

Non-selective public BA callback rate

0.091

0.091

0.091

0.091

Number of observations

4,100

4,100

4,100

4,100

Vacancy fixed effects

X

X

F(FP online = Local)

0.263

F(FP online = Selective public)

0.015

F(FP not online = Selective public)

0.549

F(Labor markets)

0.501

F(White=Nonwhite)

0.824

F(Male=Female)

0.913

F(Race and gender)

0.813

F(Names)

0.660

0.666

F(Work histories and Skills)

0.116

0.031

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for any personalized callback from the potential
employer. Public BA (non-selective) is the omitted education category, and white female is omitted for
race/gender. Col. (2) includes indictor variables for labor market. Cols. (2) and (4) include fixed effects for
skill template, work history template, and names (applicant initials). Standard errors are clustered at the vacancy
level.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

-47-

TABLE 6—CALLBACK REGRESSIONS FOR HEALTH-SECTOR JOBS

For-profit certificate
No postsecondary certificate
(high school degree only)
White male
Nonwhite female
Nonwhite male
Public certificate callback rate

(1)
Callback

(2)
Callback

(3)
Callback

-0.0501**

-0.0507**

-0.0040

-0.0054

(0.0179)

(0.0179)

(0.0100)

(0.0094)

-0.0349**

-0.0357**

(0.0147)

(0.0148)

-0.0514

-0.0020

(0.0370)

(0.0294)

-0.0717*

0.0280

(0.0391)

(0.0318)

-0.0516

-0.0014

(0.0419)

(0.0291)

(4)
Callback

0.089
No Certificate
Required

0.089
No Certificate
Required

0.056
Certificate
Required

0.056
Certificate
Required

948

948

1,432

1,432

F(FP certificate = HS degree only)

0.235

0.241

F(Labor Markets)

0.005

0.002

F(White=Nonwhite)

0.170

0.493

F(Male=Female)

0.514

0.464

F(Race and gender)

0.338

F(Names)

0.359

0.352

0.591

0.586

F(Work histories and Skills)

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Sample
Number of observations
Vacancy fixed effects

X

X

0.744

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for any personalized callback from the potential
employer. A certificate from a public community college is the omitted education category in cols. (1) through
(4). White female is the omitted category for race/gender in cols. (1) and (3). All the specifications include
fixed effects for skill template, work history template, and names (applicant initials). Standard errors are
clustered at the vacancy level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

-48-

TABLE 7—CALLBACK REGRESSIONS BY QUALITY OF JOB (FOR BUSINESS JOBS, NO BA DEGREE REQUIRED)
(1)
Less than
$35,000
For-profit (AA)

(2)
$35,000 to
$49,999

(3)
$50,000 and
greater

(4)
All

0.0004

-0.0041

-0.0133

0.0023

(0.0105)

(0.0130)

(0.0133)

(0.0151)

× Salary (in $10,000s)

-0.0014
(0.0031)

For-profit (BA)

-0.0049

0.0238*

0.0273*

-0.0053

(0.0134)

(0.0142)

(0.0154)

(0.0174)

× Salary (in $10,000s)

0.0041
(0.0034)

Public (AA)

0.0020

0.0020

-0.0089

0.0047

(0.0102)

(0.0125)

(0.0124)

(0.0149)

× Salary (in $10,000s)

-0.0011
(0.0031)

Baseline callback rate

0.105

0.125

0.075

0.104

Number of observations

1,704

1,432

617

3,753

X

X

X

X

F(FP AA = FP BA)

0.788

0.214

0.081

F(FP AA = Public AA)

0.885

0.602

0.604

F(Public AA = FP BA)

0.669

0.265

0.100

Vacancy fixed effects

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for any personalized callback from the potential
employer. Standard errors are clustered at the vacancy level. All the specifications include fixed effects for
skill template, work history template, and name (i.e. applicant initials). The line “× Salary” is an interaction of
the variable above that line times the expected salary for the job opening (based on the median salary for the job
title). The first three columns split the sample into expected salary ranges (less than $35,000; $35,000 to
$49,999; and $50,000 or more). Col. (4) includes the entire expected salary range. The omitted education
group is no postsecondary degree.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

-49-

TABLE 8—CALLBACK REGRESSIONS BY QUALITY OF JOB (FOR BUSINESS JOBS, BA REQUIRED)
(1)
Less than
$35,000
For-profit BA, online

(2)
$35,000 to
$49,999

(3)
$50,000 to
$64,999

(4)
$65,000
and greater

All

-0.0277

-0.0153

-0.0286**

-0.0157**

-0.0328*

(0.0176)

(0.0117)

(0.0144)

(0.0074)

(0.0168)

× Salary (in $10,000s)

(5)

0.0020
(0.0024)

For-profit BA, local

-0.0277

0.0039

-0.0084

0.0109

-0.0314

(0.0235)

(0.0286)

(0.0213)

(0.0156)

(0.0290)

× Salary (in $10,000s)

0.0053
(0.0042)

Selective public BA

-0.0130

-0.0209

-0.0059

0.0392**

(0.0217)

(0.0179)

(0.0211)

(0.0197)

× Salary (in $10,000s)

-0.0515**
(0.0250)
0.0096**
(0.0043)

Baseline callback rate

0.119

0.114

0.096

0.057

0.091

793

1,036

893

1,192

3,914

X

X

X

X

X

F(FP online = FP local)

1.000

0.506

0.343

0.073

F(FP online = Selective public)

0.484

0.743

0.262

0.003

F(FP local = Selective public)

0.622

0.443

0.902

0.158

Number of observations
Vacancy fixed effects

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for any personalized callback from the potential
employer. Standard errors are clustered at the vacancy level. All the specifications include fixed effects for
skill template, work history template, and name (i.e. applicant initials). The line “× Salary” is an interaction of
the variable above that line times the expected salary for the job opening (based on the median salary for the job
title). The first four columns split the sample into expected salary ranges (less than $35,000; $35,000 to
$49,999; and $50,000 to $64,999; and $65,000 or more). Col. (5) includes the entire expected salary range. The
omitted education group is non-selective public BA.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.

-50-

FIGURE 1. CALLBACK RATES BY POSTSECONDARY SECTOR FOR BUSINESS JOBS: WITHOUT AND WITH BA REQUIREMENT
Notes: From a regression of callbacks on indicators of postsecondary sector and vacancy fixed effects. “FP” represents a
for-profit postsecondary institution, “Public” represents a public postsecondary institution, and “No Degree” indicates no
postsecondary degree.

-51-

FIGURE 2. CALLBACK RATES BY POSTSECONDARY SECTOR FOR HEALTHCARE JOBS: WITHOUT AND WITH CERTIFICATE
REQUIREMENT
Notes: From a regression of callbacks on indicators of postsecondary sector and vacancy fixed effects. “FP” stands for a
for-profit postsecondary institution, “Public” stands for a public postsecondary institution, and “No Certificate” indicates
no postsecondary credential.

-52-

