                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INTEGRATION AND CRISIS CONTAGION

                                         Michael B. Devereux
                                            Changhua Yu

                                         Working Paper 20526
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20526


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014




We thank Hiroyuki Kasahara, Ennise Kharroubi, Anton Korinek, Vadim Marmer, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull,
Karl Schmedders, Jian Wang, Kang Shi, Carlos Zarazaga, and seminar participants at the CUHK, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the BIS, the BIS Hong Kong, and SHUFE for helpful discussions.
Devereux’s research is supported by ESRC award ES/1024174/1. Changhua Yu thanks National Natural
Science Foundation of China, No. 71303044. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Michael B. Devereux and Changhua Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Financial Integration and Crisis Contagion
Michael B. Devereux and Changhua Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 20526
September 2014
JEL No. D52,F36,F44,G11,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

International financial integration helps to diversify risk but also may increase the trans- mission of
crises across countries. We provide a quantitative analysis of this trade-off in a two-country general
equilibrium model with endogenous portfolio choice and collateral con- straints. Collateral constraints
bind occasionally, depending upon the state of the economy and levels of inherited debt. The analysis
allows for different degrees of financial integration, moving from financial autarky to bond market
integration and equity market integration. Fi- nancial integration leads to a significant increase in global
leverage, doubles the probability of balance sheet crises for any one country, and dramatically increases
the degree of ‘contagion’ across countries. Outside of crises, the impact of financial integration on
macro aggregates is relatively small. But the impact of a crisis with integrated international financial
markets is much less severe than that under financial market autarky. Thus, a trade-off emerges between
the probability of crises and the severity of crises. Financial integration can raise or lower welfare,
depending on the scale of macroeconomic risk. In particular, in a low risk environment, the increased
leverage resulting from financial integration can reduce welfare of investors.


Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com

Changhua Yu
School of Banking and Finance
University of International Business and Economics
No. 10 Huixin East Rd., Chaoyang District
Beijing, China, 100029
changhuay@gmail.com
1       Introduction

    Since the global financial crisis, there has been a significant reevaluation of the effects
of financial market integration. It is widely acknowledged that financial linkages between
countries were critical to the rapid transmission of the crisis across national borders. A
large empirical and theoretical literature has explored questions related to the nature of this
transmission (see for instance, Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009; Mishkin, 2011; Campello, Graham
and Harvey, 2010).1 Many of these papers present detailed accounts of the origin and nature
of the crisis.
    The paper is motivated by the events of the global crisis but takes a more general per-
spective on the nature of international financial markets in the presence of market failures
within the domestic financial system. We present an analysis of the transmission of crises
in a two-country general equilibrium model with endogenous portfolio choice and collateral
constraints arising from the absence of full legal enforcement of contracts. In our model,
collateral constraints bind occasionally, depending on inherited debt burdens and shocks to
productivity. We study three stages of financial integration: financial autarky, bond market
integration and equity market integration. In each type of financial regime, an investor must
raise external funds from lenders to invest in a project, but faces a collateral constraint be-
cause of default risk. In financial autarky, an investor borrows only from domestic lenders.
In bond market integration, an investor obtains funding from a global bank that accepts
deposits from savers in all countries. In equity market integration, investors borrow from a
global bank but can make investments in domestic or foreign projects.
    The aim of the paper is to explore how different levels of international financial market
integration effect the level of risk-taking that investor-borrowers are willing to engage in, to
explore how financial markets affect the probability of financial crises and the international
transmission of crises, and what financial markets imply for the nature and severity of crises.
Given answers to these questions, we can investigate the welfare effects of financial market

    1
    Others include Almunia, Benetrix, Eichengreen, ORourke and Rua (2010), Puri, Rocholl and Steffen
(2011), Chudik and Fratzscher (2011), Perri and Quadrini (2011), Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis
(2011), Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou and Perri (2013) and Fratzscher (2012).

                                                 1
integration within a framework of endogenous financial crises. A key novelty of the analysis is
that we explore these questions within a full multi-country general equilibrium model, where
world interest rates, asset prices, and capital flows are all endogenously determined. In this
model, crises can be specific to one country, or can occur in all countries simultaneously.
   The model embodies a central trade-off inherent in much recent discussion of the nature
of financial markets and international financial crises. Integrated financial markets facilitate
inter-temporal capital flows and portfolio diversification, and by doing so, help to defray
country-specific risk. But at the same time, more open capital markets may increase the
probability of financial crises and the contagion of crises across countries. By constructing a
model with endogenous portfolio choice, endogenous leverage, and endogenous financial crises
which are affected by these decisions, as well as the opportunities offered by international
financial markets, we can explore the nature and characteristics of this trade-off in detail.
   Our results closely reflect this two-fold nature of financial market integration. First,
we find that financial integration tends to increase investor leverage and risk-taking, over
and above the opportunities that it affords for portfolio diversification and inter-temporal
borrowing and lending. Two channels are critical for this linkage between financial opening
and increased risk-taking. First, by increasing the value of existing asset holdings, financial
integration increases the collateral value of investors’ portfolios and facilitates an increase in
borrowing capacity. Secondly, and critically, by reducing overall consumption risk, financial
integration reduces precautionary saving and leads to an increase in investor’s desire to
borrow.
   As a result of the increase in global leverage, we find that financial market integration
increases the unconditional probability of financial crises. In addition, due to the linkage of
borrowing costs and asset prices through international financial markets, the contagion of
crises across countries is substantially higher after financial market liberalization. Because
investors do not take account of how their borrowing and investment decisions impact the
probability of financial crises, this represents a negative externality which reduces the social
welfare benefits of financial liberalization.



                                                2
    While we find that financial crises are more likely in an integrated world financial market,
crises are much less severe in terms of lost output and consumption than those in financial
autarky. During ‘normal times’ (or in the absence of crises), the impact of financial integration
is rather small - financial market openness improves allocative efficiency modestly and has a
benefit in terms of slightly lower output and consumption volatility. But in a financial crisis,
the output and consumption losses are much greater in an environment of financial autarky.
Hence, while we see more crises unconditionally in an environment of international financial
integration, they are milder events, and the costs are more evenly spread amongst countries.
    In welfare terms, we can ask whether, given the existence of a trade-off between the
probability of crises and the severity of crises, there is always a net gain from financial market
integration. Our results indicate that this depends on the overall level of global risk. In an
environment of high risk, the benefits of diversification exceed the costs of increased crisis
occurrence, and both investors and savers are always better off with open capital markets.
But with a lower risk environment, induced effects of financial integration on leverage and
crisis probability can be more important, and we find that investors can be worse off with
open financial markets than in financial market autarky.
    This paper contributes to several branches of literature. First of all, the paper provides
a direct link between financial integration and transmission of crisis across countries. The
question of the international transmission of crises has attracted much attention in recent
literature.2 Recently, several authors have developed models of crisis transmission in a two-
country framework with financial frictions. A paper closely related to our work is Perri and
Quadrini (2011). They assume that investors can perfectly share their income risk across
borders and consequently investors in both countries simultaneously face either slack collat-
eral constraints or tight collateral constraints. In another words, the conditional probability
of one country being in a crisis given that the other is in a crisis is one. There are two main
differences between their work and ours. First, we investigate endogenous portfolio decisions
made by investors, and risk sharing is imperfect between investors across borders, while they
   2
    See recent work on the global financial crisis by Cetorelli and Goldberg (2010), de Haas and van Lelyveld
(2010), Aizenman (2011), Aizenman and Hutchison (2012) and others; on 1998 Russian default by Schnabl
(2012).

                                                     3
focus mainly on perfect risk sharing for investors. Second, the mechanism is quite different.
We study a channel of fire sales, in which both asset prices and quantities of assets adjust
endogenously to exogenous shocks, while they focus only on the quantity adjustment of as-
sets. Another related paper is Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou and Perri (2013). They study
a global banker who lends to firms in two countries and focus on a bank lending channel.
Firms in both countries need to finance their working capital via borrowing from a banker in
advance. Variation in the interest payment for working capital charged by the global banker
in both countries delivers a transmission of crises across borders. Our model is quite different
theirs and emphasizes the balance sheet channel of firms (investors). Moreover, we provide a
model of endogenous portfolio choice by investors (firms) and bankers, and study explicitly
the transmission of crises through the fire sale of assets.
   Second, this paper makes a contribution to studying slow recovery in economies with
occasionally binding borrowing constraints. We explore an international dimension of slow
recovery. Based on a closed economy with lenders, borrowers and occasionally binding bor-
rowing constraints, Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2013) show that there are two modes in
the distribution of constrained borrowers’ net worth. We confirm their result in our model,
using the distribution of consumption for investors. Moreover, we find multiple modes in
the consumption distribution in financial integration. There is one major mode, in which
investors are financially unconstrained, and there exist at least two minor modes, in which
investors in either of countries are financially constrained.
   Third, this paper is complementary to a burgeoning literature of international portfolio
choice (see Devereux and Sutherland, 2011a; Devereux and Sutherland, 2010; Tille and van
Wincoop, 2010 and others). Compared to these work with approximation around a deter-
ministic steady state, we develop a model with occasionally binding collateral constraints
and solve this model using a global solution method based on Dumas and Lyasoff (2012) and
Judd, Kubler and Schmedders (2002). In the model, we obtain a stochastic steady state of
portfolios. In terms of model setups, this paper is a variation of Devereux and Yetman (2010)
and Devereux and Sutherland (2011b). They focus on a case with collateral constraints being



                                               4
always binding, while we consider a model with occasionally binding collateral constraints
and address quite different issues.
    In a related sense, our paper makes a modest computational step forward by computing
equilibria of a infinite horizon stochastic general equilibrium model with incomplete markets
and multiple endogenous state variables. We make use of a recently developed method
method of backward indication for stochastic general equilibrium models with incomplete
markets that is outlined in Dumas and Lyasoff (2012).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyzes a two-country financial integration
model with equity market integration, bond market integration and financial autarky. The
algorithm for solving the model, some computational issues, and calibration assumptions
are discussed in 3. A perfect foresight special case of the model is presented in 4. Section
5 provides the main results. The last section concludes. All detailed issues related to the
solution of the model are contained in a Technical Appendix at the end of the paper.



2      A Two-country General Equilibrium Model of In-

      vestment and Leverage

    Here we set out a basic model where there are two countries, each of which contains
borrowers and lenders, and lenders make risky levered investments subject to constraints on
their total borrowing. The baseline is similar to Devereux and Yetman (2010) and Devereux
and Sutherland (2011b), which is essentially an international version of Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), except extended to allow for uncertainty in investment returns. There are two coun-
tries, country 1 (home) and 2 (foreign) in the world economy. In each country, a number
of firm-investors with a measure of population n make consumption decisions, borrow from
bankers and purchase capital to invest in equity markets. Investors also supply labor and
earn labor income from competitive labor markets. A remaining population of 1 − n workers
(savers) operate capital in the informal backyard production sector, supply labor, and save
in the form of risk-free debt. There is a competitive banking sector that operates in both


                                              5
countries. Bankers raise funds from workers and lend to investors. We look at varying degrees
of financial market integration between the two countries. In financial autarky, savers lend to
domestic banks, who in turn lend to home investors, and investors can only make investments
in the domestic technology (or domestic equity). In bond market integration, there is a global
bank that raises funds from informal savers in both countries, and extends loans to investors.
But investors are still restricted to investing in the domestic technology. Finally, in equity
market integration, investors borrow from the global bankers but may make investments in
the equity of either country. In all environments, there is a fixed stock of capital which may
be allocated to the informal backyard sector or the domestic investment technology. Capital
cannot be physically transferred across countries.


2.1      Equity market integration

     It is convenient to first set out the model in the case of full equity market integration,
and then later describe how this model is restricted in the case of bond market integration,
or financial autarky. When investors trade equity assets across borders, there are three types
of assets in their portfolios including domestic equities, foreign equities and borrowing from
bankers.


2.1.1     Firm-investors

     The budget constraint for a representative firm-investor in country l = 1, 2, reads as

     bl,t+1              l            l                         l                   l
 −          +cl,t +q1,t k1,t+1 +q2,t k2,t+1 = dl,t +Wl,t hl,t +k1,t (q1,t +R1k,t )+k2,t (q2,t +R2k,t )−bl,t (1)
     Rt+1

The right hand side of the budget constraint states income sources including labor income
Wl,t hl,t , profit from the ownership of domestic firms, dl,t , gross return on equities issued by
                                   l                                               l
country 1 and held by investor l, k1,t (q1,t + R1k,t ), gross return on equity 2, k2,t (q2,t + R2k,t ),
less debt owed to the bank bl,t . The left hand side denotes the investor’s consumption cl,t ,
                           l        l
and portfolio decisions, (k1,t+1 , k2,t+1 , bl,t+1 ). Asset prices for country 1 and 2 equities and
                                             1
the international bond are q1,t , q2,t ,    Rt+1
                                                 ,   respectively. Dividends for equities come from the

                                                        6
marginal product of capital, R1k,t and R2k,t .
     Profit dl,t is then defined as

                                   1
                          dl,t ≡     [F (Al,t , Hl,t , Kl,t ) − Wl,t Hl,t − Kl,t Rlk,t ]
                                   n

where the total cost of labor services then reads Wl,t Hl,t .
     Investors need to finance their inter-period borrowing to smooth their consumption over
time. They face a collateral (or leverage) constraint as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) when
borrowing from a bank


                                                    l               l
                                           
                               bl,t+1 ≤ κEt q1,t+1 k1,t+1 + q2,t+1 k2,t+1                               (2)


where κ characterizes the upper bound for loan-to-value.
     We assume that investors can collateralize all of their equity assets at hand to finance
borrowing from bankers. Domestic and foreign equity assets are perfect substitutes when they
are used to obtaining external funds for investors in either of the countries.3 Preferences of
investors are given by                         (   ∞
                                                                            )
                                                   X
                                          E0             βlt U (cl,t , hl,t )
                                                   t=0

where 0 < βl < 1 is investors’ subjective discount factor and U (cl,t , hl,t ) is their utility
function. E0 stands for mathematical expectations conditional on information up to period
0.
     The optimality condition for labor supply states that marginal rate of substitution be-
tween consumption and leisure equals the wage rate,

                                          Uh (cl,t , hl,t )
                                      −                     = Wl,t , l = 1, 2                           (3)
                                          Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

where Uc (cl,t , hl,t ) and Uh (cl,t , hl,t ) denote an investor’s marginal utility of consumption and
labor supply in country l, respectively.
     3
    Several recent studies explore asymmetric efficiency of channeling funds through financial markets (Men-
doza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull, 2009) or through financial intermediations (Maggiori, 2012) across countries.

                                                            7
   Let the Lagrange multiplier for the collateral constraint (2) be µl,t . The optimal holdings
of equity for investors must satisfy the following conditions:


                           βl Et Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )(qi,t+1 + Rik,t+1 ) + µl,t κEt qi,t+1
                 qi,t =                                                                     , i = 1, 2   (4)
                                                      Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

   The left hand side is the cost of one unit of equity at time t. The right hand side indicates
that the benefit of an additional unit of equity is twofold. First, there is a direct increase in
wealth in the next period from the direct return on capital plus the value of equity. Secondly,
an additional unit of equity relaxes the collateral constraint (2). If µt > 0, then this increases
the borrowing limit at time t.
   The optimal choice of bond holdings must satisfy

                                                  1     βl Et Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 ) + µl,t
                                       q3,t ≡         =                                                  (5)
                                                 Rt+1             Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

When the collateral constraint (2) is binding, reducing one unit of borrowing has an extra
benefit µl,t , by relaxing the constraint. Rearranging the equation above yields,

                                               βl Et Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )Rt+1
                                       1=                                      + EF Pl,t+1
                                                       Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

                           µl,t Rt+1
where EF Pl,t+1 ≡         Uc (cl,t ,hl,t )
                                             measures the external finance premium in terms of consumption
in period t faced by investors in country l.
   The complementary slackness condition for the collateral constraint (2) can be written as


                                              l               l
                                                                           
                                  κEt q1,t+1 k1,t+1 + q2,t+1 k2,t+1 − bl,t+1 µl,t = 0                    (6)


with µl,t ≥ 0.
   The critical focus of the computation will be to investigate the extent to which constraint
(2) binds in an equilibrium that is represented by a stationary distribution of decision rules
made by savers and investors, and to see how that depends on the realizations of productivity,
and on the degree of financial market integration across countries. The fact that productivity


                                                                 8
is stochastic, inducing riskiness in the return on equities to investors, is critical. In a de-
terministic environment, the constraint will always bind in a steady state equilibrium (with
any degree of financial market integration). This is because following Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), we assume that investors are more impatient than savers. Thus, in an infinite horizon
budgeting plan, investors will always wish to front-load their consumption stream so much
that (2) will always bind. But this is not true generally, in a stochastic economy, since then
investors will have a precautionary savings motive that leads them to defer consumption as a
way to self-insure against low productivity (and binding collateral constraints) states in the
future.


2.1.2     Global bankers

   In both countries, there are worker/savers who supply labor, earn income, employ capital
to use in an informal sector, and save. They save by making deposits in a ‘bank’, which in
turn makes loans to investors. Workers are subject to country specific risk coming from fluc-
tuations in wage rates and in the price of domestic capital. Because idiosyncratic variation
in workers consumption and savings decisions plays no essential role in the transmission of
productivity shocks across countries, we make a simplification that aids the model solution
by assuming that with financial market integration (either bond market integration or equity
market integration), workers’ preferences are subsumed by a ‘global banker’ who receives
their deposits and chooses investment and lending to maximize utility of the global rep-
resentative worker. Hence, there is full risk-sharing across countries among worker/savers.
This assumption substantially simplifies the computation of equilibrium without changing
the nature of the results in any essential way.
   Hence, there is a representative banker in the world financial market. The banker runs two
branches, one branch in each country with which the representative worker/saver conducts
business. As we noted, the worker receives a competitive wage rate in the local labor market
and operates a safe but informal production function. Given perfect risk sharing among
workers within the bank, the objective of the banker is to maximize a representative worker’s



                                              9
lifetime utility. Let subscript 3 indicate variables for the banker. The budget constraint for
the global banker can be written as



       b3,t+1 c31,t + c32,t q1,t k1,t+1
                                  3             3
                                        + q2,t k2,t+1   W1,t h31,t + W2,t h32,t q1,t k1,t
                                                                                      3           3
                                                                                          + q2,t k2,t
     −       +             +                          =                        +
       Rt+1         2                   2                          2                      2

                                                                  3          3
                                                               G(k1,t ) + G(k2,t )
                                                 − b3,t +                                                                            (7)
                                                                        2

   The left hand side of the equation above states expenditures for a representative worker
                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                  q1,t k1,t+1        3
                                                                                                                              +q2,t k2,t+1
                                                 b3,t+1
in the bank, including borrowing                 Rt+1
                                                        ,   consumption c3l,t and physical capital                            2

employed in informal production sectors. The right hand side describes labor income per
         W1,t h31,t +W2,t h32,t                                                                3 +q
                                                                                         q1,t k1,t        3
                                                                                                     2,t k2,t
worker              2
                                ,   the value of existing capital holdings                         2
                                                                                                              ,   debt repayment
                                                                      3 )+G(k 3 )
                                                                   G(k1,t    2,t         3            3
b3,t and production in the informal sectors                              2
                                                                                    . G(k1,t ) and G(k2,t ) denote the
                                                                                       3
production technology in the informal sector of country 1 and 2 with physical capital k1,t and
 3
k2,t as inputs, respectively. We assume that G(.) is increasing and concave.
   The global banker internalizes the preferences of worker savers, maximizing an objective
function given by

                                       (  ∞                                              )
                                         1 X
                                               β3t U (c31,t , h31,t ) + U (c32,t , h32,t )
                                                  
                                    E0
                                         2 t=0

where β3 stands for the subjective discount factor for a worker. As noted above, we assume
that workers are more patient than investors, so that βl < β3 < 1. This ensures that investors
are borrowers in the stationary equilibrium.
   The optimality condition for labor supply in each country is

                                                 Uh (c3l,t , h3l,t )
                                             −                       = Wl,t , l = 1, 2                                               (8)
                                                 Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

   In addition, through the global banker, consumption risk-sharing among worker/savers
across borders is attained, so that




                                                                  10
                                         Uc (c31,t , h31,t ) = Uc (c32,t , h32,t )               (9)

   The optimal choices of capital holdings for the banker are represented as:


                             β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )(qi,t+1 + G0 (ki,t+1
                                                                         3
                                                                               ))
                    qi,t =                             3     3
                                                                                  , i = 1, 2    (10)
                                                 Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

   Finally the optimality condition for the global banker bond holdings is as follows

                                           1     β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )
                                 q3,t   ≡      =                                                (11)
                                          Rt+1        Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

   We note that the global banker faces no separate borrowing constraints such as (2).


2.1.3   Production and market clearing conditions

   In the formal sector of country i with i = 1, 2, goods are produced by competitive goods
producers, who hire domestic labor services and physical capital in competitive factor mar-
kets. Taking the formal sector production function as Yi,t = F (Ai,t , Hi,t , Ki,t ), where Ai,t rep-
resents an exogenous productivity coefficient, we have in equilibrium, the wage rate equaling
the marginal product of labor and the return on capital being equal to the marginal product
of capital
                                  Wi,t = Fh (Ai,t , Hi,t , Ki,t ) , i = 1, 2                    (12)

                                  Rik,t = Fk (Ai,t , Hi,t , Ki,t ) , i = 1, 2                   (13)

   Labor market and rental market clearing conditions are written as


                                  Hi,t = nhi,t + (1 − n)h3i,t , i = 1, 2.                       (14)


Total labor employed is the sum of employment of investors and savers.


                                                  1      2
                                        Ki,t = n(ki,t + ki,t ) , i = 1, 2.                      (15)



                                                           11
Capital employed in the formal sector is the sum of equity holdings of the domestic capital
stock by both domestic and foreign investors.
     Asset market clearing conditions read


          1         2               3                                    1         2               3
        nk1,t+1 + nk1,t+1 + (1 − n)k1,t+1 = 1,                         nk2,t+1 + nk2,t+1 + (1 − n)k2,t+1 =1                           (16)


                                          nb1,t+1 + nb2,t+1 + 2(1 − n)b3,t+1 = 0                                                      (17)

     The top line says that equity markets in each country must clear, while the bottom line
says that bond market clearing ensures that the positive bond position of the global bank
equals the sum of the bond liabilities of investors in both countries.
     Finally, there is only one world good, so the global resource constraint can be written as:


             n(c1,t + c2,t ) + (1 − n)(c31,t + c32,t ) = F (A1,t , H1,t , K1,t ) + F (A2,t , H2,t , K2,t )+

                                                             3          3
                                                                             
                                                  (1 − n) G(k1,t ) + G(k2,t )                                                         (18)


2.1.4       A competitive recursive stationary equilibrium

     We define a competitive equilibrium which consists of a sequence of allocations {cl,t }t=0,1,2,··· ,
{c3l,t }t=0,1,2,··· , {kl,t
                        i
                            }t=0,1,2,··· , {bi,t }t=0,1,2,··· ,{hl,t }t=0,1,2··· ,{h3l,t }t=0,1,2··· , {Hl,t }t=0,1,2,··· , {Kl,t }t=0,1,2,··· ,
a sequence of prices {qi,t }t=0,1,2,··· , {Wl,t }t=0,1,2,··· and {Rlk,t }t=0,1,2,··· , and a sequence of La-
grange multipliers {µl,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with l = 1, 2, i = 1, 2, 3, such that (a) consumption {cl,t }t=0,1,2,··· ,
{c3l,t }t=0,1,2,··· , labor supply, {hl,t }t=0,1,2··· , {h3l,t }t=0,1,2··· , with l = 1, 2, and portfolios {kl,t
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                 }t=0,1,2,··· ,
{bi,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with l = 1, 2, i = 1, 2, 3, solve the investors’ and bankers’ problem; (b) labor de-
mand {Hl,t }t=0,1,2,··· and physical capital demand {Kl,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with l = 1, 2, solve for firms’
problem; (c) wages {Wl,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with l = 1, 2, clear labor markets and {Rlk,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with
l = 1, 2, clear physical capital markets; (d) asset prices {qi,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with i = 1, 2, 3, clear
the corresponding equity markets and bond markets; (e) the associated Lagrange multipliers
{µl,t }t=0,1,2,··· , with l = 1, 2, satisfy the complementary slackness conditions.
     Our interest is in developing a global solution to the model, where the collateral constraint


                                                                    12
may alternate between binding and non-binding states. A description of the solution approach
is contained in Section 3 below, and fully exposited in the Technical Appendix.


2.2    Bond market integration

   We wish to compare the equilibrium with fully integrated global equity markets with
one where there is restricted financial market integration. Take the case where there is a
global bond market, but equity holdings are restricted to domestic agents. All returns on
capital in the formal sector must accrue to domestic firm-investors, although they can finance
investment by borrowing from the Global Bank. To save space, we outline only the equations
that differ from the case of equity market integration.
   A representative firm-investor’s budget constraint in the bond market integration case is
given by


                     bl,t+1                l                           l
                −           + cl,t + ql,t kl,t+1 = dl,t + Wl,t hl,t + kl,t (ql,t + Rlk,t ) − bl,t .     (19)
                     Rt+1

   The collateral constraint now depends only on domestic equity values


                                                                 l
                                            bl,t+1 ≤ κEt ql,t+1 kl,t+1                                  (20)


   A firm-investor maximizes his life-time utility
                                                (   ∞
                                                                             )
                                                    X
                                           E0             βlt U (cl,t , hl,t )
                                                    t=0


Consumption Euler equations for portfolio holdings imply

                    βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 ) (ql,t+1 + Rlk,t+1 )} + µl,t κEt {ql,t+1 }
           ql,t =                                                                          , l = 1, 2   (21)
                                                  Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

                                        1     βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )} + µl,t
                              q3,t ≡        =                                                           (22)
                                       Rt+1             Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

   The complementary slackness condition implied by the collateral constraint (20) can be


                                                            13
written as
                                               l
                                                            
                                   κEt ql,t+1 kl,t+1 − bl,t+1 µl,t = 0                              (23)

with µl,t ≥ 0.
   The global banker’s problem is identical to the condition under equity market integration,
and so is omitted here.
   Market clearing conditions for rental and equity assets are as follows


                                                   l
                                          Kl,t = nkl,t , l = 1, 2                                   (24)



               1               3                                         2               3
             nk1,t+1 + (1 − n)k1,t+1 = 1,                              nk2,t+1 + (1 − n)k2,t+1 =1   (25)


   A competitive recursive stationary equilibrium in bond market integration is similar to
equity market integration in section 2.1.4.


2.3    Financial autarky

   Finally, we define a market structure without any financial interaction between countries
at all, referred to as financial autarky. Since there is only a single good in the world economy,
in financial autarky there is no trade between countries at all, so the two countries are
essentially closed economies. Investors obtain external funds only from local bankers and
hold only local equity assets. Therefore, their budget constraints and collateral constraints
are the same as in bond market integration (equation (19)-(20)). Now, local bankers receive
deposits only from local savers.
   A representative local banker’s problem in country l = 1, 2 reads
                                              (∞                           )
                                               X
                                         E0           β3t U (c3l,t , h3l,t )
                                                t=0


subject to
                      bl3,t+1
                  −           + c3l,t + ql,t kl,t+1
                                              3
                                                    = Wl,t h3l,t + ql,t kl,t
                                                                         3
                                                                             − bl3,t + G(kl,t
                                                                                          3
                                                                                              )     (26)
                      Rt+1

                                                        14
    The optimality conditions yield

                                    Uh (c3l,t , h3l,t )
                                  −                     = Wl,t , l = 1, 2              (27)
                                    Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

                               β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )(ql,t+1 + G0 (kl,t+1
                                                                           3
                                                                                 ))
                        ql,t =                                                         (28)
                                                   Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

                                         1     β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )
                               q3,t   ≡      =                                         (29)
                                        Rt+1        Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

    The market clearing condition for the domestic bond market now becomes


                                      nbl,t+1 + (1 − n)bl3,t+1 = 0.                    (30)


    The resource constraint in financial autarky is written as


                    ncl,t + (1 − n)c3l,t = F (Al,t , Hl,t , Kl,t ) + (1 − n)G(kl,t
                                                                               3
                                                                                   )   (31)


    A competitive recursive stationary equilibrium in financial autarky is similar to equity
market integration in section 2.1.4.



3      Calibration and Model Solution

3.1    Specific functional forms

    We make the following set of assumptions regarding functional forms for preferences and
technology. First, all agents are assumed to have GHH preferences so that

                                                 [c − v(h)]1−σ − 1
                                      U (c, h) =
                                                       1−σ

with
                                                          h1+ν
                                             v(h) = χ
                                                          1+ν



                                                     15
   In addition, the formal good production function is Cobb-Douglas with the form


                                                          α    1−α
                          F (Ai,t , Hi,t , Ki,t ) = Ai,t Hi,t Ki,t , i = 1, 2             (32)


                                                       3          3 γ
   Informal backyard production has a technology of G(ki,t ) = Z(ki,t ) . Parameter Z denotes
a constant productivity in the informal sector.


3.2    Solution Method

   The solution of the model with stochastic productivity shocks, occasionally binding collat-
eral constraints, multiple state variable for capital holdings and debt, and endogenous asset
prices and world interest rates, represents a serious computational challenge. The solution
approach is described at length in the Technical Appendix. The key facilitating feature of the
solution is that the model structure allows us to follow the approach of Dumas and Lyasoff
(2012). Their method involves a process of backward induction on an event tree. Current
period consumption shares in total world GDP are treated as endogenous state variables.
The construction of equilibrium is done by a change of variable, so that the equilibrium
conditions determine future consumption and end of period portfolios as functions of current
exogenous and endogenous state variables. From these functions, using consumption-Euler
equations we can recursively compute asset prices and the end of period financial wealth. We
then iterate on this process using backward induction until we obtain time-invariant policy
functions. Once we have these policy functions, we can make use of the initial conditions,
including initial exogenous shocks and initial portfolios, and of equilibrium conditions in the
first period to pin down consumption, end of period portfolios, output and asset prices in the
initial period.


3.3    The role of asset constraints

   Although the basic economics of the model is described in the previous section, an ad-
ditional set of constraints has to be incorporated as part of the implementation, in order to


                                                  16
ensure the existence of a well-behaved solution to the general equilibrium model. What we
have described is a general equilibrium model with incomplete markets (GEI). In order to
ensure an equilibrium solution, it is necessary to rule out paths in which agents accumulate
unbounded debts. Without imposing some additional constraints, an equilibrium may not
exist (e.g. Krebs, 2004). There are several ways to restrict the model so as to ensure ex-
istence. One approach is to directly put short-sale constraints on asset holdings. For our
purposes, it is more useful to follow Judd et al. (2002) and impose a utility penalty on
holdings of assets. The benefit of imposing a penalty rather than a short-sale constraint is
that adding a penalty function to the problem of the investors or the global banker does not
increase the numbers of equations to be solved in the solution procedure.
   Following Judd et al. (2002), the penalty function for investor l has a form of


                     ρl (k1,t
                          l      l
                              , k2,t                l
                                     ) = κ1 min(0, k1,t − k l1 )4 + κ2 min(0, k2,t
                                                                               l
                                                                                   − k l2 )4                 (33)


where k li , with i = 1, 2, denotes the lower bound for holding equity i by investor l, and
κi > 0 is a penalty parameter. Whenever equity holdings are lower than their lower bounds,
investors will receive a penalty.4 As described later, the calibration for the penalty functions
in the model ensures that there is only very tiny probability of hitting the lower bound
constraints on asset holdings along the equilibrium path of the model. Also, we do not need
to impose a constraint on bond holdings since the collateral constraint (2) already limits the
highest borrowing an investor can incur.
   The portfolio penalty is added to the utility function of investors in each country and
leads to an amendment of investor’s necessary conditions in a straightforward way. The
amended set of first-order conditions is described in the Technical Appendix.
   For the global banker, we also need a penalty function constraining the equity and debt
positions. We use the following penalty function


  ρ3 (k1,t
       3      3
           , k2,t                       3
                  , b3,t ) = κ1 min(0, k1,t − k 31 )4 + κ2 min(0, k2,t
                                                                   3
                                                                       − k 32 )4 + 2κb min(0, b3 − b3,t )4   (34)
   4
    We use a power of 4 here to make sure that the first-order partial derivative of ρl with respect to any
argument is twice continuously differentiable.

                                                       17
where κb > 0, k 3i with i = 1, 2 is the lower bound for physical capital held by the banker,
and b3 is the upper bound for borrowing by the banker. It will be a property of equilibrium
that physical capital held by the banker is never below zero, since the marginal product of
capital in backyard production tends to infinity when capital approaches zero. Here, the lower
bound for capital in backyard production in each country captures a minimum requirement
of capital. Again, this penalty function is added to the preferences of the global banker and
leads to an amended set of first order conditions in a straightforward way, as documented in
the Technical Appendix.
    The set of penalty functions differs under the bond market equilibrium. For the investors,
in the bond market equilibrium it is not necessary to impose any penalties, since bond
positions are constrained by (2), and given strict decreasing returns in formal and informal
production, along with the penalty imposed on global bankers, there is no need for a penalty
on investors. For the global banker, the penalty function is the same in the bond market
integration equilibrium as in the equity market integration, since the global banker is assumed
not to directly access equity markets in any case.
    Finally, under financial autarky, the investors problem is the same as under the bond
market integration equilibrium (no penalty function), while the domestic banker’s problem
is a straightforward restriction on (34), where the first order conditions are described in the
Technical Appendix.


3.4     Calibration

    The model has relatively few parameters. The period of measurement is one year. Pa-
rameter values in the baseline model are mostly taken from the literature and are listed in
table 1.5 . The population of investors in each country is n = 0.5. The coefficient of relative
risk aversion σ is set equal to 2.
    The key features of the calibration involve the productivity shock processes. This is done
in a two-fold manner. First, we specify a conventional AR process for the shock. But we
   5
     In the deterministic steady state, both financial integration regimes have the same values for aggregate
variables.

                                                     18
                                       Table 1: Parameter values
          Parameter                                                                             Value
          Preferences
          n               Population size                                                         0.5
          σ               Relative risk aversion                                                    2
          βl , l = 1, 2   Subjective discount factor for investors                              0.954
          β3              Subjective discount factor for workers                                 0.96
          ν               Inverse of Frisch labor supply elasticity                               0.5
          χ               Parameter in labor supply (H=1 at steady state)                        0.58
          κ               Loan-to-value ratio for inter-period borrowing                          0.5

          Production
          α          Labor share in formal production                                            0.64
          γ          Informal production                                                          0.3
          Zl , l=1,2 TFP level in informal production (capital share in the                       0.7
                     formal production=0.8)
          ρz         Persistence of TFP shocks                                                0.65
          σ         Standard deviation of TFP shocks                                         0.02
          D          Disaster risk                                                         -0.1054
          π          Probability of disaster risk                                            0.025
          K          Normalized physical capital stock                                           1

          Penalty for     portfolios
          k li            Lower bound for equity holdings                                       -0.35
          b̄3             Upper bound for a banker’s borrowing                                      2
          κ1 , κ2 , κb    Penalty parameter                                                     1,000


append to this process a small probability of a large negative shock (a ‘rare disaster’). The
AR(1) component of the shock can be represented as:


                 ln(Al,t+1 ) = (1 − ρz ) ln(Al ) + ρz ln(Al,t ) + Dφl,t+1 + l,t+1 , l = 1, 2           (35)


where Al is the unconditional mean of Al,t , ρz characterizes the persistence of the shock, and
l,t+1 denotes an innovation in period t + 1, which is assumed to follow a normal distribution
with zero mean and standard deviation σ .
   The disaster component of the shock is captured by the φl,t+1 term. This follows a
Bernoulli distribution and takes either value of {−π, (1 − π)}, with probability of {1 − π, π}
respectively, 0 < π < 1. The scale parameter D < 0 measures a disaster risk in productivity.6

   6
                                                                                                  p
       The mean of the disaster risk is zero E(φl,t ) = 0 and its standard deviation equals −D      π(1 − π).

                                                     19
We take ρz = 0.65 and σ = 0.02 as in Bianchi (2011). We assume that the cross-country
correlation of productivity shocks is zero. The mean of each country’s productivity shock is
normalized to be one. The distribution of φl,t+1 is taken from the rare disaster literature (see
for instance, Barro and Ursua, 2012) so that π = 0.025, which implies that the probability
of an economy entering a disaster state is 2.5% per year. Once an economy enters a disaster
state, productivity will experience a drop by 10%, that is, D = ln(0.9). The number is
chosen such that investors’ consumption will drop by around 30% in disasters relative to
that in normal times.
   With this calibration, the unconditional standard deviation of TFP shocks is 4 percent per
annum. In some of the analysis below, we look at a low-risk case, where the unconditional
standard deviation of the TFP shocks is 2 percent per annum. This has some important
implications for welfare comparisons. Aside from welfare implications though, all the results
discussed in the paper are robust to a change from the high-risk to a low-risk economy.
   In solving the model, we need to discretize the continuous state AR(1) process above
into a finite number of exogenous states. The Technical Appendix describes in detail how
we accomplish this task. In the baseline model, we choose three grid points for technological
levels Al,t . The grid points and the associated transition matrix in each country are as follows

                                                                               
                    AL       0.9271                0.6311 0.2723 0.0967 
                                                                        
              Al ≡ 
                    AM
                             =  0.9925 
                                              Πl = 
                                                       0.1312 0.5739 0.2949 
                                                                             
                                                                        
                     AH           1.0269                0.0078 0.2321 0.7601

   Given this specification, productivity in each country will visit its lowest state 0.9271
with a probability of 15%. The lowest state is associated with the disaster state but because
the continuous distribution is projected into a three state Markov Chain, this is not identical
to the disaster itself. The exogenous state of the world economy in financial integration is
characterized by a pair (A1,t , A2,t ), which takes nine possible values. Its associated transition
matrix is simply the Kronecker product of transition matrices in both countries, Π ≡ Π1 ⊗Π2 ,


Compared to the standard p AR(1) process without disaster risk (say D = 0), the standard deviation of
innovations increases by −D π(1 − π).

                                                 20
since the shocks are independent across countries.
   Recall that we require portfolio penalties to restrict equity holdings by investors in equity
market integration. In the baseline model, we set k li = −0.35. The results show that the
economy never hits these equity boundaries in simulations. Equity short-sale constraints are
redundant in bond market integration because of the concavity of production in capital. As
for the upper bound for the banker’s borrowing b̄3 , we choose a positive number b̄3 = 2. This
upper bound is never reached in our case since we assume investors are less patient than
bankers. The penalty for exceeding the preset bounds is set as κ1 = κ2 = κb = 1, 000.
   The loan-to-value ratio parameter is set to be κ = 0.5, which states that the maximal
leverage is 2 in the stationary distribution of the economy. This leverage ratio is consistent
with evidence from non-financial corporations in the United States (Graham, Leary and
Roberts, 2013). The subjective discount factor for bankers is β3 = 0.96, which implies an
annualized risk free rate of 4%. Investors are less patient, and their subjective discount
factor is chosen to be βl = 0.954. Together with the productivity shock process and the
loan-to-value ratio of κ = 0.5 , this implies that in financial autarky, the economy visits the
state where the collateral constraint is binding and productivity is at its lowest level with a
probability of around 3.5%, or approximately every 30 years.
   In the preference specification, the inverse of the Frisch labor supply elasticity is set to
be 0.5, which is consistent with business cycle observations (Cooley, ed, 1995). We normalize
the steady state labor supply to be H = 1, which implies the parameter χ = 0.58.
   The share of labor in formal production is set to be α = 0.64. In the informal backyard
production, the marginal product of capital is characterized by parameter γ = 0.3, which is
lower than that in the formal production sector. The level of productivity in the informal
backyard production is set to be Zl = 0.7. This implies that around 80% of physical capital
is employed in the formal production in the stationary distribution of the economy.




                                              21
4       A perfect foresight special case

    Before we present the main results of the paper, it is worthwhile to explore the workings
of the model in a simpler environment. Here we look at the impact of productivity shocks in
a deterministic version of the model, under financial autarky. This can give some insight into
the states of the world in which the collateral constraint on investor’s borrowing does or does
not bind. As we have noted, in a deterministic steady state, the constraint will always bind,
since investors are more impatient than savers, and wish to front-load their consumption
stream. But in response to a transitory productivity shock, the endogenous movement in
borrowing, asset prices and investment may lead to either a relaxation or a further tightening
of the collateral constraint.
    Figure 1 illustrates the impact of an unanticipated fall in productivity in the final goods
sector that starts in period 2 and is known to last for 3 periods, following which productivity
returns to the steady state level and remains at that level thereafter.7 The 6 panels in the
figure show the responses of investor borrowing, the Lagrange multiplier on the investor’s
collateral constraint, the price of capital, productivity in the formal sector, capital employed
in the formal sector, and output in the formal sector. At the initial level of investor debt, the
collateral constraint is binding. The unanticipated fall in productivity leads to an immediate
and large drop in the price of capital. This causes a tightening of the collateral constraint,
illustrated by a jump in the Lagrange multiplier µt . Investors are forced to de-lever, and
there is a large reallocation of capital out of the final goods sector and into the backyard
production sector. In the transitional period, following the return of productivity to its
steady state level, investor’s borrowing gradually returns to its initial steady state, mirrored
by an increased allocation of capital to the formal sector. Although the shock expires after
period 3, there is a prolonged period of adjustment as the collateral constraint gradually
eases over time. Note that the constraint continues to bind before and after the shock in this
experiment.
    Figure 2 looks at the same size shock, but now assuming a positive rather than a negative
    7
     The calibration of this version of the model follows the calibrated values as described above, except for
the absence of stochastic shocks.

                                                     22
shock to productivity in the final goods sector. Again, the shock is unanticipated, and
known to last for 3 periods, before returning to the steady state. The immediate effect is
to cause a rise in the price of capital. But this now relaxes the collateral constraint such
that the constraint ceases to bind. The Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint
goes to zero. Investor borrowing and investment in the final goods sector increases for the
duration of the shock. Although the size of the productivity shock is exactly the reverse
of Figure 1, the magnitude of responses is much less. The forced de-leveraging in response
to a temporary negative productivity shock is over 50% greater than the peak increase in
debt accumulation in the case of a temporary positive productivity shock. The fall in capital
use in the formal sector after the negative shock is more than twice the rise in capital use
following the positive shock. The follow-on adjustment to the positive productivity shock is
also significantly different than that for the negative shock. The collateral constraint remains
non-binding for a significant time after the expiry of the shock. Even though the price of
capital returns very quickly to its steady state level, the higher level of capital in the hands of
investors enhances the value of collateral so as to exceed the borrowing limit for a prolonged
period after the shock. We note also that in this case, there is much less persistence in
investor borrowing, capital dynamics, and output. Both in the magnitude of response and
in the persistence of responses, we see a clear asymmetry in the dynamics of the economy
following a positive shock relative to a negative shock.
   This comparison suggests that, although the borrowing constraint on investors will al-
ways bind in a deterministic steady, this is not likely to be true in a stochastic economy,
where productivity shocks generate unanticipated movements in asset prices and the value of
collateral. Moreover, in a stochastic economy, given CRRA preferences, investors will engage
in precautionary saving; their desired consumption profile for any given path of interest rates
will be less front-loaded than in the deterministic economy.
   Figure 3 illustrates the impact of a negative productivity shock, but now assuming that
the shock is anticipated. We assume that the shock again lasts for three periods, but the
shock is known 3 periods in advance. The immediate effect is an increase in borrowing,



                                                23
                 (a) Investor’s borrowing                    (b) Lagrange multiplier

                                                       0.1
             7
                                                      0.08
           6.5
                                                      0.06

             6                                        0.04

                                                      0.02
                    5        10     15      20                5      10       15    20

                        (c) Capital price                           (d) TFP

             9                                          1


                                                      0.98
           8.5

                                                      0.96

             8
                    5        10     15      20                5      10       15    20


                    (e) Capital (formal)                           (f) Output
           0.8
                                                       0.9
          0.78

          0.76
                                                      0.85
          0.74

          0.72                                         0.8
           0.7
                    5        10     15      20                5      10       15    20




Figure 1: This figure reports responses of investors’ borrowing, Lagrange multiplier, capital price,
capital and output in the formal production sector to an unanticipated negative productivity (TFP)
shock. The economy stays at its steady state in period 1. TFP shock occurs unexpectedly in
period 2 and lasts for 3 periods (the shaded region), and it returns to its steady state from period
5 onwards.




                                                 24
                 (a) Investor’s borrowing                         (b) Lagrange multiplier
                                                          0.015

            8
                                                           0.01

          7.5
                                                          0.005


            7
                                                             0
                  5     10    15   20      25   30                5   10    15   20   25    30


                       (c) Capital price                                   (d) TFP
                                                           1.06
         10.5

                                                           1.04
           10

                                                           1.02

          9.5
                                                             1

                  5     10    15   20      25   30                5   10    15   20   25    30


                      (e) Capital (formal)                              (f) Output
                                                           1.04
         0.84
                                                           1.02
         0.83
                                                             1
         0.82
                                                           0.98
         0.81                                              0.96
          0.8                                              0.94

                  5     10    15   20      25   30                5   10    15   20   25    30




Figure 2: This figure reports responses of investors’ borrowing, Lagrange multiplier, capital price,
capital and output in the formal production sector to an unanticipated positive productivity (TFP)
shock. The economy stays at its steady state in period 1. TFP shock occurs unexpectedly in
period 2 and lasts for 3 periods (the shaded region), and it returns to its steady state from period
5 onwards.




                                                     25
                  (a) Investor’s borrowing                    (b) Lagrange multiplier
           7.5                                        0.025

                                                       0.02

                                                      0.015
             7
                                                       0.01

                                                      0.005
           6.5
                                                         0
                    5        10     15      20                 5      10        15    20

                        (c) Capital price                             (d) TFP

           9.2                                           1
             9
           8.8                                         0.98
           8.6
           8.4                                         0.96

           8.2
                    5        10     15      20                 5      10        15    20


                     (e) Capital (formal)                           (f) Output
          0.81
                                                       0.92
         0.805
                                                        0.9
           0.8
                                                       0.88
         0.795
                                                       0.86
          0.79
                                                       0.84
         0.785
                    5        10     15      20                 5      10        15    20




Figure 3: This figure reports responses of investors’ borrowing, Lagrange multiplier, capital price,
capital and output in the formal production sector to an anticipated negative productivity (TFP)
shock. The economy stays at its steady state in period 1. TFP shock occurs expectedly in period 5
and lasts for 3 periods (the shaded region), and it returns to its steady state from period 8 onwards.




                                                 26
a rise in the price of capital, and a weakening of the collateral constraint. The constraint
becomes non-binding in advance of the shock, as savers build up capital to partially absorb
the negative effects of the shock on consumption. This example illustrates that the impact
of productivity shocks on the borrowing constraint depends sensitively not just on the sign
of the shock, but also on the timing of the shock.
    Finally, these examples pertain only to the closed economy setting. When we open up
financial markets, either with bond trade, or full equity market integration, these shocks
can be absorbed by international borrowing and lending, or diversified away by holding a
portfolio of domestic and foreign equities. But by altering the stochastic environment in which
investors operate, financial integration will also affect the frequency with which borrowing
constraints are binding, and the intensity to which they bind. We now turn to an analysis
of the effects of financial market integration in the full model.



5     Results: simulations over alternative financial regimes

5.1    The effect of financial integration on balance sheet constraints

    We simulate the stationary policy rules obtained from the model, using the stochastic
processes for productivity described in the previous section, for the three different financial
regimes described above. The simulations are done for T=210,000 periods, with the first
10, 000 periods dropped from the sample. The first issue of interest is the degree to which the
debt collateral constraint binds, and how this differs across the different financial regimes.
Figure 4 provides an illustration and contrast between the different regimes. The figure
presents illustrations of the fraction of time spent at the leverage constraints, and the degree
to which the leverage constraints bind simultaneously in the two countries. Starting with the
financial autarky case, we find that under the calibration and the distribution of productivity
shocks in the baseline model, the leverage constraint binds only 10 percent of the time. So
in the simulations, in financial autarky, investors in each country are strictly below the
borrowing limit for 90 percent of the time. Considering that in a deterministic steady state,


                                               27
the constraint will always bind, this dramatically illustrates the strength of the precautionary
savings motive in the economy with technological uncertainty. Investors will consistently limit
their borrowing so as to avoid instances where they are constrained in the future.
   Because productivity shocks are independent across countries, there is a very small prob-
ability that the constraint binds simultaneously in both countries - there is no ‘contagion’ in
leverage crises in the absence of financial linkages.
   How does opening up to international financial markets affect the likelihood of leverage
crises? In the bond market case, there is a big increase in the likelihood that the leverage
constraint binds, for any one country. In a global bond market equilibrium the probability
that any one country is constrained effectively doubles, to 19 percent. Moreover, to a large
extent this increase in the probability of leverage crises is associated with correlated crises
across countries. The probability that the constraint binds in both countries simultaneously
is now 13 percent (relative to 1 percent in financial autarky). Hence there is a jump in
financial contagion associated with the opening up of international bond markets.
   What drives the high correlation in leverage crises across countries with bond market
integration? In this form of financial linkages, equities are not tradable across countries, so
it is only the linkages in debt markets that lead to a correlation in financing of investment
behaviour across countries. As we will see below in more detail, a tightening of the collateral
constraint in one country drives up the cost of borrowing for investors, and this will spill
over to the cost of financing investment in the other country, increasing the likelihood that
the leverage constraint binds in that country also.
   But there is a second critical element at work in the comparison of the financial autarky
regime with the bond market integration. This is the scale of overall borrowing. In financial
autarky in one country, investors limit their debt accumulation due to precautionary motives.
Hence, as we have seen, the leverage constraint binds on average only 10 percent of the
time. When bond markets become integrated, the overall scale of consumption risk falls
significantly, as shown below. This leads to a reduction in precautionary saving motives,
increasing the willingness to borrow, raising leverage closer to the limit implied by equation



                                               28
(2). As a result, the leverage constraint binds almost 20 percent of the time.
    Hence the two key features of financial integration are a substantial increase in the cor-
relation of crises across countries, and an increased willingness to assume a higher level of
leverage due to a fall in overall investment risk. Figure 4 illustrates now the impact of
moving from integration in bond markets alone to a full integration of equity markets and
bond markets8 . With integrated equity markets, the correlation of leverage crises across
countries becomes complete. That is, conditional on one country being leverage constrained,
the probability that the second country is also constrained is effectively 100 percent. Hence,
crisis contagion is complete when equity markets are integrated. Compared with the bond
market integration, the unconditional probability of any one country being constrained is
only slightly higher (21 percent relative to 20 percent). But the key difference is that there
is essentially zero probability that a country will be subject to a balance sheet constraint on
its own.
    As we show in more detail below, the move from bond market integration to full bond
and equity market integration has only a marginal increase in the degree of risk-sharing
across countries. But the key feature that effects the linkage of financial contagion is the
direct interdependence of balance sheets. As illustrated by equation (2), with equity market
integration, the collateral value of investors portfolios are directly interdependent via the
prices of domestic and foreign equity. Investors in one country hold a world portfolio, and
shocks which affect foreign equity prices directly impact on the value of domestic collateral,
independent of the world cost of capital. This leads to a dramatic increase in the degree of
financial contagion in the equity market equilibrium relative to the bond market equilibrium.
    Since the leverage constraint depends on the collateral value of capital, it is natural to
conjecture that the constraint is more likely to be binding in low productivity states. Figure
5 illustrates the probability of binding constraints conditional on the state of productivity in
any one country, contrasting this across all three financial regimes. In financial autarky, the
probability of being constrained is much higher in the low productivity state - conditional

   8
    We note that although equity markets enhance the possibilities for cross-country risk-sharing relative to
bond market integration alone, this still falls short of a full set of arrow Debreu markets for risk-sharing.

                                                     30
                              Probability of binding constraints
                   0.45
                    0.4
                                                                FA
                   0.35
                    0.3                                         Bond M.
                   0.25                                         Equity M.
                    0.2
                   0.15
                    0.1
                   0.05
                     0
                                AL               AM                  AH




Figure 5: This chart shows the conditional distribution of collateral constraints being binding or
not in financial autarky (FA), bond market integration (Bond M.) and equity market integration
(Equity M.) under different shock states. AL, AM and AH denote the low, medium and high state
of productivity A, respectively.



on a low state, the probability of the constraint binding is about 0.25. The corresponding
probabilities under the medium and high states are .09 and .07 respectively. But when we
open up international bond markets and international debt markets, it is much more likely
for a country to be leverage constrained in medium or high productivity states, as well as
states of low productivity.


5.2    Moment analysis

   The impact of alternative degrees of financial integration can be seen more directly in
the moments reported in Tables 2 and 3. Table 2 shows the simulated mean levels of in-
vestor consumption, formal output, capital in production, investor borrowing and leverage,
employment, the price of equity, the interest rate (borrowing rate), and the external finance
premium. Table 3 shows standard deviations, in percentage terms, as well as the cross-
country correlations, under each financial regime. In each case, we report first the moments
over the whole sample, then the moments restricted to states where the leverage constraint

                                               31
binds in both countries simultaneously (or in the case of financial autarky, just cases where
the leverage constraint is binding).
   In the discussion above, we noted that financial integration leads to an increase in the
overall probability of leverage crises, as well as a dramatic increase in the cross-country
correlation of crises. The first factor comes about because financial integration leads to a
substantial increase in investor debt accumulation. Table 2 shows that the mean level of
investor borrowing increases by about 25 percent when we move from financial autarky to
bond or equity integration. This translates into a shift from an average leverage rate of 1.46
under autarky to a leverage of 1.68 with financial integration.
   What accounts for the rise in investor borrowing in a global financial system? There
are two main channels. The first is a fall in the desire to engage in precautionary saving.
Table 3 shows moving from autarky to bond or equity integration reduces the volatility of
consumption. This leads directly to a rise in willingness to accumulate debt. The second
factor is that the average equity price tends to rise, increasing the value of collateral, thus
increasing the ability to service debt without violating the leverage constraint. But since
financial integration does not change the limit on investor leverage, the first factor is the
key reason for a rise in average leverage, and as a consequence, a rise in the unconditional
probability of leverage crises when financial markets become integrated.
   We now focus more carefully on a comparison of the first and second moments in Tables
2 and 3 for the different degrees of financial market integration. The first point of note is
that the mean consumption level of investors is lower under bond bond market and equity
market integration than in financial autarky. This is not surprising, since we have already
seen that opening financial markets leads to an increase in leverage, and investors attempt to
engage in more front-loading of consumption. As a result there is a rise in anticipated debt
service payments and fall in expected consumption in a stationary equilibrium.
   When we compare over the whole sample path, aside from the rise in leverage and the
fall in mean consumption, there is little difference between the different financial regimes in
terms of first moments. Mean output is slightly higher with full equity market integration,



                                              32
as is capital used in the formal sector. Mean employment is unchanged, while the mean price
of equity rises very slightly when bond or equity markets are opened up.
   Opening up financial markets has a greater impact on volatilities, compared over the
whole sample path. We have noted already that the volatility of consumption of investors
drops by a full percentage point. The volatility of output and employment also fall, but by
a relatively small magnitude.
   These results are, on the whole, consistent with existing business cycle literature, suggest-
ing that financial market integration enhances consumption risk-sharing but does not have
major effects on other macro aggregates in terms of first or second moments. But this ob-
servation pertains only to the comparison across the whole sample path. The middle panels
of Table 2 and 3 focus on moments taken from a sample path where the leverage constraint
binds in both countries simultaneously. Here we see a very sharp difference between outcomes
in financial autarky and those under financial market integration.
   First, note from Table 2, that while mean consumption is on average 5 percent higher in
financial autarky than in financial integration, over the whole sample path, this comparison
is completely reversed during a global leverage crisis, where both collateral constraints bind.
Average consumption within a leverage crisis is 6 to 7 percent lower in financial autarky
than under bond or equity market integration. Likewise, output, employment, and capital
in production falls by much more during a leverage crisis in the absence of international
financial markets.
   A similar picture emerges in the comparison of second moments during a leverage crisis.
Table 3 shows that the rise in consumption, output, employment and capital stock volatility
during a leverage crisis is dramatically greater under financial autarky than when financial
markets are integrated through bond trade or equity trade.
   What accounts for the major difference between ‘normal times’ and ‘crisis times’ as re-
gards the effects of financial market openness? We know from previous literature that a
binding collateral constraint introduces a ‘financial accelerator’, so that a negative shock to
productivity leads to a greater fall in equity prices, borrowing, and formal sector output



                                              33
through the process of forced deleveraging. The same process is taking place in this model.
In the comparison of the performance during leverage crisis, the financial accelerator is in
operation under all degrees of financial market integration. But because financial markets
allow for diversification, when the underlying fundamental shocks are not perfectly correl-
lated across countries, they also allow the multiplier effects of these shocks to be cushioned
through a smaller volatility in world interest rates and asset prices. Thus, while volatility is
magnified during leverage crises under all regimes, the impact is much greater in the absence
of this international diversification. This accounts for the much smaller volatility of macro
aggregates during a leverage crisis in the presence of international financial markets. We see
this much more clearly in the ‘event analysis’ described below.
   Why is it that first moments are also lower during a leverage crisis, under financial
autarky? This is due to the asymmetry between positive and negative shocks, as we pointed
out in Figures 1-2 above. Since a negative productivity shock is more likely to lead to
binding collateral constraints, and the response to a negative shock will be greater under
financial autarky than with international financial integration, it follows that international
financial markets facilitate higher average levels of consumption, output and employment,
even during episodes of leverage crises. Tables 2 indicates that the rise in interest rates,
affecting the borrowing costs facing investors, is significantly larger in leverage crises in the
financial autarky environment than when capital markets are open.
   Hence, while on average, international capital markets lead to a rise in the probability
of binding leverage constraints, and an increase in financial contagion, they have the benefit
that crises are much less severe with financial market integration than under financial au-
tarky. This points to a clear trade-off between the benefits of integration and the increased
preponderance of balance sheet crises under integration. In section 5.6 below, we explore the
welfare implications of this trade-off.




                                               34
                 Table 2: Simulated means
                             Autarky Bond                   Equity
Panel A: Full sample
Consumption                     1.06    1.02                  1.02
Formal output                   0.92    0.92                  0.93
Capital                         0.78    0.78                  0.78
Debt (borrowing)                4.50    5.80                  5.90
Leverage                        1.46    1.67                  1.69
Labor                           1.01    1.01                  1.01
Equity Price                    9.19    9.28                  9.29
Interest Rate                 1.0417 1.0417                 1.0417
External Finance Premium      0.0022 0.0033                 0.0034

Panel B: A subsample with µ1 > 0 and µ2 > 0
Consumption                    0.83     0.86                  0.88
Formal output                  0.81     0.84                  0.86
Capital                        0.67     0.70                  0.72
Debt (borrowing)               5.84     6.22                  6.46
Leverage                       2.00     2.00                  2.00
Labor                          0.92     0.95                  0.96
Equity Price                   8.60     8.74                  8.86
Interest Rate                1.0497 1.0486                  1.0474
External Finance Premium     0.0207 0.0196                  0.0161

Panel C: A subsample with µ1 > 0, µ2 > 0 and A1 = AL
Consumption                    0.72     0.77         0.80
Formal output                  0.69     0.72         0.74
Capital                        0.60     0.64         0.67
Debt (borrowing)               4.70     5.30         5.88
Leverage                       2.00     2.00         2.00
Labor                          0.85     0.87         0.88
Equity Price                   7.49     8.06         8.27
Interest Rate                1.0760 1.0610         1.0617
External Finance Premium     0.0262 0.0247         0.0206
Notes: This table reports simulated means for variables of inter-
est in the model economies. Column Autarky, Bond and Equity
denote financial autarky, bond market integration and equity mar-
ket integration respectively. Corr.(bond) and Corr.(Equity) are for
cross correlations in bond and equity market integration. Model
parameters are the same as the baseline model. The results are
obtained through simulating the model economy 210, 000 periods
and the first 10, 000 periods are discarded to get rid of the impact
of initial conditions. AL denotes the low state of productivity. All
model economies use the same realized shock sequences.



                                35
                        Table 3: Simulated standard deviations
                               Autarky Bond Equity Corr.(bond)               Corr.(equity)
Panel A: Full sample
Consumption                         4.61    3.76      3.63            0.64            0.78
Formal output                       4.62    4.42      4.45            0.11            0.11
Capital                             1.99    1.65      1.67            0.57            0.67
Debt (borrowing)                   35.00   28.11     26.18            0.57            1.00
Labor                               3.16    3.04      3.07            0.07            0.07
Equity Price                       47.18   34.73     34.62            0.96            1.00
External Finance Premium            0.18    0.21      0.21            0.42            1.00

Panel B: A subsample with µ1 > 0 and µ2 > 0
Consumption                    6.36   4.79            4.43            0.49            0.78
Formal output                  6.86   5.78            5.76            0.17            0.19
Capital                        4.16   3.12            2.99            0.60            0.75
Debt (borrowing)              68.92 50.27            47.39            0.72            1.00
Labor                          4.61   3.96            3.93            0.09            0.11
Equity Price                  63.41 43.03            42.52            0.89            1.00
External Finance Premium       0.55   0.50            0.43            0.38            1.00

Panel C: A subsample with µ1 > 0, µ2 > 0 and A1 = AL
Consumption                    3.85    3.53    3.46                   0.56            0.92
Formal output                  3.25    2.74    2.57                   0.40            0.54
Capital                        4.19    3.67    3.50                   0.57            0.91
Debt (borrowing)              42.82 43.59     46.91                   0.61            1.00
Labor                          3.08    2.54    2.39                   0.36            0.48
Equity Price                  15.36 27.31     29.62                   0.82            1.00
External Finance Premium       0.96    0.77    0.73                   0.52            1.00
Notes: This table reports simulated standard deviations for variables of interest in the
model economies. Column Autarky, Bond and Equity denote financial autarky, bond mar-
ket integration and equity market integration respectively. Corr.(bond) and Corr.(Equity)
are for cross correlations in bond and equity market integration. Model parameters are
the same as the baseline model. The results are obtained through simulating the model
economy 210, 000 periods and the first 10, 000 periods are discarded to get rid of the im-
pact of initial conditions. AL denotes the low state of productivity. All model economies
use the same realized shock sequences. The model period is one year and variables are
HP-filtered with parameter λ = 100.




                                            36
5.3    Comparison of financial autarky and financial integration un-

       der low states of productivity.

   In the previous section, we noted that leverage crises are much less severe under financial
market integration, whether with bond trade or equity market integration, than with finan-
cial autarky. But we had previously noted that leverage crises are more likely to occur in
the first place when financial markets are integrated, and as pointed out in Figure 5, crises
are more likely to occur in low productivity states. So a natural question to ask is whether
this beneficial effect of international financial markets in responding to crises is robust to a
comparison carried out solely during states when productivity is at its lowest level. The bot-
tom panels in Table 2-3 show that this is the case. These tables illustrate the comparison of
first and second moments for the three different financial regimes when leverage constraints
bind, and productivity in the home country is at its lowest level (i.e. A = AL ).9 We see that
average levels of consumption, output and employment are still significantly higher under
either bond market integration or equity integration than with financial autarky. Likewise,
consumption, output and employment volatility are much lower in the presence of interna-
tional financial market integration. Hence, even when the comparison is restricted to the
low productivity state, we find nonetheless that there remains a major cushioning effect of
financial markets in times of crises.


5.4    The distribution of investors consumption under alternative

       financial market outcomes.

   Figures 6-8 illustrate the empirical distributions of investor’s consumption from the model
simulations. In financial autarky, Figure 6 shows that investor’s consumption has a bi-modal
characteristic with a fat left tail. The blue shades indicate states where the leverage constraint
is non-binding, while the red shaded areas indicate states with the binding constraint. Clearly
consumption is lower in the latter case. But the presence of the fat left tail of the distribution

   9
     These moments now pertain to the home country alone, since this comparison involves an asymmetric
outcome across countries.

                                                 37
                                4000


                                3500


                                3000


                                2500

                    Histogram
                                2000


                                1500


                                1000


                                500


                                  0
                                  0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9        1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4
                                                                c1



Figure 6: Investors’ consumption distribution along a simulated path of 200, 000 periods in financial
autarky. The blue region denotes the distribution of consumption when collateral constraints don’t
bind and the red region is for binding collateral constraints. There are also overlapping areas in the
middle. Model parameters are the same as the baseline model.



indicates that constrained states tend to be more persistent than unconstrained states. This
is consistent with previous analysis (e.g. Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2013). Once the
economy is in a debt constrained equilibrium, the convergence to a steady state slows down
significantly.
   Figures 7 and 8 illustrate the joint consumption distribution for country 1 and country 2 in
four separate panels, depending upon whether they are both unconstrained, both constrained,
or just one country constrained. Figure 7 illustrates the distribution under bond market
integration. Again, when both countries are unconstrained, consumption is substantially
higher on average, and the distribution of consumption is more tightly ordered. When both
countries are constrained, consumption rates are lower, and the distribution is more spread
out in both directions. More generally, we see a multi-model characteristic of the consumption
distribution in this case, where depending on constraints that bind, there are multiple local
maxima in the distribution of consumption. Figure 7 also indicates two features of the nature
of leverage crises under both market equilibrium. First, as in the financial autarky case, there


                                                            38
                       (a) µ1=0 and µ2=0                           (b) µ1>0 and µ2=0

            1.2                                         1.2

            1.1                                         1.1

             1                                           1
       c2




                                                   c2
            0.9                                         0.9

            0.8                                         0.8

            0.7                                         0.7

            0.6                                         0.6
               0.6     0.8         1       1.2             0.6     0.8         1       1.2
                              c1                                          c1

                       (c) µ1=0 and µ2>0                             (d) µ1>0,µ2>0

            1.2                                         1.2

            1.1                                         1.1

             1                                           1
       c2




                                                   c2




            0.9                                         0.9

            0.8                                         0.8

            0.7                                         0.7

            0.6                                         0.6
               0.6     0.8         1       1.2             0.6     0.8         1       1.2
                              c1                                          c1




Figure 7: Investors’ consumption distribution along a simulated path of 200, 000 periods in bond
market integration. The darker an area is, the higher the frequency becomes. Panel (a) displays the
distribution of consumption when investors in both countries are financially unconstrained, panel
(b) for only investors in country 1 constrained, panel (c) for only investors in country 2 constrained,
and , panel (d) for investors in both countries constrained. Model parameters are the same as the
baseline model.




                                                  39
                       (a) µ1=0 and µ2=0                           (b) µ1>0 and µ2=0

            1.2                                         1.2

            1.1                                         1.1

             1                                           1
       c2




                                                   c2
            0.9                                         0.9

            0.8                                         0.8

            0.7                                         0.7

            0.6                                         0.6
               0.6     0.8         1       1.2             0.6     0.8         1       1.2
                              c1                                          c1

                       (c) µ1=0 and µ2>0                             (d) µ1>0,µ2>0

            1.2                                         1.2

            1.1                                         1.1

             1                                           1
       c2




                                                   c2




            0.9                                         0.9

            0.8                                         0.8

            0.7                                         0.7

            0.6                                         0.6
               0.6     0.8         1       1.2             0.6     0.8         1       1.2
                              c1                                          c1




Figure 8: Investors’ consumption distribution along a simulated path of 200, 000 periods in equity
market integration. The darker an area is, the higher the frequency becomes. Panel (a) displays the
distribution of consumption when investors in both countries are financially unconstrained, panel
(b) for only investors in country 1 constrained, panel (c) for only investors in country 2 constrained,
and panel (d) for investors in both countries constrained. Model parameters are the same as the
baseline model.




                                                  40
is substantially more persistence in the economy constrained by leverage limits. But also,
given that the consumption distribution is more laterally spread, the impact of leverage
constraints dramatically reduces the degree to which bond market integration facilitates
international consumption risk-sharing. This point can be seen equivalently in going back
to Table 3, where we see that the cross country consumption correlation drops significantly
when the sample is restricted to episodes of binding leverage constraints.
   Finally, Figure 8 shows the joint consumption distribution but now under full equity in-
tegration. The sparseness of the distributions with just one constraint binding confirms our
previous results that financial contagion is almost complete in the equity integration case.
Again we find that the distribution is shifted down substantially when the leverage con-
straints are binding, and tends to be more spread out. But unlike the bond market case, the
distribution is not noticeably more laterally spread out when leverage constraints are binding.
The implication of this is that unlike the bond market equilibrium, the presence of binding
leverage constraints does not clearly interfere with cross country consumption risk sharing
when equity markets are integrated. While leverage crises reduce average consumption rates,
they do not limit the degree to which equity markets can share risk across countries. This is
confirmed also by noticing that in Table 3, the cross country correlation of consumption is
not reduced in simulations that are restricted to the binding leverage states relative to those
from the overall sample.


5.5    Event Analysis

   Figure 9-10 organizes the simulation results in terms of an ‘Event Analysis’. Because the
responses to shocks to productivity in the model depend upon the existing states, it is not
possible to conduct conventional impulse response calculations as in models analyzed with
linear approximations. Instead, we define a particular ‘event’, characterized by a particular
set of criteria, and group together all simulation runs in the model which satisfy this criteria,
and then taking average of these runs over the whole sample. In this instance, we define
the event as a situation where the home country (country 1) experiences a binding leverage


                                               41
                                µ1                                               µ2



              0.1                                            0.1



             0.05                                           0.05



               0                                              0
               −3    −2   −1     0      1      2   3          −3      −2   −1     0      1      2   3
                               Period                                           Period

                          Formal output 1                                  Formal output 1

             0.95                                           0.95

              0.9                                            0.9

             0.85                                           0.85

              0.8                                            0.8

             0.75                                           0.75

              0.7                                            0.7
                −3   −2   −1     0      1      2   3           −3     −2   −1     0      1      2   3
                               Period                                           Period

                            Borrowing 1                                     Borrowing 2
                7                                             7

              6.5                                            6.5

                6                                             6

              5.5                                            5.5

                5                                             5
               −3    −2   −1     0      1      2   3          −3      −2   −1     0      1      2   3
                               Period                                           Period
                                     Autarky       Bond integration        Equity Integration



Figure 9: Event analysis in financial autarky (black dots), bond market integration (blue dashed
lines) and equity market integration (solid red lines). The figure shows an average of events with a
seven-year window along a simulated path with 200, 000 periods. The selection of a seven-year win-
dow satisfies that collateral constraints don’t bind in the first two periods and bind in the following
three period (period −1 to 1) in country 1 and country 1 experiences the lowest productivity in the
middle period 0.




                                                       42
                          Investors’ consumption 1                           Investors’ consumption 2

             0.95                                                  0.95

              0.9                                                   0.9

             0.85                                                  0.85

              0.8                                                   0.8

             0.75                                                  0.75

               −3    −2      −1     0      1         2    3          −3     −2    −1     0      1     2   3
                                  Period                                               Period
                               Asset price 1                                        Asset price 2

                9                                                    9


              8.5                                                   8.5


                8                                                    8


              7.5                                                   7.5
                −3   −2      −1     0      1         2    3           −3    −2    −1     0      1     2   3
                                  Period                                               Period
                          Workers’ consumption 1                                    Interest rate

                                                                   1.09
              1.4
                                                                   1.08
             1.38
                                                                   1.07
             1.36

             1.34                                                  1.06

             1.32                                                  1.05
                −3   −2      −1     0      1         2    3           −3    −2    −1     0      1     2   3
                                  Period                                               Period

                                       Autarky           Bond integration        Equity Integration



Figure 10: Event analysis in financial autarky (black dots), bond market integration (blue dashed
lines) and equity market integration (solid red lines). The figure shows an average of events with a
seven-year window along a simulated path with 200, 000 periods. The selection of a seven-year win-
dow satisfies that collateral constraints don’t bind in the first two periods and bind in the following
three period (period −1 to 1) in country 1 and country 1 experiences the lowest productivity in the
middle period 0.




                                                              43
constraint for three successive periods, and in addition, the home country experiences the
lowest productivity outcome in the middle period.10 All other variables are left unconstrained.
   Using this definition for each of the three financial market regimes, we then compare the
outcomes in Figure 9-10. For the case of financial autarky, we show only the home country
responses, because under financial autarky, the two country’s responses are independent of
one another. The Figure shows the average time path of the home country and foreign
country Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint under the three separate regimes.
   The results from these pictures are in accord with the previous analysis from the first and
second moments in Tables 2-3). In particular, the response of all macro variable in financial
autarky is more ‘severe’ than that under bond or equity market integration. The Lagrange
multiplier on the home leverage constraint is uniformly higher in financial autarky, having
the interpretation that the constraint is more binding in financial autarky (equivalently, the
shadow price of an additional unit of collateral is greater in financial autarky than with
integrated bond or equity markets). Output, borrowing, investor’s consumption, and the
equity price falls substantially more in financial autarky than in either of the integrated
regimes. The domestic interest rate also increases much more in financial autarky, increasing
the cost of borrowing for domestic investors.
   With bond and equity market integration, there is a higher correlation of macro aggregates
across the two countries, but the degree of response is less. In general, with bond market
integration, the correlation of responses is less than with equity market integration. With
bond market integration, output falls by more in the home country, which is the source of
the ‘event’, and also borrowing, investor’s consumption, and asset prices fall by more. Bond
integration helps insulate the country from the shock, but by less than can be achieved by
full equity market integration. With full equity market integration, we see that the responses
of the Lagrange multipliers are essentially identical. This translates into a much greater,
but still less than perfect, co-movement in macro aggregates. Asset prices, consumption and
borrowing move closely together in the two countries, even though the home country is the

  10
     We experimented with other definitions of an event, for instance assuming only that the leverage con-
straint binds without specifying the productivity state. The results were similar to those in Figure 9-10.

                                                   44
source of the ‘shock’.


5.6    Welfare analysis

   What are the welfare implications of financial market integration in this model? The
answer to this is not immediately obvious, because the presence of leverage constraints in each
domestic economy prior to financial opening implies a pre-existing financial distortion, and
hence expanding existing financial trading opportunities is not necessarily welfare enhancing.
More precisely, a number of authors in recent literature have pointed out (e.g. Bianchi,
2011; Bianchi and Mendoza, 2010; Korinek, 2011; Korinek and Simsek, 2014; Jeanne and
Korinek, 2010) that the existence of balance sheet constraints in financial markets introduces
a pecuniary externality associated with the failure of individual financial market participants
to take account of their trading activity on the constraints faced by other traders. Hence, in
general, investment and portfolio choices will fail to be socially optimal, and as a result it
is not guaranteed that opening up financial markets will raise welfare. More generally, the
presence of balance sheet constraints opens up the possibility for macro-prudential policy
instruments applied to bond or equity trading that may improve upon the unrestricted free
market outcomes.
   Given that this is a heterogeneous agent model within each country, the evaluation of
welfare must involve weighting preferences in some way. This introduces some complications
with respect to the nature of the social welfare function, given that investors have a higher
rate of time preference than savers. In particular, it would not be a valid comparison to
focus only on a stationary or unconditional measure of welfare, since, as shown in Table
2, in a stationary equilibrium with open international financial markets, investors will have
lower mean consumption levels, given that they reduce precautionary saving and tilt con-
sumption more toward the present and away from the future. An unconditional measure of
welfare solely based on the stationary distribution will neglect the additional welfare benefits
that investors obtain from being able to consume earlier, as a result of the lower-volatility
environment induced by international financial integration.


                                              45
    To take account of this we compute welfare from a conditional distribution. Specifically,
we compute welfare under all three different financial environments using the equilibrium pol-
icy functions for each environment, conditional on the same initial conditions for investor’s
portfolios and debt, where these initial portfolio and debt liabilities are determined at their
mean levels under financial autarky. By using this conditional measure of welfare, we in-
corporate the full potential benefit that investor’s receive by reducing their precautionary
saving in the lower risk environment, thereby tilting their consumption profile more towards
the present.
    The conditional utility for a representative agent l (= 1, 2 for an investor in either country
or = 3 for a banker) is defined as

                                                 (   ∞
                                                                                    )
                                                     X
                                   W ell ≡ E0              βlt−1 U (cl,t , hl,t )                          (36)
                                                     t=1


    We focus on the certainty equivalence of effective consumption c̃l , which is given by11
                                (∞                                        )
                                                              1−σ
                                 X
                                         t−1 [cl,t − v(hl,t )]    −1                c̃1−σ
                                                                                      l   −1 1
                  W ell = E0            βl                                    =
                                  t=1
                                                      1−σ                              1 − σ 1 − βl

Rearranging the equation above, yields

                                                                                1
                                   c̃l = [W ell (1 − σ)(1 − βl ) + 1] 1−σ                                  (37)


    Suppose that economy-wide social welfare is defined as the equally weighted sum of util-
ities for all agents in an economy, and then we have a measure of economy-wide welfare


                                 W el = nW ell + (1 − n)W el3 , l = 1, 2                                   (38)


    We compute both the conditional welfare and the effective consumption certainty equiv-
   11
    Certainty equivalences of effective consumption across different financial integration regimes are com-
parable. Let the c̃rl denote effective consumption certainty equivalence in regime
                                                                                  r, r = 1, 2, 3 for financial
autarky, bond market integration and equity market integration, and then c̃jl /c̃il − 1 × 100 measures the
percentage increase of effective consumption in regime i such that welfare for agent l in regime i is the same
as that in regime j.

                                                       46
         Table 4: Conditional welfare in the baseline models
               Utility W ell Certainty equivalence c̃l    Change (%)
Panel A: Financial autarky
Investor            -10.2859                   0.6788
Worker               -2.3124                   0.9153
Economy-wide         -6.2992                   0.7971

Panel B: Bond market integration
Investor          -10.2725                              0.6791              0.042
Worker             -2.1492                              0.9208              0.601
Economy-wide       -6.2109                              0.8000

Panel C: Equity market integration
Investor           -10.2667                             0.6792              0.018
Worker              -2.1406                             0.9211              0.032
Economy-wide        -6.2036                             0.8002
Notes: This table reports the conditional welfare and certainty equivalence of
effective consumption for all agents in various financial integration regimes.
The volatility of shocks are the same as in the baseline model. W ell denotes
the life time discounted utility. Economy wide welfare is a weighted average
of the life time discounted utility for investors and savers (workers). The
initial portfolio and shock in period 0 read k1,0      1      2
                                                           = k2,0 = 1.6, b1,0 = 4.5
and A1,0 = A2,0 = AM where AM is the middle state of productivity. The
last column shows the percentage change of effective consumption in regime j
relative to the previous regime i, (c̃jl /c̃il − 1) × 100.




                                        47
         Table 5: Conditional welfare in the low risk economies
                 Utility W ell Certainty equivalence c̃l    Change (%)
Panel A: Financial autarky
Investor             -10.1504                    0.6817
Worker                 -2.2617                   0.9170
Economy-wide           -6.2060                   0.7994

Panel B: Bond market integration
Investor          -10.1780                             0.6811              -0.086
Worker             -2.1260                             0.9216               0.500
Economy-wide       -6.1520                             0.8014

Panel C: Equity market integration
Investor           -10.1775                            0.6811               0.001
Worker              -2.1242                            0.9217               0.007
Economy-wide        -6.1508                            0.8014
Notes: This table reports the conditional welfare and certainty equivalence of
effective consumption for all agents in various financial integration regimes.
The standard deviation of shocks is one-half of the baseline shocks (2% vs.
4%). W ell denotes the life time discounted utility. Economy wide welfare is
a weighted average of the life time discounted utility for investors and savers
(workers). The initial portfolio and shock in period 0 read k1,0    1 = k 2 = 1.6,
                                                                         2,0
b1,0 = 4.5 and A1,0 = A2,0 = AM where AM is the middle state of productiv-
ity. The last column shows the percentage change of effective consumption in
regime j relative to the previous regime i, (c̃jl /c̃il − 1) × 100.




                                       48
alence for each set of agents (investors and savers) in all financial integration regimes. Com-
putation of conditional welfare is done through two steps. First, we compute the stationary
value function for each agent in each regime. Second, starting at the same initial condi-
tions mentioned above in period 0, we apply the transition matrix and the value function to
calculate the conditional welfare for each agent W ell in each financial integration regime.
    Table 4 indicates the results of the comparison of welfare across the different regimes
for the baseline calibration of the model. We find that overall social welfare as measured by
(38) is higher when we move from financial autarky to bond integration or equity integration.
This is also true separately for investors and savers/workers, although as to be expected from
previous literature, the gains are very small. Investors gain in terms of consumption certainly
equivalence by 0.04% moving from autarky to bond market integration, and then by about
another 0.02% moving from bond market integration to equity market integration. The gain
for savers/workers is significantly larger, equal to 0.6% and 0.03% respectively. Thus, for
the baseline (or high-risk) economy, although there is no theoretical guarantee that financial
market integration will raise welfare, we find that this is indeed the case. Welfare rises by a
small amount when financial markets are opened, and most of the gains can be accrued by
opening international bond markets alone.
    But these results are likely to depend on the overall scale of the risk in the economy.
In the previous section, we discussed the trade-off between the benefits of diversification
arising from international financial market integration and the costs of an increase in the
probability of binding balance sheet constraints. A fall in overall risk may be expected to
tilt the calculation towards an increase in the importance the costs of financial distortions
and away from the benefits of risk sharing. To explore this, Table 5 reports the same welfare
calculations in a low-risk economy. This is defined in the same way as before, but now
assuming that the unconditional standard deviation of productivity shocks is 2% instead of
4%.12 Now we find that again, overall social welfare increases with financial integration, as
before. But this overall measure hides a conflict among groups. Savers/workers are better off

  12
     Aside from the welfare differences, the qualitative results of the paper do not change under this alter-
native low-risk analysis.

                                                     49
in either bond market integration or equity integration than under financial autarky. But now,
investors are slightly worse off with integrated financial markets, both in bond Integration
and equity Integration. As expected, the magnitude of welfare changes in terms of effective
consumption equivalencies is again very small.13 Nevertheless, the negative effects of financial
market integration for the welfare of investors indicates that the presence of balance sheet
externalities are important enough to reverse the normal presumption of welfare gains from
financial market integration for this version of the model.



6        Conclusions

     This paper constructs and solves a two-country general equilibrium model with endoge-
nous portfolio choice, occasionally binding collateral constraints, and within and across coun-
try trade in equity and bond assets. Leverage is time varying and will depend on the nature
of international financial markets. The paper finds that international financial integration
introduces a trade-off between the frequency and severity of financial crises. Opening up
financial markets leads to a higher degree of global leverage, increasing the frequency of fi-
nancial crises for any one country and dramatically increasing the correlation (or contagion)
of crises across countries. But crises in an open world capital market are less severe than
in closed economies. In terms of welfare, financial market integration may be positive or
negative.
     The paper naturally suggests a number of extensions. One major question we have
not addressed is the role for economic policy, whether it terms of macro-prudential tools
that affect leverage and investment choices of agents, or other more general tools of fiscal
or monetary policy. In addition, we have focused on shocks coming from real economic
fundamentals - productivity. An obvious further question would be how shocks arising from
the financial system itself would affect the nature and workings of international financial

    13
     It is important to note that these welfare calculations are not approximation errors. In calculating
welfare effects, we choose a tolerance size and the number of grid points for endogenous state variables so
that the approximation error is several orders of magnitude smaller than calculated differences in welfare
across financial market regimes.

                                                    50
markets. Finally, we have not allowed a role for aggregate demand deficiencies following
crises. These would naturally arise in an extended model that incorporated slow price or
wage adjustment.


References
Aizenman, Joshua (2011) ‘Hoarding international reserves versus a pigovian tax-cum-subsidy
  scheme: Reflections on the deleveraging crisis of 2008 − 2009, and a cost benefit analysis.’
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 35(9), 1502–1513

Aizenman, Joshua, and Michael M. Hutchison (2012) ‘Exchange market pressure and ab-
  sorption by international reserves: Emerging markets and fear of reserve loss during the
  2008-2009 crisis.’ Journal of International Money and Finance 31(5), 1076–1091

Almunia, Miguel, Agust Benetrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin H. ORourke, and Gisela Rua
  (2010) ‘From great depression to great credit crisis: similarities, differences and lessons.’
  Economic Policy 25, 219–265

Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua (2012) ‘Rare macroeconomic disasters.’ Annual Review
  of Economics 4(1), 83–109

Bianchi, Javier (2011) ‘Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle.’ Amer-
  ican Economic Review 101(7), 3400–3426

Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique G. Mendoza (2010) ‘Overborrowing, Financial Crises and
  ’Macro-prudential’ Taxes.’ NBER Working Papers 16091, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc, June

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov (2013) ‘A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector.’ forthcoming in American Economic Review, Princeton University, July

Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey (2010) ‘The real effects of
  financial constraints: Evidence from a financial crisis.’ Journal of Financial Economics
  97(3), 470–487

Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg (2010) ‘Global banks and international shock trans-
  mission: Evidence from the crisis.’ NBER Working Papers 15974, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc, May

Chudik, Alexander, and Marcel Fratzscher (2011) ‘Identifying the global transmission of the
  2007-2009 financial crisis in a GVAR model.’ European Economic Review 55(3), 325–339


                                              51
Cooley, Thomas F., ed. (1995) Frontiers of Business Cycle Research (New Jersey, USA:
  Princeton University Press)

de Haas, Ralph, and Iman van Lelyveld (2010) ‘Internal capital markets and lending by
  multinational bank subsidiaries.’ Journal of Financial Intermediation 19(1), 1–25

Devereux, Michael B., and Alan Sutherland (2010) ‘Country portfolio dynamics.’ Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control 34(7), 1325–1342

Devereux, Michael B., and Alan Sutherland (2011a) ‘Country portfolios in open economy
  macro models.’ Journal of the European Economic Association 9(2), 337–369

Devereux, Michael B., and Alan Sutherland (2011b) ‘Evaluating international financial inte-
  gration under leverage constraints.’ European Economic Review 55(3), 427–442

Devereux, Michael B., and James Yetman (2010) ‘Leverage constraints and the international
  transmission of shocks.’ Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42(s1), 71–105

Dumas, Bernard, and Andrew Lyasoff (2012) ‘Incomplete-market equilibria solved recursively
 on an event tree.’ Journal of Finance 67(5), 1897–1941

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis (2011) ‘Trade and the
  global recession.’ NBER Working Papers 16666, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc, January

Eaves, B. Curtis, and Karl Schmedders (1999) ‘General equilibrium models and homotopy
  methods.’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 23(9-10), 1249–1279

Fratzscher, Marcel (2012) ‘Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial
  crisis.’ Journal of International Economics 88(2), 341–356

Graham, John R., Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts (2013) ‘A century of capi-
  tal structure: The leveraging of corporate America.’ Workig paper, Available at SSRN:
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2223302, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Oc-
  tober

Hussey, Robert, and George Tauchen (1991) ‘Quadrature-based methods for obtaining ap-
 proximate solutions to nonlinear asset pricing models.’ Econometrica 59(2), 371–96

Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek (2010) ‘Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigou-
  vian Taxation Approach.’ American Economic Review 100(2), 403–07

Judd, Kenneth L., Felix Kubler, and Karl Schmedders (2002) ‘A solution method for in-
  complete asset markets with heterogeneous agents.’ Unpublished manusript, Standford
  University

                                            52
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou, and Fabrizio Perri (2013) ‘Global banks and
 crisis transmission.’ Journal of International Economics, Elsevier 89(2), 495–510

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore (1997) ‘Credit cycles.’ Journal of Political Economy
  105(2), 211–48

Korinek, Anton (2011) ‘Systemic risk-taking: amplification effects, externalities, and regu-
 latory responses.’ Working Paper Series, European Central Bank 1345, European Central
 Bank, June

Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek (2014) ‘Liquidity trap and excessive leverage.’ Working
 paper, MIT, March

Maggiori, Matteo (2012) ‘Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve
 currencies.’ 2012 Meeting Papers 146, Society for Economic Dynamics, June

Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2009) ‘Financial in-
 tegration, financial development, and global imbalances.’ Journal of Political Economy
 117(3), 371–416

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2011) ‘Over the cliff: From the subprime to the global financial crisis.’
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1), 49–70

Perri, Fabrizio, and Vincenzo Quadrini (2011) ‘International recessions.’ Staff Report 463,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May

Puri, Manju, Jorg Rocholl, and Sascha Steffen (2011) ‘Global retail lending in the aftermath
  of the US financial crisis: Distinguishing between supply and demand effects.’ Journal of
  Financial Economics 100(3), 556–578

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009) This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries
  of Financial Folly (Princeton University Press)

Schmedders, Karl (1998) ‘Computing equilibria in the general equilibrium model with in-
  complete asset markets.’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22(8-9), 1375–1401

Schnabl, Philipp (2012) ‘The international transmission of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence
  from an emerging market.’ Journal of Finance 67(3), 897–932

Tille, Cedric, and Eric van Wincoop (2010) ‘International capital flows.’ Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 80(2), 157–175

Watson, Layne T. (1990) ‘Globally convergent homotopy algorithms for nonlinear systems
 of equations.’ Nonlinear Dynamics 1(2), 143–191


                                              53
Not For Publication Technical Appendix
A      Asset constraints and model solution
    The text discussed the need for imposing asset trading constraints as part of the solution of
the general equilibrium model with incomplete markets. Here we report how these asset market
constraints affect the first order conditions of investors and bankers in the model.
    In the case of full equity market integration, investors first order condition for equity holding
are given by:


               βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )(qi,t+1 + Rik,t+1 )} + µl,t κEt {qi,t+1 } − ρli,t+1
      qi,t =                                                                                   , i = 1, 2     (A.1)
                                                 Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

where ρli,t+1 is defined as

                                        ∂ρl (k1,t+1
                                              l        l
                                                    , k2,t+1 )
                            ρli,t+1 =           l
                                                                                l
                                                                  = 4κi min(0, ki,t+1 − k li )3 ≤ 0
                                              ∂ki,t+1

The numerator of equation (A.1) states three types of gains for an investor from increasing an
additional unit of equity holdings: (a) increasing consumption tomorrow, (b) relaxing a borrowing
constraint for inter-period loans, (c) reducing penalties of hitting lower bounds of equity holdings.
    That analagous optimality condition for bond holdings reads

                                               1        βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )} + µl,t
                                   q3,t ≡           =                                                         (A.2)
                                            Rt+1                  Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

    For the global banker under equity market integration, the optimality condition for equity
holdings are
                                 n                                              o
                            β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )(qi,t+1 + G0 (ki,t+1
                                                                        3     )) − ρ3i,t+1
                   qi,t =                                                                        , i = 1, 2   (A.3)
                                                        Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

where the marginal penalty for holding physical capital ρ3i,t+1 is similar to ρ1i,t+1 .
    Again, for the banker under equity market integration, the optimality condition for bond hold-
ings is as follows                                       n                       o
                                           1        β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 ) + 21 ρ33,t+1
                                 q3,t ≡        =                                                              (A.4)
                                          Rt+1                         Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

where ρ33,t+1 is defined as

                                 ∂ρ3 (k1,t+1
                                       3        3
                                             , k2,t+1 , b3,t+1 )
                     ρ33,t+1 =                                   = −8κb min(0, b3 − b3,t+1 )3 ≥ 0
                                           ∂b3,t+1

    Under bond market integration, the optimality conditions for equity holdings are

                                                                  54
                        βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 ) (ql,t+1 + Rlk,t+1 )} + µl,t κEt {ql,t+1 }
               ql,t =                                                                          , l = 1, 2   (A.5)
                                                      Uc (cl,t , hl,t )
and for bond holding, the optimality condition is

                                               1         βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )} + µl,t
                                  q3,t ≡           =                                                        (A.6)
                                           Rt+1                    Uc (cl,t , hl,t )

The global banker’s problem under bond market integration is the same as under equity market
integration.
    Finally, in financial autarky, the investor’s optimality condition is the same as that under bond
market integration. The banker’s problem (now a domestic banker) is written as: The optimality
conditions yield
                                       n                                              o
                                  β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )(ql,t+1 + G0 (kl,t+1
                                                                              3     )) − ρ3l,t+1
                         ql,t =                                                                             (A.7)
                                                             Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )
                                                            n                       o
                                           1           β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 ) + ρ33,t+1
                                q3,t ≡             =                                                        (A.8)
                                         Rt+1                        Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )
with penalty on excessive holdings of a portfolio

                                   ρ3l,t+1 (kl,t+1
                                             3
                                                   , bl3,t+1 ) = 4κl min(0, kl,t
                                                                             3
                                                                                 − k 3l )3

                                     ∂ρ3 (kl,t+1
                                           3     , bl3,t+1 )                               l
                         ρ33,t+1 =                             = −4κb min(0, b3 − bl3,t+1 )3 ≥ 0
                                           ∂bl3,t+1


B      An event tree approach to solving the model
    This section shows in detail how we solve a model with equity market integration. The other
two financial integration regimes can be solved similarly and are omitted here. Basically, we need
to rewrite the forward-looking recursive competitive equilibrium in terms of a backward-looking
system. The event tree approach developed by Dumas and Lyasoff (2012) is used. We use B-
splines smooth functions with degree three to interpolate and approximate policy functions on
discrete state grid points. Accordingly, the transformed system of equations in equilibrium are
twice continuously differentiable by construction. Therefore, a Newton-type method can be used.
Next, we calculate the system based on a discrete consumption share distribution, which lies between
zero and one, and exogenous shocks Al,t . Let S be the number of exogenous states and J be the
number of consumption distribution grid points in the economy. After simplifying the dynamic
system, there are 2S + 6 (2S + 4 or S + 2) number of equations in equity market integration (bond
market integration or financial autarky). Let’s take equity market integration for example. In
equity market integration, we need to solve 2S + 6 nonlinear equations at S × J different nodes in
each iteration. As is well known, it is not a trivial task to solve a system of nonlinear equations



                                                                55
using Newton method, particularly at so many different nodes, unless we provide the solver with
an extremely good initial guess at each node. In practice, we adopt a method similar to that in
Judd, Kubler and Schmedders (2002), which uses a homotopy path-following algorithm to solve a
system of nonlinear equations. Open sources for FORTRAN supply necessary subroutines to use a
homotopy path-following algorithm, such as HOMPACK77/90, as well as subroutines for nonlinear
solvers. Of course the key challenge for using this algorithm is in constructing a homotopy function.
   Nevertheless, a remaining challenge still presents here. The homotopy path-following algorithm
requires certain conditions to be satisfied (see, Schmedders, 1998; Eaves and Schmedders, 1999;
Watson, 1990). In practice, it is not easy to verify these conditions, particularly when the system
is complicated, like the system here. So we take a practical perspective. That is, we will use the
algorithm as long as it leads us to find optimal policy functions. First of all, we need to construct
a proper homotopy function such that the homotopy path-following algorithm works effectively.
In the GEI literature, several ways are proposed to use the homotopy path-following algorithm.
Basically, in these exercises, researchers attempt to find current optimal consumption and exiting
portfolio of assets given current portfolio of assets and shocks. In order to solve these models, it
is normal to introduce a penalty function for asset trading, which guarantees continuity in excess
demand functions. Conditional on continuous excess demand functions, the approach rephrases
agents’ objective functions such that financial autarky for each agent in each period is a good start
for the homotopy path-following algorithm. However, the way of constructing homotopy functions
in these papers seems improper in our model, because we don’t have any information on the current
portfolio of assets. The main fact about the system here is that it should have a solution under a
proper set of parameter values and that the Jacobian of the system should have full rank. After
trying several ways of homotopy functions, we found that the Newton homotopy works quite well
in the current model.
   To illustrate, let F (x) be a system of nonlinear equations with an endogenous variable vector
x. F (x) contains all of the equilibrium conditions in the model and it is a square nonlinear system.
A homotopy function H(x, λ) is defined as

                             H(x, λ) ≡ λF (x) + (1 − λ)(F (x) − F (x0 ))                       (B.1)

where x0 is a starting point for the homotopy path-following and 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1. When λ = 0, the homo-
topy function is degenerated to a simple system H(x0 , 0) = F (x0 ) − F (x0 ) = 0. This simple system
F (x) − F (x0 ) = 0 has a unique and robust solution at x = x0 . When λ = 1, the homotopy function
becomes the original function H(x, 1) = F (x). Observe that if the Jacobian of F (x) has a full rank,
the Jacobian of the homotopy function H(x, λ) also has a full row rank. Based on this constructed
homotopy function, we can solve the transformed system for the optimal policy functions. We next
need to simulate a path for exogenous shocks to pin down other endogenous variables. Combining
the optimal policy functions with the initial conditions for shocks and portfolios, we can solve for
all endogenous variables along the simulation path.




                                                 56
B.1      Equilibrium conditions
   Following the algorithm in Dumas and Lyasoff (2012), we rewrite the whole equilibrium system
in the period t + 1 and get rid of all endogenous variables in period t.
   The so-called ‘marketability conditions’ (budget constraints) of Dumas and Lyasoff (2012) are
as follows

                                         l                         l
 c̃l,t+1 +Fl,t+1 = N Wl,t+1 −v(Hl,t+1 )+k1,t+1 (q1,t+1 +R1k,t+1 )+k2,t+1 (q2,t+1 +R2k,t+1 )−bl,t+1 (B.2)

                                         l
where exiting wealth is Fl,t+1 ≡ q1,t+1 k1,t+2           l
                                               + q2,t+1 k2,t+2 − bl,t+2 /Rt+2 with l = 1, 2, and effective
consumption is c̃l,t+1 ≡ cl,t+1 − v(Hl,t+1 ). The effective non-financial income becomes N Wl,t+1 −
v(Hl,t+1 ), where N Wl,t+1 is defined as

                  1
     N Wl,t+1 ≡     [F (Al,t+1 , Hl,t+1 , Kl,t+1 ) − Wl,t+1 Hl,t+1 − Kl,t+1 Rlk,t+1 ] + Wl,t+1 Hl,t+1
                  n                                                                                                 (B.3)
                = Wl,t+1 Hl,t+1

where we have used the fact that the formal production is CRS.
   Kernel conditions read

                         βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 ) (qi,t+1 + Rik,t+1 )} + µl,t κEt {qi,t+1 } − ρli,t+1
                qi,t =
                                                            Uc (cl,t , hl,t )
                               n                                                o
                         β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 )(qi,t+1 + G0 (ki,t+1
                                                                        3     )) − ρ3i,t+1
                    =                                                                                               (B.4)
                                                 Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

with l = 1, 2 and i = 1, 2. And
                                                               n                       o
               βl Et {Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )} + µl,t       β3 Et Uc (c3l,t+1 , h3l,t+1 ) + 21 ρ33,t+1
      q3,t =                                        =                                                  , l = 1, 2   (B.5)
                         Uc (cl,t , hl,t )                              Uc (c3l,t , h3l,t )

   The collateral constraint reads
                                    n                              o         
                                              l               l
                                  κEt q1,t+1 k1,t+1 + q2,t+1 k2,t+1   − bl,t+1 µl,t = 0                             (B.6)

   Equilibrium labor yields
                                                                                 1
                                                                   1−α
                                                      "                    #
                                                                               1+ν−α
                                                          αAl,t+1 Kl,t+1
                                          Hl,t+1 =                                                                  (B.7)
                                                                   χ

   Let the global output be

                              α    1−α         α    1−α              3 γ        3 γ
                                                                                                         
                   Yt ≡ A1,t H1,t K1,t + A2,t H2,t K2,t + (1 − n) Z(k1,t ) + Z(k2,t )

and the effective global output is given by

                                             Ỹt ≡ Yt − v(H1,t ) − v(H2,t )


                                                               57
B.2     Scaled equilibrium conditions
   The share of investors’ effective consumption in country l is defined as

                                                                   nc̃l,t+1
                                                     ωl,t+1 ≡                  , l = 1, 2                                           (B.8)
                                                                       Ỹt+1

                                                                                                2(1−n)c̃31,t+1
Then bankers’ effective consumption share becomes ω3,t+1 =                                           Ỹt+1
                                                                                                                  = 1 − ω1,t+1 − ω2,t+1 .
Effective consumption for each agent thus reads

                   ω1,t+1 Ỹt+1                             ω2,t+1 Ỹt+1                             (1 − ω1,t+1 − ω2,t+1 )Ỹt+1
      c̃1,t+1 =                 ,               c̃2,t+1 =                ,            c̃31,t+1 =
                        n                                        n                                            2(1 − n)

   Therefore, consumption levels can be obtained as

                    c1,t+1 = c̃1,t+1 + v(H1,t+1 )                                   c2,t+1 = c̃2,t+1 + v(H2,t+1 )
                    c31,t+1 = c̃31,t+1 + v(H1,t+1 )                                 c32,t+1 = c̃31,t+1 + v(H2,t+1 )

   Notice that current output Ỹt is an endogenous variable, we then scale asset prices and exiting
wealth by 1/Ỹtσ

                                      qi,t                                                          Fl,t
                           q̃i,t =         , i = 1, 2, 3                                  F̃l,t =          , l = 1, 2.              (B.9)
                                      Ỹtσ                                                          Ỹtσ

   Substituting the effective consumption share {ω1 , ω2 }, scaled asset prices q̃i and exiting financial
wealth F̃l in period t and t + 1 into the system of equations (B.4-B.7) to replace the effective
consumption, asset prices and exiting financial wealth, we then obtain a transformed system of
equations, which are listed as follows

                   n      σ                    n                                            n       l         σ
    ωl,t+1 +           Ỹt+1 F̃l,t+1 =              (N Wl,t+1 − v(Hl,t+1 )) +                      k1,t+1 (Ỹt+1 q̃1,t+1 + R1k,t+1 )+
               Ỹt+1                        Ỹt+1                                          Ỹt+1
                                  n      l         σ                                  n
                                        k2,t+1 (Ỹt+1 q̃2,t+1 + R2k,t+1 ) −                 bl,t+1 , l = 1, 2                      (B.10)
                                Ỹt+1                                               Ỹt+1

                                             −σ                                               n             o
                                ωl,t+1 Ỹt+1              σ q̃                                          σ q̃          l
                   βl Et             n                 Ỹt+1   i,t+1   + Rik,t+1          + µl,t κEt Ỹt+1   i,t+1 − ρi,t+1
         q̃i,t =                                                         ωl,t −σ
                                                                           n
                                             −σ                                      
                                ω3,t+1 Ỹt+1
                   β3 Et          2(1−n)
                                                          σ q̃
                                                       Ỹt+1   i,t+1   +   G0 (ki,t+1
                                                                                3     )       − ρ3i,t+1
             =                                                 −σ                                                                (B.11)
                                                           ω3,t
                                                         2(1−n)


with l = 1, 2 and i = 1, 2.




                                                                        58
                                          −σ                                          −σ 
                             ωl,t+1 Ỹt+1                                     ω3,t+1 Yt+1
                βl Et             n                 + µl,t       β3 Et          2(1−n)              + 12 ρ33,t+1
      q̃3,t =                    ωl,t −σ                    =                            −σ                     , l = 1, 2   (B.12)
                                                                                      ω3,t
                                  n                                                 2(1−n)

                          n                                            o         
                               σ           l          σ           l
                   µl,t κEt Ỹt+1 q̃1,t+1 k1,t+1 + Ỹt+1 q̃2,t+1 k2,t+1   − bl,t+1 = 0 , l = 1, 2                               (B.13)

                                                                                           1
                                                                          1−α
                                                             "                       #
                                                                                         1+ν−α
                                                                 αAl,t+1 Kl,t+1
                                                Hl,t+1 =                                                                        (B.14)
                                                                         χ

    Consumption share simplex reads

                                                                                            3
                         (                                                                                             )
                                                                                            X
                   Ω≡         (ω1,t , ω2,t , ω3,t ) : ωl,t > 0, l = 1, 2, 3, and                  ωl,t = 1 for all t            (B.15)
                                                                                            l=1

    Let the exogenous shock vector be At = (A1,t , A2,t ). Policy functions for variables of interest
can be expressed as functions of investors’ effective consumption distribution (ω1,t , ω2,t ). Given
future policy functions {q̃i,t+1 (ω1,t+1 , ω2,t+1 ; At+1 ), F̃l,t+1 (ω1,t+1 , ω2,t+1 ; At+1 )}, with i = 1, 2, 3 and
l = 1, 2, given current effective consumption shares {ω1,t , ω2,t }, we solve for future state-contingent
effective consumption shares {ωl,t+1 (ω1,t , ω2,t ; At ; At+1 )}l=1,2 , the Lagrange multiplier for the inter-
period collateral constraint {µl,t (ω1,t , ω2,t ; At )}l=1,2 , state-contingent equilibrium labor {Hl,t+1 (ω1,t ,
                                                               i
ω2,t ; At ; At+1 ) }l=1,2 , end-of-period t equity portfolio {kl,t+1 (ω1,t , ω2,t ; At )}i=1,2,3 and bond portfolio
{bi,t+1 (ω1,t , ω2,t ; At ) }l=1,2 . Asset price and exiting financial wealth are updated via corresponding
conditions {q̃i (ω1,t , ω2,t ; At )}i=1,2,3 and {F̃l (ω1,t , ω2,t ; At )}l=1,2 , which are derived in the following
subsection in detail.
    Let S be the number of exogenous states in the economy. there are then 2S + 7 + 2S = 4S + 7
equations and variables to be solved at each grid point and at each iteration.


B.3      Dealing with inequality constraints
    Following Judd, Kubler and Schmedders (2002), we make the following transformation

                                                µl,t = (max {0, ηl,t })L , l = 1, 2                                             (B.16)
                     n                              o
                              l
                  κEt q1,t+1 k1,t+1           l
                                    + q2,t+1 k2,t+1   − bl,t+1 = (max {0, −ηl,t })L , l = 1, 2

where ηl,t is a real number and L is an integer, usually taking L = 3. These two equations are
equivalent to the slackness conditions in the system. Notice that function (max {0, ηl,t })L is a
(L − 1)th continuously differentiable function. Therefore, the transformed equilibrium system is
twice continuously differentiable, and a Newton method can be applied here.




                                                                     59
    Rearranging the collateral constraint above, yields
                       n                                            o
                           σ
           bl,t+1 = κEt Ỹt+1          l
                              q̃1,t+1 k1,t+1      σ
                                             + Ỹt+1          l
                                                     q̃2,t+1 k2,t+1   − (max {0, −ηl,t })L , l = 1, 2                (B.17)

    Accordingly, we use ηl,t to replace µl,t in the computation.


B.4         Simplifying the system
    Notice that the sum of consumption shares equals unity. We can use only consumption shares
for investors as independent state variables here. In addition, we can also get rid of bond holdings
bl,t+1 by using equation (B.17). Asset market clearing conditions imply that one agent’s portfolio
of assets is pinned down by the portfolios of the     n resto of agents. Consequently, we have a sequence
                                                         l
of independent variables {ωl,t+1,s }l=1,2;s=1,··· ,S , ki,t            , {ηl,t }l=1,2 , totally 2S + 6 variables.
                                                                       l=1,2;i=1,2
The system of equations consists of 2S + 6 equations (B.10)-(B.12), with l = 1, 2, i = 1, 2.


B.5         Updating asset prices and exiting financial wealth
    Once solving the system of equations above, we update asset prices according to equation
(B.11)-(B.12). Multiplying βl Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 ) on both sides of equation (B.2), taking expectations
conditional on information up to period t, and replacing relevant terms with the ones in correspond-
ing consumption Euler equations and complementary slackness conditions for collateral constraints,
yields
                                         (                                                                       )
                           1              βl Et [Uc (cl,t+1 , hl,t+1 )(Fl,t+1 + c̃l,t+1 − N Wl,t+1 + v(Hl,t+1 ))]
            Fl,t   =                                           l
                     Uc (cl,t , hl,t )                       −k1,t+1 ρl1,t+1 − k2,t+1
                                                                                l     ρl2,t+1

where net non-financial income N Wl,t+1 can be written as

                                                     N Wl,t+1 = Wl,t+1 Hl,t+1

    Normalizing this equation by Ytσ , yields
                                          −σ                                                       
                                ωl,t+1 Ỹt+1           σ F̃       ωl,t+1 Ỹt+1
               1       β E
                         l t         n             Ỹ t+1 l,t+1 +       n       − N Il,t+1 + v(Hl,t+1 )   
 F̃l,t =    ωl,t −σ                                                                                        , l = 1, 2
             n
                                                     l     l         l       l
                                                 −k1,t+1 ρ1,t+1 − k2,t+1 ρ2,t+1
                                                                                                          

                                                                                                                     (B.18)

B.6         The initial period t=0 and simulated paths
                                                                               i
    At period t ≥ 1, we can solve for endogenous variables {Hl,t+1 , Kl,t+1 , kl,t+1 , bl,t+1 , µl,t , ωl,t+1 },
with l = 1, 2, i = 1, 2, 3, as functions of consumption share distribution in period t (also in period
t+1 for state-contingent variables). Asset prices q̃i,t and exiting financial wealth F̃i,t can be updated
based on the corresponding consumption Euler equations. Although we can’t prove the existence of
an equilibrium in such a complicated model as ours, we take a more practical approach as in most

                                                                 60
of the literature. As long as policy functions of interest converge after a long enough period of time,
we assume that an equilibrium exists over an appropriate domain. Nevertheless, the economy starts
                                                         i , b , initial interest rate R and shocks A .
with some initial conditions such as initial portfolio, kl,0  l,0                       0            0
The path for variables of interest should be calculated given these initial conditions. We first solve
for ωl,0 , Hl,0 with l = 1, 2 based on the following four equations.

                           n σ             n                        n l
                 ωl,0 +       Ỹ0 F̃l,0 =     (N Wl,0 − v(Hl,0 )) + k1,0 (Ỹ0σ q̃1,0 + R1k,0 )+
                          Ỹ0             Ỹ0                      Ỹ0
                                 n l                             n
                                    k2,0 (Ỹ0σ q̃2,0 + R2k,0 ) − bl,0 , l = 1, 2, 3                    (B.19)
                                Ỹ0                             Ỹ0
                                                                         1
                                                             1−α
                                                  "                #
                                                                       1+ν−α
                                                      αAl,0 Kl,0
                                         Hl,0 =                                                        (B.20)
                                                          χ

Notice that equilibrium labor is a function of state variables and becomes known at the beginning
of a period. We need essentially to solve two budget constraints for consumption share distribution
{ω1,0 , ω2,0 }. Once obtaining the current consumption distribution {ω1,0 , ω2,0 }, the end-of-period
           i ,b
portfolio kl,1 l,1 are obtained via interpolating relevant policy functions. We then move the process
forwarding redoing the calculation for {ω1,t , ω2,t } based on four equations in period t and given
           i ,b
portfolio kl,t l,t with t ≥ 1 along the simulation path. Other endogenous variables can be found
accordingly along the simulation path.


B.7     The algorithm for solving the model
   Assume that exogenous shocks (A1,t , A2,t ) follow a Markovian process. We can use time-iteration
(backward induction) to solve the system. At the last period T, q̃i,T = F̃l,T = 0 with i = 1, 2 and
l = 1, 2. The algorithm is summarized as follows

Step 1. Choose an appropriate function tolerance . In the baseline model we use  = 10−5 .
      Discretize the exogenous state space (A1,t , A2,t ) into S grid points {(a1,s , a2,s )}s=1,··· ,S and
                                                                          i=1,··· ,nx
      endogenous state space Ω into J = nx ny grid points {(ω1,i , ω2,j )}j=1,··· ,ny . Set period T long
      enough.

Step 2. Given asset price functions q̃i,t+1 and exiting wealth functions F̃l,t+1 with i = 1, 2, 3 and
      l = 1, 2, t = T − 1, T − 2, · · · , for each grid point {(a1,s , a2,s ; ω1,i , ω2,j )}, we solve equation
      (B.10)-(B.12) with l = 1, 2, i = 1, 2 for state consumption share {ωl,t+1 }l=1,2 , current portfolio
      n       ol=1,2
        l
       ki,t+1        and current Lagrange multipliers {ηl,t }l=1,2 . Asset price q̃i,t+1 and exiting wealth
                i=1,2
      F̃l,t+1 are obtained through interpolation at a specific point of {(a1,t+1 , a2,t+1 ; ω1,t+1 , ω2,t+1 )}.
      Current asset prices q̃i,t , i = 1, 2, 3, are updated through equation (B.11)-(B.12), and exiting
      wealth F̃l,t , l = 1, 2, through equation (B.18).




                                                         61
Step 3. Compare the distance between two consecutive asset prices and exiting wealths

                                      l        l
                        dist = max{| ki,t+1 − ki,t |, | q̃i,t+1 − q̃i,t |, | F̃l,t+1 − F̃l,t |}l=1,2;i=1,2,3

         If dist ≥ , go to step 2; otherwise terminate the calculation and go to step 4.

Step 4. Once obtaining a convergent solution, we simulate the model forwardly for given initial con-
            n ol=1,2,3
               l
     ditions ki,0           , {bl,0 }l=1,2,3 and shock A0 to obtain state consumption levels {cl,t }l=1,2,3 ,
                    i=1,2
                                       n       ol=1,2,3
                                          l
     labor {Hl,t }l=1,2 , portfolios ki,t+1             , {bl,t+1 }l=1,2,3 , Lagrange multipliers {µl,t }l=1,2 , as-
                                                     i=1,2
         set prices {qi,t }i=1,2,3 and exiting wealth {Fl,t }l=1,2 , for t = 0, 1, 2, · · · .



C         Interpolation and approximation
C.1         Consumption simplex
    In the model, the domain of consumption shares is a triangle, which is not easy to cope with
directly in computation. There are several methods to investigate this issue in numerical analysis,
for instance, Barycentric coordinates on surfaces. However, we will avoid this computational issue
by making a one-to-one mapping between a triangle and a rectangle.14 Consumption share simplex
in the economy is rewritten here for convenience

                                                                                 3
                                 (                                                            )
                                                                                 X
                            Ω≡      (ω1 , ω2 , ω3 ) : ωl > 0, l = 1, 2, 3, and         ωl = 1
                                                                                 l=1

Here, we treat (ω1 , ω2 ) as a pair of free states. The consumption share simplex is equivalent to
0 < ωi < 1, i = 1, 2, ωl + ω2 < 1 and ω3 = 1 − ω1 − ω2 . We employ a trick in the following way.
First, write (ω1 , ω2 ) as functions of two other variables, say, z, w

                                     z                                               w
                            ω1 =                                            ω2 =
                                   1+z+w                                           1+z+w

Here, ω1 is increasing in z and decreasing in w. ω2 is increasing in w and decreasing in z. These
                             S
two functions map (0, +∞) (0, +∞) onto the consumption share simplex Ω. Second, finding a
                                           S
mapping between a rectangle and (0, +∞) (0, +∞), we use two new variables (θ1 , θ2 ) which are
                   S
defined over (0, 1) (0, 1), and two new functions here

                              z = − log(θ1 )                                w = − log(θ2 )

                                                                       S
    Consequently, we build a one-to-one mapping from a rectangle (0, 1) (0, 1) onto the simplex
Ω.15


   14
        We thank Hiroyuki Kasahara for his helpful suggestion.
   15
        Of course, there are many other transformations. Let’s discuss some of them. Example 1: (θ1 , θ2 ) ∈

                                                             62
C.2        B-spline interpolation and approximation
     In the algorithm, we need to know the policy functions q̃h,t+1 (θ1,t+1 , θ2,t+1 , st+1 ) and F̃l,t+1
(θ1,t+1 , θ2,t+1 , st+1 ) with h = 1, 2, 3, l = 1, 2 and st+1 is the state of Nature. Since we cannot obtain
closed-form expressions for these functions, we take use of B-spline smooth functions with degree 3
to approximate policy functions. Therefore the approximated functions are twice continuously dif-
ferentiable. We approximate asset prices q̃h (θ1 , θ2 , s) with h = 1, 2, 3 and exiting wealth F̃l (θ1 , θ2 , s)
with l = 1, 2 parametrically by functions
                                                             ny
                                                          nx X
                                                                    aqhs
                                                          X
                                   q̃ˆh (θ1 , θ2 , s) =              ij Bi (θ1 )Bj (θ2 )
                                                          i=1 j=1

                                                          nx   ny
                                    F̃ˆl (θ1 , θ2 , s) =
                                                         X X f ls
                                                            aij Bi (θ1 )Bj (θ2 )
                                                          i=1 j=1

where aqhs     f ls
       ij and aij are coefficients in B-spline approximations.
     B-splines are piecewise polynomial. The B-splines of degree 0 are defined as
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  0 if x < xi
                                                  
                                           0
                                          Bi (x) = 1 if xi ≤ x < xi+1
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                          i+1 ≤ x
                                                  0 if x


where {xi }i=1,··· ,n are grid points on x. The B-splines of degree 1 follow as
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              0                    if x < xi
                                              
                                              
                                               x−xi
                                              
                                                                    if xi ≤ x < xi+1
                                                xi+1 −xi
                                  Bi1 (x) =
                                                  xi+2 −x
                                                                   if xi+1 ≤ x < xi+2
                                               xi+2 −xi+1
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              0                    if xi+2 ≤ x

(0, π2 ) (0, π2 )
        S

                               z = tan(θ1 )                                      w = tan(θ2 )
                                 S
  Example 2: (θ1 , θ2 ) ∈ (0, 1) (0, 1)
                                    1                                                  1
                              z=      −1                                          w=      −1
                                   θ1                                                  θ2
                                  S
  Example 3: (θ1 , θ2 ) ∈ (0.5, 1) (0.5, 1)

                    z = log(θ1 ) − log(1 − θ1 )                            w = log(θ2 ) − log(1 − θ2 )
                                 S
  Example 4: (θ1 , θ2 ) ∈ (−1, 1) (−1, 1)

                                 1 + θ1                                         1
                          ω1 =                                          ω2 =      (1 + θ2 )(1 − θ1 )
                                   2                                            4
  The key differences among these transformations are the density of consumption shares on the simplex Ω
even when grid points for (θ1 , θ2 ) are equidistant.

                                                               63
   The B-splines of degree k have a recursive form of

                                 x − xi                xi+k+1 − x
                    Bik (x) =             Bik−1 (x) +              B k−1 (x) , k ≥ 1
                                xi+k − xi             xi+k+1 − xi+1 i+1

   The B-splines of degree k require (n + k) grid points. In the algorithm, we need to implement
interpolation and approximation of policy functions. In the interpolation part, asset prices and
exiting wealth are obtained through interpolating approximated asset price functions q̃ˆh (θ1 , θ2 , s)
and end-of-period wealth F̃ˆ (θ , θ , s). Once we have updated current asset prices and exiting wealth
                            h    1   2
through equation (B.11) and (B.18), coefficients in the approximated functions {aqhs   f ls
                                                                                 ij , aij } can be
obtained through interpolation.


C.3     Interpolation on a bounded set
   In interpolation, we want to find an asset pricing (exiting wealth) function f (state, ·) : Ω → Ω,
where Ω is a bounded set. In practice, we might only use a subset of Ω to enhance the accuracy
given the number of nodes (the nodes are more dense on a subset of Ω for a given number of
grid points). The grid points we are mainly concerned with are boundary points. For instance,
when they are patient and have high consumption shares today, say at the boundary points in the
domain, investors will hold more assets to smooth consumption whenever they have the chance,
say, exogenous constraints on asset holdings are not tight. It would be the case that their optimal
consumption shares are higher than the upper bound of the bounded set. The zero-finding problem
then becomes truncated and it’s possible that the nonlinear system doesn’t have a solution. There
are at least three ways to deal with this situation.
   One is increasing the range of the bounded set. The problem is how large the highest consump-
tion share is since the domain in the original problem is an open set (say, Ω). For given preference
parameters, there should exist, we think, an upper bound for consumption shares. But as a matter
of fact, this approach will produce a policy function surface with many curvatures, which in turn
requires very dense grid points to obtain an accurate solution.
   A second way is to make investors more patient, in which investors prefer consuming today
to tomorrow. Therefore, consumption share domain is smaller than that in the original problem.
When they are impatient enough, investors would borrow a lot and they will face binding borrowing
constraints in equilibrium. Thereby, given other parameter values unchanged, an economy with more
impatient investors would make collateral constraints bind more frequently.
   Another way to deal with unbounded asset holdings is to allow for large penalties when asset
holdings exceed some bounds. For instance, if we don’t allow for short positions (or small positive
positions) in assets, agents can not accumulate a large position in any of assets. In this case, their
consumption shares will lie in a narrow range of its natural domain.
   Our approach takes a practical perspective. First, we set the penalties for over holdings of
portfolios are large enough, choose a relatively large tolerance size, and try a relatively large domain
for consumption shares to obtain a stationary solution to the model. Note that the achieved solution
might be inaccurate. We then narrow the domain for consumption shares based on simulations,


                                                   64
use the obtained stationary solution as an new initial guess, and then rerun the solution procedure
above to obtain an accurate solution.


C.4        Discretizing an AR(1) process with a disaster risk
   We discretize the continuous state technological shock Markov process into a discrete and finite
state Markov process. Researchers usually make use of Hussey and Tauchen (1991)’s method to find
a finite state Markov process based on a standard AR(1) Markov process. However their method
doesn’t apply directly here because of the additional disaster risk φt . We use the following approach
instead.16
   Assume that the finite state space for the exogenous state variable is Al in country l. For the
sake of simplicity but without loss of generality, we choose three states to characterize the exogenous
process (C.1) in each country,


                   ln(Al,t+1 ) = (1 − ρz ) ln(Al ) + ρz ln(Al,t ) + Dφl,t+1 + l,t+1 , l = 1, 2   (C.1)

Al = {lo, mid, hi}. These three states could be any numbers around the unconditional mean of Al,t .
We set the middle state mid equals the mean of Al,t , the lowest state lo = mid − 2 × std(Al,t ), and
the highest state hi = mid + std(Al,t ), where std stands for the unconditional standard deviation of
Al,t . Now we need an associated transition matrix Π such that the discrete state process generates
the same moments as the original AR(1) process with a disaster shock. Since Π is a 3 by 3 matrix
and the sum of each row is one, there are 6 free unknowns in Π. Consequently, we need 6 moments
(constraints) to pin down these unknowns.
   In the calculation, we choose the first three unconditional moments including mean, variance
and skewness, and three auto-correlations with lagged 1, 2 and 3 periods. Then we simulate the
original exogenous process (C.1) with 2500 periods (discard the first 500 periods) and 5000 times
to calculate the 6 unconditional moments for equation (C.1). Next we then use nonlinear solvers to
find 6 unknowns in matrix Π such that the unconditional moments generated by matrix Π are very
closed to the original process.
   Some remarks are in order. First, the discrete state Markov process characterizes the original
continuous state Markov process in terms of unconditional moments. There might be other moments
one could choose, but we prefer these six moments in the calculation. Second, we want to associate
the lowest technological state with an event of disaster, but it isn’t necessarily the disaster state
itself. One could use a much lower value for the lowest state, say, lo = mid−3×std(Al,t ) and obtain
a different transition matrix. The choice of state values doesn’t affect the business cycle property
of the model. It only affects how we define a recession scenario.




  16
       We thank Victor Rios-Rull for his valuable suggestion and encouragement.

                                                       65
C.5         Accuracy
    Once obtaining policy functions for asset prices and exiting wealth, we can implement a simu-
lation starting from the initial period (given the portfolio and state of Nature in the first period) to
obtain all other variables. Along a simulated path, we have a sequence of consumption levels and
a sequence of portfolio of assets for each agent in the world economy. The accuracy of the solution
is based on relative consumption between actual consumption c̃l,t along the simulated path and the
consumption c̃ˆl,t that is derived from Euler equations, given current portfolio choices and future
state contingent consumption and asset prices,
            (                                                                               )− 1
                βl Et {U 0 (c̃l,t+1 )(qi,t+1 + Rik,t+1 )} + µl,t κEt {qi,t+1 } − ρli,t+1        σ

 c̃ˆl,t =                                                                                           with l = 1, 2, i = 1, 2, 3
                                                   qi,t

The banker’s Euler equations deliver similar current consumption c̃ˆ3,t . The absolute relative error
is defined as
                                                       c̃ˆl,t
                                              l,i =          − 1 with l, i = 1, 2, 3
                                                       c̃l,t

When the mean and maximum of l,i along the simulated is small enough, the solution to the model
is accurate. In the baseline model, we obtain an average error of log(l,i ) < −6.98 and maximal
error of log(l,i ) < −2.8.



D           Value functions and welfare
    Once obtaining policy functions for variables of interest, we arrive at the policy function for
consumption at period t as c̃i (ω1,t , ω2,t , At , At−1 ). Then the value function for agent i (investors
and workers in either country) is defined as,

                    Vi (ω1,t , ω2,t , At , At−1 ) = max {U (c̃i,t ) + βi E [Vi (ω1,t+1 , ω2,t+1 , At+1 , At )]}
                                                   {c̃i,t }


                           = U (c̃i (ω1,t , ω2,t , At , At−1 )) + βi E [Vi (ω1,t+1 , ω2,t+1 , At+1 , At )] .             (D.1)

where the second equality uses the optimal effective consumption c̃i (ω1,t , ω2,t , At , At−1 ). The time-
invariant function Vi (ω1,t , ω2,t , At , At−1 ) satisfying the equation above is the value function we look
for. Note that the value function can also be expressed as a function of predetermined portfolios
                           i , b }i=1,2,3 , A
and exogenous shocks Vi ({kj,t  i,t j=1,2    t+1 ).



D.1         Unconditional welfare evaluation
    Investors are less patient than workers, so they will front-load their consumption by borrowing
more from workers. In the long run ergodic distribution, investors accumulate higher debts and
consume less, while workers’ consumption will have the opposite feature. Financial integration which
enhances risk-sharing for investors is associated with higher indebtedness and lower consumption in


                                                                 66
the long run. How does financial integration alter risk sharing in the long run? We can characterize
the unconditional stationary value of welfare by calculating the unconditional mean of value function
Vi . To economize on notation, we use Vir as such an unconditional mean in financial integration
regime r = u, b, e, with u standing for financial autarky, b for bond market integration and e for
equity market integration. The unconditional mean of value function Vir is calculated based on
100 simulation runs, each of which contains 210000 periods (the first 10000 periods are discarded).
Along these simulation paths, portfolio choices never exceed their preset lower bounds.
    Specifically, in order to make welfare gains from financial integration comparable to consumption
changes, we apply the certainty equivalent of effective consumption c̃i , which is defined as,
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
                                                   Vir =         βit U (c̃ri ).                                    (D.2)
                                                           t=0

Given the preference specification in the main text, the certainty equivalent of consumption c̃ri reads,

                                                                                  1
                                        c̃ri = [Vir (1 − σ)(1 − βi ) + 1] 1−σ .                                    (D.3)

    Unconditional welfare gains now can be written as effective consumption changes across different
financial integration regimes. Let λr1,r2,i be the change of effective consumption from regime r1 to
regime r2 for agent i,
                                                                 c̃r2
                                                                   i − c̃i
                                                                           r1
                                                   λr1,r2,i =                                                      (D.4)
                                                                      c̃r1
                                                                        i

When λr1,r2,i > 0, agent i is better off from regime r1 to regime r2 in the long run.


D.2       Conditional welfare evaluation
    In order to properly evaluate the gains from financial integration, it is necessary to calculate
welfare conditional on initial conditions.17 Starting from an common initial state, including initial
portfolios for all agents and exogenous shocks, assume that there is an unanticipated change in
regime from r1 to r2. Accordingly, agents in the economy optimize their consumption and portfolio
paths in each integration regime after they observe the realization of shocks. Specifically, assume
                                                                   j
that the economy starts at period 0 with end-of-period portfolio {ki,0 , bj,0 }j=1,2,3
                                                                               i=1,2   and exogenous
state A0 . The switch of regimes happens unexpectedly at period 1 and the economy stays in that
regime from period 1 onwards. Nevertheless, the exogenous shocks in period t = 1, 2 are unknown
                                                         r for integration regime r and agent j,
for agents in period 0. Let the welfare in period 0 be V0,j
                                           n                                                                          o
           j
     r
   Vj,0 ({ki,0 , bj,0 }j=1,2,3
                       i=1,2   , A0 ) ≡ E0  U (c̃∗
                                                 j ({k j
                                                         , b } j=1,2,3
                                                      i,0 j,0 i=1,2    , A1 )) + β E [V
                                                                                  j 1 j
                                                                                        r
                                                                                          ({k j
                                                                                                 , b } j=1,2,3
                                                                                              i,1 j,1 i=1,2    , A2 )]
                                                                                                                   (D.5)
                j
where c̃∗j ({ki,0  , bj,0 }j=1,2,3
                           i=1,2 , A1 ) is agent   j’s optimal effective consumption given endogenous state
  j           j=1,2,3
{ki,0 , bj,0 }i=1,2 and exogenous state A1         at period 1, Vjr denotes the value function and Et represents

   17
     This is because unconditional measures of welfare ignore the transitory gains in utility that investors
get from early consumption.

                                                            67
conditional expectations over exogenous state At+1 with t = 0, 1.
   Once obtaining the effective consumption c̃∗j and value function Vjr , we can calculate the condi-
                              r , based on the transition matrix Π. Similarly, the certainty equivalence
tional welfare for agent j, Vj,0
of effective consumption in the short run c̃r,s
                                            j is defined as,

                                                                  1
                                 c̃r,s
                                        r
                                   j = Vj,0 (1 − σ)(1 − βj ) + 1      .                           (D.6)
                                                                  1−σ




                                                  68
