                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            COMPETITIVE PRESSURE AND THE DECLINE OF THE RUST BELT:
                         A MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS

                                              Simeon Alder
                                              David Lagakos
                                               Lee Ohanian

                                          Working Paper 20538
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20538


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2014

A previous version of this paper circulated under the title “The Decline of the U.S. Rust Belt: A Macroeconomic
Analysis.” We thank Ufuk Akcigit, Marco Bassetto, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Pablo Fajgelbaum,
Jeremy Greenwood, Berthold Herrendorf, Tom Holmes, Alejandro Justiniano, Thomas Klier, Michael
Peters, Andrea Pozzi, Ed Prescott, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Leena Rudanko, Jim Schmitz, Todd Schoellman,
Marcelo Veracierto, Fabrizio Zilibotti and seminar participants at Arizona State, Autonoma de Barcelona,
Berkeley, Brown, British Columbia, the Bank of Chile, Chicago Booth, the Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, St. Louis and Richmond, Frankfurt, LSE, Notre Dame, NYU, Ohio
State, Pennsylvania, UCLA, UCSB, UCSD, USC, Wharton, Yale, Zurich, the NBER Macroeconomics
across Time and Space 2014 meeting, the NBER Summer Institute 2013 (EFBGZ and PRMP), GSE
Summer Forum, 2013 Midwest Macro meeting, February 2013 NBER EFG meeting, 2012 Einaudi
Roma Macro Junior conference, and 2012 SED meeting (Cyprus) for helpful comments. We thank
Andrew Cole, Alex Hartman, Patrick Kiernan, Patrick Orr, Samin Peirovi, Billy Smith and especially
Caleb Johnson and Glenn Farley for excellent research assistance. All potential errors are ours. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Simeon Alder, David Lagakos, and Lee Ohanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Competitive Pressure and the Decline of the Rust Belt: A Macroeconomic Analysis
Simeon Alder, David Lagakos, and Lee Ohanian
NBER Working Paper No. 20538
October 2014
JEL No. E0,O3,O4

                                           ABSTRACT

No region of the United States fared worse over the postwar period than the “Rust Belt,” the heavy
manufacturing region bordering the Great Lakes. This paper hypothesizes that the Rust Belt declined
in large part due to a lack of competitive pressure in its labor and output markets. We formalize this
thesis in a two-region dynamic general equilibrium model, in which productivity growth and regional
employment shares are determined by the extent of competition. Quantitatively, the model accounts
for much of the large secular decline in the Rust Belt’s employment share before the 1980s, and the
relative stabilization of the Rust Belt since then, as competitive pressure increased.


Simeon Alder                                      Lee Ohanian
Department of Economics                           8283 Bunche Hall
University of Notre Dame                          UCLA, Department of Economics
715 Flanner                                       Box 951477
Notre Dame, IN 46556                              Los Angeles, CA 90095
simeon.alder.1@nd.edu                             and NBER
                                                  ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
David Lagakos
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
lagakos@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction
No region of the United States fared worse over the postwar period than the “Rust Belt,” the
heavy-manufacturing region bordering the Great Lakes. We document that from 1950 to 2000, the
Rust Belt’s share of U.S. manufacturing employment fell from more than one half to around one
third, and that its share of aggregate employment dropped by a similar magnitude. In addition, we
document that wages in the Rust Belt were higher on average than in the rest of the country, and
that labor productivity growth in most of the Rust Belt’s industries was lower than average.1

We use these facts to develop a new theory of the Rust Belt’s decline. Our theory focuses on
the lack of competitive pressure in the Rust Belt’s labor and output markets. In practice, lack of
competition was a salient feature of the region’s postwar economy. Output markets in many of the
region’s industries were dominated by oligopolies that faced little competition for decades after
the war. Similarly, powerful labor unions controlled the Rust Belt’s labor markets and used their
bargaining power to obtain higher payments from their employers.

Our theory has two parts. The first part formalizes the idea that a lack of competition in labor and
output markets depressed the firms’ incentives to innovate and thereby raise productivity. This part
builds on a growing literature that connects lack of competitive pressure to low productivity (see
e.g. Acemoglu, Akcigit, Bloom, and Kerr, 2013; Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griffith, and Howitt,
2005; Schmitz, 2005; Holmes and Schmitz, 2010; Syverson, 2011). The second part links de-
pressed productivity growth to the decline of the region’s employment share. This channel builds
on models of structural change, which connect sectoral productivity growth to employment dy-
namics (see e.g. Ngai and Pissarides, 2007; Buera and Kaboski, 2008; Herrendorf, Rogerson, and
Valentinyi, 2014).

We combine these two parts in a dynamic general equilibrium model in which the extent of com-
petition in output and labor markets determines productivity growth, wages, and regional employ-
ment shares. In labor markets, regional differences in competitive pressure are governed by the
presence of a labor union in the Rust Belt. While firms bear the full cost of innovation, they must
bargain with the union over profits, which are determined in part by the firm’s current innovation
decision. This leads to a “hold up” problem in the Rust Belt that discourages innovation and lowers
productivity growth. In output markets, since Rust Belt producers face less competitive pressure
from close competitors, they can earn rents even with little or no innovation, which dulls their
incentive to innovate, all else equal.

Regional employment shares evolve endogenously and are driven by relative productivity growth.
   1 We  define the Rust Belt to be the states of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, West
Virginia and Wisconsin. We discuss our data in detail in Section 3.


                                                       2
Since goods are gross substitutes in production, demand shifts toward goods from the region whose
productivity growth is highest. As a result, the employment share of the Rust Belt declines as long
as its productivity growth is lower than that of producers in the rest of the country.

We use the model to quantify how much of the Rust Belt’s employment share decline can be ac-
counted for by our theory. We use estimated markups and wage premia to discipline differences
in competitive pressure between the Rust Belt and the rest of the country. We then calculate the
equilibrium of the model from 1950 through 2000, in which innovation, productivity growth, and
employment shares endogenously evolve in the two regions. The model predicts a large secular
decline in the Rust Belt’s employment share of about 11 percentage points, which accounts for
around two-thirds of the actual 17 percentage-point decline. The model also predicts that produc-
tivity growth in the Rust Belt is lower than in the rest of the country, as in the data.

There is considerable evidence that competitive pressure in output and labor markets picked up
around the 1980s. We exploit this change to test our theory. When we feed this rise in competition
into our model, it predicts a falling wage premium, an increase in productivity growth, and a slow-
down in the Rust Belt’s employment share decline. In the data, the Rust Belt’s wage premium
did indeed fall in the 1980s, its productivity growth did increase in most of its industries, and its
decline did slow in the 1980s.

We conclude by presenting additional evidence supporting the theory’s mechanism and predic-
tions. First, we show that across Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) of the United States,
MSAs that paid the highest wage premia in 1950 tended to have the lowest employment growth
from 1950 to 2000. To the extent that wage premia in 1950 reflect non-competitive labor markets,
this finding provides further disaggregated evidence that a lack of competitive pressure in labor
markets played a role in regional employment changes. Second, we present historical evidence
that technology adoption rates in Rust Belt industries lagged behind their foreign counterparts and
other domestic industries. This supports the view that innovation in the Rust Belt was low by the
industry standards of the time.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 places the paper in the context of the related literature.
Section 3 documents four facts which characterize the Rust Belt’s decline. Section 4 presents
evidence that competitive pressure was low in the Rust Belt’s output and labor markets over the
postwar period. Section 5 presents the model economy. Section 6 presents the quantitative analysis.
Section 7 introduces a model extension with forward-looking unions. Section 8 presents additional
supporting evidence and Section 9 concludes.




                                                   3
2. Related Literature
Few prior papers have attempted to explain the root causes of the Rust Belt’s decline. The only
other theory of which we are aware is that of Yoon (2012), who argues, in contrast to our work,
that the Rust Belt’s decline was due in large part to rapid technological change in manufacturing.
Glaeser and Ponzetto (2007) theorize that the decline in transportation costs over the postwar
period may have caused the declines of U.S. regions whose industries depend on being close to
their customers, of which the Rust Belt is arguably a good example. Our paper also differs from
the work of Feyrer, Sacerdote, and Stern (2007) and Kahn (1999), who study labor-market and
environmental consequences of the Rust Belt’s decline, respectively, but do not attempt to explain
the underlying causes of the decline. Our model is consistent with the findings of Blanchard
and Katz (1992), who argue that employment losses sustained by the Rust Belt led to population
outflows rather than persistent increases in unemployment rates.

By focusing on competition, our paper builds on a recent and growing literature linking compe-
tition and productivity. Schmitz (2005) shows that in the wake of a large increase in competitive
pressure in the 1980s, the U.S. iron ore industry roughly doubled its labor productivity. Similarly,
Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen (2011) present evidence that European firms most exposed to trade
from China innovated and raised productivity more than other firms. Pavcnik (2002) documents
that after the 1980s trade liberalization in Chile, producers facing new import competition saw
large gains in productivity. Cole, Ohanian, Riascos, and Schmitz Jr. (2005) show that productivity
growth, and in some cases productivity levels, declined substantially in a number of Latin Amer-
ican countries when they received protection from competition, and that productivity rebounded
once protection ended. Holmes and Schmitz (2010) review a number of other studies at the indus-
try level that document the impact of competition on productivity. Acemoglu and Robinson (2013)
discuss the relationship between competition, innovation and productivity growth at the national
level.

From a modeling perspective, our work builds on several recent endogenous growth models where
innovation depends on the extent of the competition in output markets, in particular Acemoglu and
Akcigit (2011), Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griffith, and Howitt (2005), and Peters (2013). By com-
bining an endogenous growth model and a union bargaining problem, we more heavily emphasize
the interaction between competition in labor and output markets than the previous literature. A
common theme, however, is that more competitive output markets encourage incumbent firms to
innovate more aggressively in order to maintain a productivity advantage over potential entrants
(Aghion, Akcigit, and Howitt, 2014). Our model also relates to those of Parente and Prescott
(1999) and Herrendorf and Teixeira (2011), where monopoly rights reduce productivity by encour-


                                                 4
aging incumbent producers to block new technologies, and that of Holmes, Levine, and Schmitz
(2012), in which firms with market power have less incentive to innovate because technological
adoption temporarily disrupts production.

Our paper also complements the literature on the macroeconomic consequences of unionization.
The paper most related to ours in this literature is that of Holmes (1998), who uses geographic
evidence along state borders to show that state policies favoring labor unions greatly depressed
manufacturing productivity over the postwar period. Our work also resembles that of Taschereau-
Dumouchel (2012), who argues that even the threat of unionization can cause non-unionized firms
to distort their decisions so as to prevent unions from forming, and that of Bridgman (2011), who
argues that a union may rationally prefer inefficient production methods so long as competition is
sufficiently weak.2


3. Decline of the Rust Belt: The Facts
In this section we document a set of facts characterizing the Rust Belt’s decline. First, the Rust
Belt’s share of aggregate and manufacturing employment declined secularly over the postwar pe-
riod. Second, wages in the Rust Belt were higher than in the rest of the country. Third, labor
productivity growth in industries located predominantly in the Rust Belt was lower than average.
Fourth, all these empirical patterns changed significantly in the 1980s: the Rust Belt’s employment
share decline slowed, its wage premia fell, and its labor productivity growth picked up.

Definition of the Rust Belt

We define the Rust Belt as the states of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
West Virginia and Wisconsin. This definition encompasses the heavy manufacturing area border-
ing the Great Lakes, and is similar to previous uses of the term (see, e.g., Blanchard and Katz
(1992), Feyrer, Sacerdote, and Stern (2007) and the references therein). Our main data are the U.S.
Censuses of 1950 through 2000, available through the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS). We restrict our sample to private-sector workers who are not primarily self-employed.
We also draw on state-level employment data from 1970 and onward from the U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA), and BEA state-level value-added and wage data from 1963 onward.
   2
     While our model takes the extent of competition in labor markets as exogenous, several recent studies have
modeled the determinants of unionization in the United States over the last century. Dinlersoz and Greenwood (2012)
argue that the rise of unions can be explained by technological change biased toward the unskilled, which increased
the benefits of their forming a union, while the later fall of unions can be explained by technological change biased
toward machines. Relatedly, Acikgoz and Kaymak (2014) argue that the fall of unionization was due instead to the
rising skill premium, caused (perhaps) by skill-biased technological change. A common theme in these papers, as well
as other papers in the literature, such as that of Borjas and Ramey (1995) and that of Taschereau-Dumouchel (2012),
is the link between inequality and unionization, which is absent from the current paper.



                                                         5
                     .55         .5
        Rust Belt Employment Share
       .3    .35    .4
                     .25  .45




                                      1950   1960          1970          1980             1990        2000

                                             Aggregate                                    Manufacturing
                                             Aggregate, excluding Sun Belt



                                             Figure 1: The Rust Belt’s Employment Share

Fact 1: Declining Employment Share

The first fact is that the Rust Belt’s share of employment decreased secularly over the postwar
period. Figure 1 plots the Rust Belt’s share of employment from 1950 through 2000 by three
different metrics. The aggregate employment share of the Rust Belt (solid red) began at 43 percent
in 1950, and declined to 27 percent in 2000. The manufacturing share of the Rust Belt (dotted
purple) began at 51 percent in 1950 and declined to 34 percent. The aggregate share of employment
in states other than the “Sun Belt” states of Arizona, California, Florida, New Mexico and Nevada
(Blanchard and Katz, 1992) (dashed orange) was 49 percent in 1950 and 36 percent in 2000. We
discuss each of these in turn.3

The fact that the Rust Belt’s share of manufacturing employment dropped so much indicates that
the decline is not just a structural shift out of manufacturing. The dotted purple line in Figure 1
clearly shows that the Rust Belt’s share of employment declined even within manufacturing. Thus,
even though manufacturing was declining relative to services in the aggregate, employment within
   3 The Rust Belt’s share of GDP also declined secularly since 1950, from 45 percent down to 27 percent in the
aggregate, and from 56 percent down to 32 percent in manufacturing.



                                                                  6
the manufacturing sector shifted from the Rust Belt to the rest of the country.4

The dashed orange line in Figure 1 shows that the Rust Belt’s decline is not accounted for by
movements, possibly related to weather, of workers to the “Sun Belt.” In contrast, the Rust Belt’s
employment share declined substantially even after excluding these states. This is consistent with
the work of Holmes (1998), who studies U.S. counties within 25 miles of the border between
right-to-work states (most of which are outside the Rust Belt) and other states, and finds much
faster employment growth in the right-to-work state counties next to the border than in counties
right across the state border.5

More broadly, no region in the U.S. declined as much as the Rust Belt. Of the seven states with the
largest drops in their share of aggregate employment between 1950 and 2000, six are in the Rust
Belt. Of the seven states with the sharpest decline in manufacturing employment, five are in the
Rust Belt. Finally, taken individually, every single Rust Belt state experienced a substantial fall in
aggregate and manufacturing employment relative to the rest of the country.

Fact 2: High Wages in the Rust Belt

The second fact we document is that relative wages were higher in the Rust Belt than in the rest
of the economy for most of the postwar period. Figure 2 plots two measures of the relative wages
earned by manufacturing workers in the Rust Belt. We focus on manufacturing since the mecha-
nisms we emphasize in our theory are particularly salient in this sector (though the patterns hold
when we include all workers; see Appendix Table 5.) The first (solid line) is the ratio of average
wages of manufacturing workers in the Rust Belt to average wages of all other U.S. manufacturing
workers. Clearly, wages in the Rust Belt were considerably higher throughout this period. The
wage premium was between 10 percent to 15 percent between 1950 and 1980, and lower, yet still
positive, afterwards.

The second measure (dotted line) is the Rust Belt wage premium among manufacturing workers
when adding controls for schooling, potential experience, race and sex. Specifically, the line is
the coefficient of a Rust Belt dummy variable interacted with the year in a Mincer-type regres-
sion. The pattern is similar to that of the first wage measure. The wage premium coefficients are
above one for the entire period, hovering around 13 percent between 1950 and 1980, and falling
afterwards (though still remaining positive.) Thus, even after controlling for standard observables,
manufacturing workers in the Rust Belt earned more than workers in the rest of the country.
    4
      We find this pattern within several prominent manufacturing sectors as well. For example the Rust Belt’s share of
U.S. employment in steel, autos and rubber tire manufacturing fell from 75 percent in 1950 to 55 percent in 2000.
    5 It is also consistent with the findings of Rappaport (2007), who concludes that weather-related migration out of

the states in the Rust Belt played only a modest role in their declining population share. Other areas in the midwest,
and New England, for example, have similar weather but had much smaller population declines.


                                                          7
            1.20
            1.15
      Relative Wage
           1.10
            1.05
            1.00




                      1950    1960          1970           1980              1990         2000

                                       Simple Ratio               With Controls



                             Figure 2: Relative Wages of Rust Belt Workers

Fact 3: Low Productivity Growth in Rust Belt Industries

The third fact we document is that labor productivity growth was lower for much of the postwar
period in manufacturing industries prevalent in the Rust Belt. The main challenge we face is
that direct measures of productivity growth by region are not available for many industries. Our
approach is to focus on measures of productivity growth in a broad set of industries by matching
productivity data by industry to census data containing the geographic location of employment for
each industry. This allows us to compare productivity growth in the industries most common in
the Rust Belt to other industries.

To define Rust Belt intensive industries, we match NBER industries (by SIC codes) to those in the
IPUMS census data (by census industry codes). In each industry, we then compute the fraction
of employment located in the Rust Belt. We define “Rust Belt industries” to be those whose
employment share in the Rust Belt is more than one standard deviation above the mean. In practice,
this turns out to be a cutoff of at least 68 percent of industry employment located in the Rust Belt.

Table 1 reports productivity growth rates for the Rust Belt industries and their average over time.
Productivity growth is measured as the growth in real value added per worker, using industry-level

                                                   8
                   Table 1: Labor Productivity Growth in Rust Belt Industries
                                                                  Annualized Growth Rate, %
                                                            1958-1985     1985-1997     1958-1997
   Blast furnaces, steelworks, mills                           0.9           7.6           2.8
   Engines and turbines                                        2.3           2.9           2.5
   Iron and steel foundries                                    1.5           2.3           1.7
   Metal forgings and stampings                                1.5           2.8           1.9
   Metalworking machinery                                      0.9           3.5           1.6
   Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment                  2.5           3.8           2.9
   Photographic equipment and supplies                         4.7           5.1           4.9
   Railroad locomotives and equipment                          1.6           3.1           2.0
   Screw machine products                                      1.2           1.1           1.2
   Rust Belt weighted average                                  2.0           4.2           2.6
   Manufacturing weighted average                              2.6           3.2           2.8
  Note: Rust Belt Industries are defined as industries whose employment shares in the Rust Belt region are more
  than one standard deviation above than the industry mean. Labor Productivity Growth is measured as the growth
  rate of real value added per worker. Rust Belt weighted average is the employment-weighted average productiv-
  ity growth rate for Rust Belt industries. Manufacturing weighted average is the employment-weighted average
  productivity growth across all manufacturing industries. Source: Author’s calculations using NBER CES pro-
  ductivity database, U.S. census data from IPUMS, and the BLS.



price indices as deflators. The first data column reports productivity growth in each industry, and
the Rust Belt weighted average, for the period 1958 to 1985. On average, productivity growth rates
were 2.0 percent per year in Rust Belt industries and 2.6 percent in all manufacturing industries.
Productivity growth rates in the Rust Belt were much higher between 1985 and 1997 than before,
averaging 4.2 percent per year, compared to 3.2 percent for all manufacturing industries. For the
whole period, the Rust Belt industries had slightly lower productivity growth (2.6 percent) than all
manufacturing industries (2.8 percent).6

One potential limitation of the productivity measures of Table 1 is that they do not directly measure
productivity by region. However, these productivity measures are consistent with studies that do
measure productivity by region directly, using plant-level data. For the steel industry, Collard-
Wexler and De Loecker (2012) measure labor productivity growth and TFP growth by two broad
types of producers: the vertically integrated mills, most of which were in the Rust Belt, and the
minimills, most of which were in the South. They find that for the vertically integrated mills, TFP
    6 In Appendix Table 6 we show that our results hold for a broader definition of Rust Belt industries. We also

find lower productivity growth rates in Rust Belt industries between 1958 to 1985 when using double-deflated value
added per worker or TFP as our measure of productivity. A detailed description of the NBER CES data, and the data
themselves, are available here: http://www.nber.org/nberces/.


                                                        9
growth was very low from 1963 to 1982 and, in fact, negative for much of the period. In contrast,
they report robust TFP growth post-1982 in the vertically integrated mills. TFP improved by 11
percent from 1982 to 1987 and by 16 percent between 1992 and 1997.7

Fact 4: Changes of the 1980s

The three Rust Belt facts described above - the substantial decline in its employment share, its wage
premium, and its low productivity growth - changed significantly in the 1980s. Figure 1 shows
that the decline in the Rust Belt’s employment share slowed after 1985. Specifically, the Rust
Belt’s share of aggregate employment declined by about 12 percentage points between 1950 and
1985, but declined only 3 percentage points afterwards. Similarly, the Rust Belt’s manufacturing
employment share declined by about 16 percentage points between 1950 and 1985, but declined
by only 2 additional percentage points from 1985 to 2000.

Figure 2 shows the decline in the Rust Belt’s wage premium around 1980. The ratio of average
wages in the Rust Belt to the rest of the country fell from around 1.13 in 1980 to around 1.07 in
1990 and to 1.06 by 2000. Controlling for education, experience, gender, and race, the Rust Belt
wage premium fell from 1.12 until 1980 down to 1.05 in 1990 and to 1.02 by 2000. Appendix Table
5 shows that the Rust Belt wage premium falls after 1980 when including all workers, when re-
stricting to full time workers, and when including dummies for more detailed race and educational
attainment categories.

As described above, Table 1 shows the Rust Belt productivity pickup after 1985. In the largest
single Rust Belt industry, blast furnaces & steel mills, productivity growth averaged just 0.9 percent
per year before 1985 but rose substantially to an average of 7.6 percent per year after 1985. Large
productivity gains after 1985 are also present in all but one of the nine industries most common
in the Rust Belt. Their average growth rate was 2.0 percent year from 1958 to 1985, but rose 4.2
percent per year after 1985. We also find that investment rates increased substantially in most Rust
Belt industries in the 1980s, rising from an average of 4.8 percent to 7.7 percent per year. Appendix
Table 6 shows that productivity increases occurred, on average, under a broader definition of Rust
Belt industries.

   7A  second potential limitation of the productivity evidence of Table 1 is that it compares Rust Belt industries to
other industries that may have differed in potential for productivity growth. When comparing the U.S. steel and auto
industries to their counterparts abroad, however, previous studies have found much lower productivity growth in the
U.S. than in Japan and Europe over this period; see Fuss and Waverman (1991) and Norsworthy and Malmquist (1983)
on the auto industry and Lieberman and Johnson (1999) on steel industry.




                                                         10
4. Lack of Competition in the Rust Belt
This section presents evidence that competitive pressure in output and labor markets in the Rust
Belt was low throughout much of the postwar period, particularly before the 1980s. Then, starting
around the 1980s, competitive pressure increased, as output markets drew new competition from
home and abroad, and the influence of unions declined.8

4.1. Lack of Competitive Pressure in Labor Markets

The Rust Belt was the most unionized region of the United States over the postwar period. A
detailed study from 1974, for example, showed that four of the five most unionized states were in
the Rust Belt (Michigan, West Virginia, New York and Pennsylvania), as well as seven of the top
ten (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1975). The Rust Belt was also home to two of the largest
unions in the country: the United Steelworkers (USW) and United Auto Workers (UAW), which
were acknowledged to be among the most powerful in the country (Goldfield, 1987).

Many studies conclude that these unions, and others like them in the Rust Belt, used the threat
of strikes to obtain higher payments from firms. In the steel industry, in each of the ten years
following WWII, union steel workers demanded wage and benefit increases and specified a strike
date in case the union was not satisfied with their employer’s response (Hogan, 1971, p. 1611-
1645). Not surprisingly then, steel workers in this period earned substantially higher than average
wages; Tiffany (1988) reports that hourly earnings for steel workers in 1959 were more than 40
percent higher than the manufacturing average in the United States, which he interprets as rents
(p. 178). For the auto industry, Ingrassia (2011) and Vlasic (2011) describe numerous concessions
obtained by workers under threat of strike, including above-average wages and non-wage benefits.9

Figure 3 plots the number of work stoppages involving more than one thousand workers each year,
as reported by the BLS, which we interpret as a measure of union bargaining power. Two features
    8 Several factors may have led competitive pressure in the Rust Belt to be low at the end of the World War II. New

Deal laws, such as the National Industrial Recovery Act, facilitated collusion in the 1930s by some of the Rust Belt’s
most prevalent sectors, such as steel. While later outlawed, much of the collusive behavior may have persisted for years
after the New Deal. Similarly, during the war, wartime economic planning suppressed normal market competitive
forces. See Cole and Ohanian (2004) for a discussion of anti-competitive policies of the 1930s, and see McGrattan
and Ohanian (2010) for a discussion regarding the World War II economy.
    9 In 1950, the UAW and GM negotiated the “Treaty of Detroit,” a five year contract that was designed to stop strikes

and bring peace to auto labor relations, and that was also presumed to serve as a model for other industries. This treaty,
however, did not solve labor conflict, as holdup continued after that, with major strikes, and threats of strikes, in the
steel and auto industries. In a 2010 speech, UAW President Bob King acknowledged the persistent and inefficient
labor relations between the UAW and the auto industry that persisted in the 20th century: “The 20th-century UAW
joined with the companies in a mindset that it was the company’s job to worry about profits, and the union’s job to
worry about getting the workers their fair share...The 20th-century UAW fell into a pattern with our employers where
we saw each other as adversaries rather than partners.”



                                                           11
             500
             400
      Work Stoppages
       200   100
             0  300




                         1950         1960         1970         1980         1990          2000


                       Figure 3: Work Stoppages Affecting More Than One Thousand Workers

of the graph are noteworthy. First, for several decades after the end of the war, strike activity was
substantial in the United States, averaging 300 strikes per year involving more than one thousand
workers. While these data are not reported by region, there is good reason to believe the majority
of these strikes occurred in the Rust Belt, since most of the most powerful unions (such as the USW
and UAW had extensive operations there. As one example, the famous steel strike of 1959 idled
more roughly 500,000 steel workers in mills located mostly in Illinois, Ohio and Pennsylvania
(Tiffany, 1988). The auto industry had major strikes at Ford in 1967, Chrysler in 1968 and General
Motors in 1970, and these strikes idled plants located almost exclusively in the Rust Belt.

The second noteworthy feature of Figure 3 is that strike activity dropped substantially around 1980
and stayed a much lower level. Afterwards, the number of strikes affecting more than one thousand
workers averaged just 50 per year. This sharp drop in work stoppages relates closely to a previously
documented decline in union organizing activity starting around 1980 (Farber and Western, 2001;
Dinlersoz, Greenwood, and Hyatt, 2014). Two commonly cited explanations for the decline in
union power include the policy stance towards unions advanced under the Reagan administration
(Freeman and Nickell, 1988) and an increase in competitive forces, discussed by Reder (1988)


                                                      12
and Farber and Western (2001). In either case, there is considerable agreement that labor unions
became significantly weaker around the early 1980s.

4.2. Lack of Competition in Output Markets

The most prominent Rust Belt industries were dominated by just a handful of firms in the decades
after WWII. The three largest steel producers – U.S. Steel, Bethlehem Steel, and National Steel
– accounted for nearly all U.S. market share after World War II and had at least half of domestic
capacity through 1980 (Crandall, 1981; Tiffany, 1988). The “Big Three” car companies – General
Motors, Ford and Chrysler – accounted for 90 percent of automobile sales in the United States in
1958, and at least 75 percent until around 1980 (Klier, 2009). Rubber tire production was similarly
concentrated by their own big four – Goodyear, Firestone, U.S. Rubber, and Goodrich – which
controlled at least 90 percent of the market from 1950 to 1970.

In each of these industries, it is generally recognized that firms faced little competitive pressure and
had considerable market power. Adams and Brock (1995, p. 94) describe the big Steel producers
as having had “virtually unchallenged control of a continent-size market,” which led to a “well-
honed system of price leadership and follower-ship” with U.S. Steel as the clear leader in price
setting. Similarly, Hudson and Sadler (1989) state that: “in 1948 the industry (. . . ) [began] a
system whereby all firms automatically followed U.S. Steel’s lead in pricing.” Ingrassia (2011,
p. 29) describes the automobile industry as being a “model of corporate oligopoly” throughout the
1950s, 1960s and 1970s, with General Motors as price leader.

The U.S. steel, auto, and rubber tire manufacturers were accused many times of explicit collusion.
In 1959, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) charged fifteen rubber manufacturers with agreeing
on common list prices and discounting policies (French, 1991). Tiffany (1988) describes similar
instances in the steel industry, and on several occasions Congress invited senior management of Big
Steel to explain their lack of competition in pricing. By 1963, the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly
Committee concluded that there was little, if any, price competition in steel and auto industries, and
recommended that General Motors be broken up into competing firms. Similarly, the U.S. Justice
Department charged Ford and General Motors with collusion and the Big Three with conspiring to
eliminate competition (Adams and Brock, 1995, p. 87)

There is substantial evidence that competitive product market pressure in the Rust Belt increased
in the 1970s and particularly in the 1980s, as new firms entered, both foreign and domestic, and
imports increased. Concentration ratios fell substantially in steel, auto and rubber industries. Mar-
ket share for auto producers fell from around 90 percent to less than 50 percent, and market share
declined similarly for Rust Belt steel and rubber producers (Tiffany, 1988; French, 1991). Esti-
mates of markups also declined as competition increased. Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2012)

                                                  13
estimate that, in the steel industry, markups fell by around 50 percent over the last forty years, and
attribute the fall to a rise in competition.10 Several industry studies also find increased competitive
pressure from imports starting around 1980, such as Schmitz (2005)’s study of the U.S. iron ore
industry, and Dunne, Klimek, and Schmitz (2010)’s study of the U.S. cement industry.

Economic policy changes also fostered greater competitive pressure on Rust Belt industries. Mc-
Grattan (2012) shows that policies that impeded foreign direct investment (FDI) in the 1960s and
1970s changed considerably in the mid-late 1970s. In particular, three policies that reduced FDI
were explicitly or implicitly dissolved: interest equalization taxes on FDI, which had significantly
increased tax rates on FDI, extraterritorial application of U.S. laws, which had permitted the U.S.
to prosecute foreign companies for antitrust violations even if the alleged acts occurred outside the
U.S., and national security laws, which had permitted the U.S. to seize foreign assets.


5. Model
This section develops a model that formalizes the linkages between competitive pressure, produc-
tivity growth, and regional employment shares. The model is tailored to capture the persistent lack
of competition in the Rust Belt’s output markets and the persistent conflicted labor relations in its
labor markets. We then use the model to relate the lack of competitive pressure to the decline in
the Rust Belt’s share of U.S. employment.

5.1. Households and Regions

Time is discrete and periods are indexed by t. There is a unit measure of households with prefer-
ences over a single consumption good:
                                                        ∞
                                                        ∑ δ t Ct                                                 (1)
                                                        t=0

where their discount factor δ satisfies δ ∈ (0, 1). The households are endowed with one unit of
labor each period and they supply their unit endowment inelastically to the market. Labor input is
the numeraire, and hence the wage is normalized to one.

There is a continuum of intermediate goods, indexed by j, which are combined to produce a final
good. The final good is either consumed or used in the innovation process. The production function
for the final good is given by
                                         Z 1                σ
                                                     σ −1    σ −1
                                    Yt =      qt ( j) σ d j                                    (2)
                                                    0
  10 Measures  of markups consistently estimated over time are not available for many other industries. Nevertheless,
estimates for the auto industry also show lower markups. Berndt, Friedlaender, and Chiang (1990) estimate markups
for Ford, GM, and Chrysler between 1959 and 1983 averaging 21 percent, and just 13 percent afterwards.


                                                            14
where qt ( j) is the quantity of intermediate j used in production of the final good, and σ is the
elasticity of substitution between any two varieties. We assume that σ > 1, meaning that any two
varieties are gross substitutes.

The households pool workers’ labor earnings plus profits from the firms, and spend all their income
on the final good. Formally, the households’ budget constraint is
                                                                Z 1
                                        Pt ·Ct = 1 + Rt +             Πt ( j)d j                                (3)
                                                                  0

where Pt is the price of the final good, Ct is the quantity of the final good purchased for consump-
tion, 1 + Rt is the labor earnings of all workers plus the rents earned by workers in the Rust Belt
(explained below), and Πt ( j) are net profits earned by intermediate firm j (also explained below).

We model the two regions of the economy as two disjoint intervals on [0, 1]. This simplification
allows for tractability, while still capturing the feature that goods in the two regions are imperfect
substitutes for one another. Intermediates j ∈ [0, λ ) are produced in the Rust Belt, and intermedi-
ates j ∈ [λ , 1] are produced in the Rest of the Country (ROC). The two regions differ in the nature
of competition in their respective labor and output markets, as we describe in detail below. We use
subscripts R for the Rust Belt and S for the Rest of the Country.

5.2. Intermediate Production and Innovation

Each intermediate can be produced by either an incumbent firm or a “competitive fringe” (or
potential entrant). Here we focus on the incumbent, and detail the competitive fringe later.

Each period consists of two stages: innovation and production. In the innovation stage, the in-
cumbent begins with productivity z j,t and chooses x j,t , the percentage by which it improves its
productivity. Upgrading productivity by x j,t requires an investment I(x j,t , Zt ), paid in units of the
final good, where Zt ≡ {zi,t }1i=0 denotes the set of productivity levels of all producers, and I(x j,t , Zt )
is convex in x j,t . The productivity upgrade is irreversible once it has been made and therefore the
investment is sunk. After innovation, the incumbent’s productivity is raised to z j,t (1 + x j,t ) and it
produces intermediate j with the technology

                                            y j,t = z j,t (1 + x j,t )ℓ j,t ,                                   (4)

where y j,t and ℓ j,t represent output and labor input, respectively.11
  11 Inreality, innovation often takes the form of a new technology embodied in capital equipment. Examples from
the Rust Belt during our time period include the continuous casting process for making steel, which required steel
makers to install new casting machinery. For simplicity, we abstract from capital and treat innovation as a purely
labor-augmenting productivity. What is key for our purposes is that the innovation is sunk and can be held up by the


                                                          15
At the production stage, incumbent firms decide how much labor to hire and what price to charge,
given their technology and demand for their output. In both regions, the incumbents engage in
Bertrand price competition with the competitive fringe. Because of the CES production function
(2), incumbents also compete with other varieties, which are gross substitutes. Hence incumbents
face a downward-sloping demand for their good. We describe their production-stage problem in
detail below.

5.3. Extent of Competition

The key difference between the two regions is that the Rust Belt’s labor and output markets feature
less competitive pressure. We model the extent of competitive pressure in each period using two
parameters: βt and µt , satisfying βt ∈ [0, 1] and µt ∈ [0, 1]. These parameters represent “distortions”
to competition in the Rust Belt’s labor markets and output markets, respectively. For simplicity we
assume no distortions to competition in the Rest of the Country.

We model the Rust Belt’s labor market as an atemporal Nash labor bargaining problem between
a union and the incumbents, in which bargaining takes place after the innovation decision. This
specification provides a simple way of capturing the persistent holdup problem that characterized
Rust Belt labor relations for decades, as we discussed in Section 4. There is a representative
labor union in each Rust Belt industry that is the sole supplier of labor services. In exchange
for supplying labor, Rust Belt workers receive the standard competitive wage plus a union rent,
Rt . The rent Rt is determined through Nash bargaining between the union and firm over period-t
profits. The parameter βt is the union’s bargaining weight, and hence its share of period-t profits.12

Bargaining takes place at the end of the production stage, and in particular after the incumbent
Rust Belt producer has made its innovation decision. This timing allows the model to capture the
hold-up problem that characterized a number of Rust Belt industries in reality. In short, the hold-up
problem arises in the model because the firm bears all the innovation costs, but then must split the
profits with the union.13

In output markets, the extent of competition is governed by µt . The incumbent firm in each industry
j competes with a competitive fringe, which may also produce the same variety. The productivity
of the competitive fringe differs by region. In the Rest of the Country, the fringe can produce with
union.
   12 Since pay in the Rust Belt is above the competitive wage, there is rationing of Rust-Belt jobs. We assume that

Rust-Belt job are randomly allocated. In reality, the actual allocation of union jobs was not random and often reflected
family ties or other connections. In some instances, immigrants or members of minority groups were given lower
preference. We abstract from these complications for simplicity since the distribution of union rents across members
of the household is not crucial for our theory.
   13 In Section 7, we consider a model extension with a forward-looking union, and show that the predictions of that

model are quantitatively similar to those of the current model.


                                                          16
productivity φ z j,t , with φ ∈ [0, 1], where φ captures the potential for catch-up by the fringe. In the
Rust Belt, the fringe can produce with productivity (1 − µt )φ z j,t where µt stands for the additional
degree of market power the firm has in output markets. The higher is µt , the less productive is the
fringe in the Rust Belt, and the lower is the competitive pressure put on the incumbent.

Parameters βt and µt evolve exogenously over time, and (for now) we assume all agents in the
economy have perfect foresight.

5.4. Optimal Production and Pricing

We first consider the static problem that an incumbent firm faces in the production stage. In this
stage, the innovation decision has already been made, and the incumbent’s productivity has been
determined. The firm’s problem is to choose a price and quantity to maximize its current-period
profits.

Consider a firm in the Rest of the Country entering the period with productivity zS who has chosen
a productivity increase xS . We drop the t and, whenever possible, the j subscripts, and focus on
symmetric equilibria. Assume, in addition, that all the other firms in the region have productivity
z̃S and have chosen upgrade x̃S (which could be equal to zS and xS , and will be in equilibrium).
Finally, assume that all Rust Belt producers start with productivity z̃R and have chosen x̃R .14 To
keep the notation tidy, we define ZS ≡ (zS , z̃S , z̃R ) and XS ≡ (xS , x̃S , x̃R ).

Firms in the Rest of the Country seek to maximize current-period profits:
                                                                   n          o
                                        ΠS (ZS , XS ; β , µ ) = max pS yS − ℓS ,                              (5)
                                                                    pS , ℓS

                                                     σ
subject to yS = zS [1 +xS ]ℓS and yS = E · Pσ −1 · p−
                                                    S , which are the production function and standard
demand function, respectively, when the final good is produced using a CES technology. E and P
represent total spending on all goods and the aggregate price index, respectively:
                                        Z λ                              Z 1
                                  E=              pR ( j)qR ( j)d j +          pS ( j)qS ( j)d j
                                          0                               λ
                                        hZ        λ                      Z 1                    i    1
                                                                                                    1−σ
                                   P=                 pR ( j)1−σ d j +         pS ( j)1−σ d j             .
                                              0                           λ

Optimal pricing falls into one of two cases. If innovation in equilibrium is sufficiently low, i.e. xS ≤
  σφ                                                     1
(σ −1) −1, the incumbent chooses a limit price of pS = φ zS such that potential entrants weakly prefer
not to enter the industry. Alternatively, for xS > (σσ−1)
                                                      φ
                                                          − 1, the firm can set a standard Dixit-Stiglitz
                                       σ
monopolist markup of pS =             σ −1 zS (1 + xS )      without triggering entry.
  14 A   sufficient condition for symmetry is zR = z˜R and zS = z˜S .


                                                                  17
Now consider a Rust Belt firm that enters the period with productivity zR and has chosen the
innovation level xR , while all other Rust Belt producers start with productivity z̃R and innovation
x̃R . Similarly, assume that all Rest of the Country producers enter with productivity z̃S and have
chosen innovation x̃S . Let us define ZR ≡ (zR , z̃R , z̃S ) and XR ≡ (xR , x̃R , x̃S ). Period profits of the
Rust Belt are given by                                       n         o
                              ΠR (ZR , XR ; β , µ ) = max pR yR − ℓR ,                                     (6)
                                                           pR , ℓR
                                                      σ
subject to yR = zR [1 + xR ]ℓR and yR = X · Pσ −1 · p−
                                                     R . Like in the Rest of the Country, the optimal
pricing strategy of the Rust Belt incumbents has two cases. When investment is sufficiently low in
equilibrium, i.e. xR ≤ σ (φσ(1− µ)                                                   1
                             −1) − 1, they limit price the fringe with price pR = (1−µ )φ zR . In contrast,
                                                                                    σ
for sufficiently high levels of xR , they set a standard markup of pR =            σ −1 zR (1 + xR ).


5.5. Optimal Innovation

We now consider the dynamic problem that an incumbent firm faces in the innovation stage. In
this stage, firms choose how much to innovate today to maximize the expected present discounted
value of their share of profits.

The Bellman equation that describes a producer in the Rest of the Country is:
                                    n                                                                  o
            VS (ZS ; β , µ ,t) = max ΠS (ZS , XS ; β , µ ) − I(xS , ZS ) + δ VS ZS′ ; β ′ , µ ′ ,t + 1        (7)
                                  xS


where ZS′ = zS (1 + xS ), z̃S (1 + x̃S ), z̃R (1 + x̃R ) . The laws of motion for β and µ are given exoge-
                                                        

nously and depend only on t; below we specific the exact laws of motion. In short, a Rest-of-the-
Country producer innovates in order to maximize period profits, minus innovation costs, plus the
discounted value of future profits.

Analogously, the Rust Belt producer’s Bellman equation is:
                               n                                                                         o
       VR (ZR ; β , µ ,t) = max (1 − β )ΠR(ZR , XR ; β , µ ) − I(xR , ZR ) + δ VR ZR′ ; β ′ , µ ′ ,t + 1      (8)
                             xR


where ZR′ = zR (1 + xR ), z̃R (1 + x̃R ), z̃S (1 + x̃S ) . Thus, the Rust Belt producer picks its technology
                                                        

upgrade to maximize its share of period profits, minus the cost of innovation, plus the discounted
value of future profits. Rather than keeping all the current period profits, the firm only gets the
share (1 − β )ΠR (ZR , XR ; β , µ ). Note that in this environment, union bargaining acts like a tax on
profits.




                                                         18
Finally, letting i ∈ {R, S} denote the region, we assume that the investment cost function is

                                                 γ              c ziσ −1
                                  I(xi , Zi ) = x j                                                     (9)
                                                      λ z̃Rσ −1 + (1 − λ )z̃Sσ −1

for Zi = (zi , z̃i , z̃−i ), γ > 1, and c > 0. This cost function is increasing and convex in xi . Note that
the cost of innovation is decreasing in the size of the gap between the incumbent’s productivity
level and the geometric average of the productivity level in the economy. An important feature of
this cost function is that it delivers balanced growth when the Rust Belt and the Rest of the Country
have the same levels of product and labor market competition, i.e. β = µ = 0 in all current and
future periods. We call this the competitive state, and restrict the path for β and µ such that the
economy reaches the competitive state in a finite number of periods T .

5.6. Dynamics in the Competitive State

In the competitive state, output and labor market conditions are characterized by β = µ = 0 for
all periods. One can show that two properties hold in the competitive state. First, the ratio zR /zS
is constant over time. Second, employment shares across the two regions are constant over time.
These properties imply that, in the competitive state, the aggregate economy is on a balanced
growth path and both regions grow at the aggregate rate. Thus, changes in employment shares can
only come about from differences in competitive pressure between the two regions, and not from
differences in the productivity levels of the two regions, per se. In addition, these properties are
useful in the model calibration since they enable us to characterize the competitive state largely by
hand. This makes the long run properties of the model transparent and tractable.

5.7. Dynamics under Imperfect Competition in the Rust Belt

We now consider the economy when β > 0 or µ > 0. As we show below, when plausibly cali-
brated, the model predicts that in this state there is less innovation (and hence productivity growth)
in the Rust Belt than elsewhere. This in turn leads the relative price of the Rust Belt’s goods to rise
and, because goods are gross substitutes, demand for Rest of the Country’s goods to rise. Thus, as
in the model of Ngai and Pissarides (2007), employment flows out of the Rust Belt.

The distortion in labor markets, β , reduces innovation, as bargaining acts as a tax on the return
to innovation. Firms bear the full cost of innovation but receive only the fraction β of the return,
while members of the labor union appropriate the remaining share 1 − β . As a result, firms invest
less ex ante than they otherwise would. By itself, this force leads to a decline in the Rust Belt’s
share of employment.



                                                         19
The output market distortion µ has two distinct effects on the innovation decisions of Rust Belt
producers. First, higher market power in the current period leads to the escape-the-competition
effect (Aghion, Akcigit, and Howitt, 2014), which reduces innovation. All else equal, the less
competitive the fringe is today (i.e. the higher is µ in the current period), the weaker is the incum-
bent firms’ incentive to invest today and thus distance themselves from the fringe. Second, higher
market power in the future (i.e. higher µ in future periods) leads to the Schumpeterian effect,
which increases innovation in the present. The higher market power is in future periods, the more
firms get to enjoy the returns to innovations made today.


6. Quantitative Analysis
We now turn to a quantitative analysis of the dynamic model to assess how much of the employ-
ment share decline from 1950-2000 can plausibly be accounted for by low competitive pressure
in Rust Belt product and labor markets. We calibrate the differences in output and labor market
competition between the Rust Belt and the Rest of the Country using evidence on wage premia and
markups. We find that our baseline calibration of the model accounts for around two-thirds of the
observed drop in the Rust Belt’s manufacturing employment share.

6.1. Parameterization

We choose a model period to be five years, and, accordingly, set the discount rate to δ = 0.965 . For
the elasticity of substitution we set σ = 2.7, based on the work of Broda and Weinstein (2006), who
estimate elasticities of substitution between a large number of goods and find median elasticities
between 2.7 and 3.6, depending on the time period and degree of aggregation. In terms of initial
conditions, we set the productivities of the two regions in 1950 to zS = zR = 1, though our results
are not sensitive to these initial values.

We calibrate the remaining four parameters jointly: φ , which governs the catch-up rate of the
fringe; λ , which pins down the share of goods produced in the Rust Belt; γ , which is the curva-
ture parameter in the cost function associated with innovation; and c, which is the (linear) scale
parameter in that same function.

We impose four empirical restrictions on the model to discipline these parameter values: (i) an
average markup of 18 percent in the Rest of the Country, which is consistent with what Collard-
Wexler and De Loecker (2012) estimate for the period since 1980 among minimill steel producers
(most of which were located outside the Rust Belt); (ii) the initial employment share of 51 percent
in the Rust Belt, corresponding to the actual share in 1950; (iii) an average innovation investment-
to-GDP ratio of 8.5 percent, which is the average ratio of investments in R&D, advertising and


                                                 20
other intangibles to GDP in the United States (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2005; McGrattan and
Prescott, 2010); and (iv) a long-run output growth rate in the symmetric competitive state of 2
percent per year.

While in general there is a complex mapping between these empirical restrictions and the param-
eters, it turns out that φ largely determines the markup in the Rest of the Country, that λ largely
determines the Rust Belt initial employment share, that γ largely determines the investment-to-
output ratio, and that c̄ , given γ , exclusively determines the long-run growth rate of output.
                       T and {µ }T to match data on wage premia and markups from the Rust
We pick the paths {βt }t=1     t t=1
Belt. The wage premia come from our estimates of Figure 2, and the markups come from estimates
from the integrated steel producers (almost all of which were located in the Rust Belt) of Collard-
Wexler and De Loecker (2012). These data suggest that bargaining power and monopoly power
remained roughly constant between 1950 and the early 1980s. By 1985, however, the data suggest
that the strength of these distortions began to steadily decline. We capture this by solving the
economy with constant parameter values for µ and β in 1950 through 1985, followed by a linear
decline toward the absorbing competitive state by some future date T .15

We choose constant values for β and µ to match average wage premia and markups from 1950 to
1985 (corresponding to the first eight periods in the model). We match the observed decline post-
1985 so as to match the wage premium and markup in the year 2000. The targeted wage premia
and markups are listed in the table below.


                              Targeted Rust Belt Wage Premia and Markups
                                                        Wage Premium                    Markup
                    Average for 1950-1985                       0.12                      0.32
                    2000                                        0.02                      0.24

In our quantitative analysis we characterize the equilibrium path of the model by solving the se-
quence of dynamic programs given by equations (7) and (8), given {βt }t=1 T            T , using
                                                                             and {µt }t=1
piecewise linear approximations to the value functions.16

  15 More   formally, µt+1 = µt and βt+1 = βt for t ∈ {1, . . . , 8}, µt+1 = max{0, µt − ∆µ } and βt+1 = max{0, βt − ∆β }
for t ∈ {9, . . . , T } and µt = βt = 0 for t > T , where parameters ∆µ and ∆β govern the speed of the decline in µ and β .
   16 Appendix A details the solution procedure. The parameter values implied by these restrictions are φ = 0.963,

λ = 0.599, γ = 1.566 and c = 3.01. We can characterize the paths {βt }t=1    T and { µ }T by their first element and the
                                                                                       t t=1
absolute decline, ∆β and ∆µ , respectively, that kicks in at time t = 9. They are β1 = 0.225 and ∆β = 0.059 for the
union’s bargaining power, and µ1 = 0.136 and ∆µ = 0.019 for the Rust Belt producer’s market power.




                                                           21
                       0.55       0.50
         Rust Belt Employment Share
      0.30   0.35    0.40
                       0.250.45




                                         1950         1960           1970          1980           1990           2000

                                                                       Data               Model



                                         Figure 4: Manufacturing Employment Share in Rust Belt: Model and Data

6.2. Quantitative Results

Figure 4 plots the model’s manufacturing employment share of the Rust Belt from 1950 to 2000
and the data. The first salient feature of the figure is that the model predicts a large secular decline
in the Rust Belt’s employment share, similar to the data. Overall, the model predicts a drop of
11.4 percentage points, compared to 17 percentage points in the data. Thus, the model accounts
for around two-thirds of the overall decline in the data.

The second salient feature of Figure 4 is that the model’s predicted decline is more pronounced
between 1950 and 1985 than in later years, and that, again, mirrors the decline in the data. The
model predicts a drop of 12.5 percentage points until 1985, compared to a 15.2 percentage point
drop in the data. After 1985, the Rust Belt’s employment share declined just 2.8 percentage points
in the data while the model predicts a small 1.1 percentage point increase in the Rust Belt’s share.

Why does the model predict a steeper decline before 1985 than afterwards? The reason is that low
competitive pressure before 1985 depresses innovation in the Rust Belt, and thus lowers produc-
tivity growth. This persistent cross-regional difference in productivity growth leads to a persistent


                                                                            22
rise in the relative price of Rust Belt goods, which in turn leads to a persistent shift in economic
activity out of the Rust Belt. By 1985, the rise in competitive pressure (lower values of βt and µt )
generates lower Rust Belt markups, more moderate wage premia, and higher productivity growth.
This in turn arrests the decline in the Rust Belt’s share of employment.

While we do not target labor productivity growth rates in our calibration, the model performs well
from 1950-1985 in this respect. It generates an average growth rate of 1.9 percent annually in the
Rust Belt, compared to 2.0 percent in the data. The corresponding growth rates for the Rest of the
Country are 2.7 percent (model) and 2.6 percent (data). Thus, the model delivers rates and regional
rate differentials that track their empirical counterparts closely in this period. After 1985, the Rust
Belt’s productivity growth rises sharply in the data up to to 4.2 percent per year on average. The
model also predicts a rise in productivity growth, but not as sharp as in the data. In the model,
productivity growth rises from around 1.75 percent in 1980 to around 1.94 percent in 2000. The
model is more successful in predicting the closing of the gap in productivity growth between the
Rust Belt and Rest of the Country. In the model, the gap closes from around 0.8 percent per year
in 1980 to around 0.2 percent per year in 2000, which is close to the data.

One place the model is less successful is in capturing the acceleration in the Rust Belt’s decline
from the late 1970s to early 1980s. One way of reconciling the model and data here is to let
competition in output markets increase before competition in labor markets, as some evidence
suggests happened. If we allowed µ to fall one period prior to the labor market transition, the
decline would temporarily sharpen in the early 1980s and the post-1985 stabilization would be
more muted. A second place the model’s predictions could be improved is in the most recent part
of the time period, where the model predicts a slight rise in the Rust Belt’s employment share,
while the data does not. The model’s predicted increase is due largely to the steady decrease in
Rust Belt markups over this period, which lower the region’s relative prices. In reality, there likely
were other countervailing factors leading to a continued decline.

Several other features of the Rust Belt’s economy in the model are consistent with the data. The
investment-to-GDP ratio – which is not targeted directly – is lower in the Rust Belt than in the rest
of the economy, particularly in the period before 1985 when competitive pressure was at its lowest.
In the model, the investment-to-value added ratio averages 7.7 percent in the Rust Belt, compared
to 9.2 percent in the Rest of the Country. Similarly, investment rates as proxied by R&D in Rust
Belt industries are low in the data. Moreover, direct measures of technology adoption support our
view that prominent Rust Belt industries were lagging behind. We present this evidence in more
detail in Section 8.




                                                  23
6.3. Sensitivity Analysis

We next present several sensitivity analyses. We begin by looking at how the model’s predicted
employment share decline of the Rust Belt varies with different targets for the elasticity of sub-
stitution. We consider the range of σ running from 2.4 to 3, which is centered around the most
conservative estimates in Broda and Weinstein (2006). For brevity, we describe our results here but
present them in more detail in Appendix Table 8. We find that when the elasticity is set to 2.4, the
Rust Belt’s employment share drops by 10.6 percentage points, compared to 11.4 in the benchmark
calibration. With a higher elasticity of 3, the Rust Belt loses 12.2 percentage points. The intuition
for why a larger σ implies a larger decline is that a higher elasticity, for a given differential in
productivity growth, leads households to substitute away from Rust Belt goods more aggressively.
We conclude that within a plausible range of σ , the model accounts for between 62 percent to 72
percent of the Rust Belt’s decline, similar to our benchmark exercise.

The second sensitivity analysis is over the parameter γ , which controls the curvature of the in-
vestment cost function and which is the major factor impacting the share of output devoted to
investment. We consider two alternative parameterizations that target investment shares of 8 per-
cent and 9 percent, respectively, rather than the 8.5 percent target from the benchmark experiment.
In these parameterizations, we maintain the 2 percent steady-state growth target – which requires a
change in c̄ – and fix φ , µ , β , λ , and σ at their baseline values. The Rust Belt’s employment share
falls 9.1 percentage points when investment share is 8 percent, compared to the 11.4 percentage
points in the benchmark. When we instead target a 9 percent investment-to-output ratio, the Rust
Belt looses 14.6 percentage points. The higher investment rate leads to a sharper decline of the
Rust Belt since holding up innovation now leads to lower relative productivity growth. For either
of these alternative targets, the model accounts for half or more of the actual decline.

6.4. Interaction Effects of Output Market and Labor Market Competition

Our mechanism emphasizes the joint impact of non-competitive rents in output markets and the
union’s ability to hold up the firm as two different aspects of the Rust Belt’s decline. In order to
illustrate the effect of each one individually, we conduct three counterfactual experiments. What
we find is that both effects are central in accounting for the data.

Table 2 reports the results. In the first row, we reproduce the employment decline, markups,
and wage premia from the benchmark parameterization. In the second row, we cut the union’s
bargaining power in half and leave all the other parameters unchanged. Since Rust Belt producers
are now relatively unencumbered by the labor unions, there is less hold up, and the employment
share decline is just 4.2 percentage points. The union’s wage premium is counterfactually low,


                                                  24
                              Table 2: Counterfactual Experiments
                                    Decline                Markup                  Wage Premium
                                  (percentage
Experiment                           points)           1950-85      2000        1950-85         2000
Benchmark                             11.4              32%          26%         12.0%          2.0%
Low bargaining power (β )              4.2              35%          24%          6.5%          1.0%
Low monopoly power (µ )               11.2              21%          19%          7.9%          1.5%
Low monopoly power
  + match wage premium                19.7              18%          19%          12%            2%


however, at just 6.5 percent. In the third row, we restore the union’s bargaining power but reduce the
Rust Belt producer’s market power instead. The employment decline is similar to our benchmark
calibration, but both the markups and wage premia are counterfactually low. With fewer rents on
the table, Rust Belt producers are more sensitive to the union’s ability to hold up sunk investments.
They innovate a lot less for precisely this reason. The corresponding lack of productivity growth
further diminishes the producers’ rents and labor unions fail to obtain much in the form of wage
premia.

Finally, in the last row we check if we can generate the observed union wage premia when rents are
more scarce. Like in the previous experiment we cut the producers’ monopoly power in half and
give the union enough bargaining power to generate the same wage premia as in the benchmark
(12 percent for 1950-85 and 2 percent for 2000). Particularly in the earlier period, the union’s
strong bargaining position dampens the Rust Belt producers’ appetitive for innovation and the
employment decline exceeds the observed drop in the data.

The experiments in Table 2 illustrate key interaction effects between competitive pressure in prod-
uct and labor markets. A significant lack of competition in both of these markets is required to
generate empirically plausible Rust Belt markups and wage premia.

6.5. Stochastic Version

In both the model and the quantitative exercises so far the economy is populated by agents with
perfect foresight. To assess how restrictive this assumption is, we solve a stochastic version of the
model. In particular, rather than paths specifying the extent of labor and output market competition,
the state of the economy follows a Markov process. In this version of the model, θ = (β , µ ) takes
on one of three values. Formally, θt ∈ {θH , θL , θC }, where θH represents a high-distortion state, θL


                                                  25
represents a low-distortion state, and θC has the same competition in product and labor markets as
the Rest of the Country.

The transition from one state to another is governed by the following transition matrix.


                                      θH                 θL            θC

                          θH         1−ε                 ε              0
                          θL           0             1−ε                ε
                          θC           0                 0              1


We place some restrictions on this matrix to keep it parsimonious and to ensure that competitive
pressure increases over time in the Rust Belt. From either the high-distortion or low-distortion
states, with probability ε the economy transitions to the symmetric competitive state, which is
absorbing. With probability 1− ε the economy stays in the same state. All other model components
remain the same.

The corresponding Bellman equation for a Rest of the Country producer is:
                                   n                                     h            io
                 VS (ZS ; θ ) = max ΠS (ZS , XS ; θ ) − I(xS , ZS ) + δ E VS ZS ; θ ′    ,       (10)
                                xS


where the expectation is over θ ′ , tomorrow’s state of competition.

Analogously, the Rust Belt producer’s Bellman equation is given by:
                              n                                            h             io
            VR (ZR ; θ ) = max (1 − β )ΠR(ZR , XR ; θ ) − I(xR , ZR ) + δ E VR ZR′ ; θ ′     .   (11)
                           xR


We solve for the Bellman equations as functions of the exogenous states and then simulate an
economy that starts off in state θH in 1950. The economy remains in this state until 1985, when
it shifts to state θL , and remains there. The values for the parameters β and µ are chosen to target
markups and wage premia, as before. The remainder of the calibration strategy is unaffected by
the switch to an imperfect foresight environment.

The evolution of the Rust Belt’s employment share in this version of the model is quite similar
to the deterministic case, with the exception that there is a small, discrete increase in the Rust
Belt’s employment share in 1985, which stems from the discrete reallocation of employment into
the Rust Best associated with the shift in market power and hence limit prices. Overall, the Rust
Belt declines by 10.3 percentage points in this version, compared to 11.2 percentage points in the
benchmark model.

                                                    26
7. Extension with Forward-Looking Union
This section modifies the model by replacing the static labor-bargaining model with a forward-
looking union that maximizes the present discounted value of its wage premia. As before, we
assume that the union is unable to commit to future actions, and that the union and firm bargain
after the firm’s investment is made. However, now we assume that the union takes into account
how its actions today impact its future returns. We parameterize this version of the model to match
the same targets as before, and then compare the model’s predictions to those of the previous
(stochastic) version of our model. We find that the Rust Belt’s employment-share decline in this
version is identical to that of the model with the static union.

7.1. Environment

Each period, the union proposes to receive a fraction bt ∈ (0, 1) of the period profits in the form
of a wage premium, and the firm either accepts or rejects the proposal. If the firm accepts the
proposal, the union and firm split the profits with shares bt and 1 − bt . If the firm rejects the
proposal, the union holds a strike. With (exogenous) probability βt the strike succeeds, and no
output is produced in period t. With probability 1 − βt the strike fails, in which case workers earn
only the competitive wage.

Letting Rt be the rents (wage premia) that the union receives at date t, the union prefers higher
values of                                    ∞
                                               ∑ δ t Rt ,                                          (12)
                                               t=0

where Rt depends on bt and other variables of the model. To illustrate how bt affects Rt , consider
an offer bt > βt . By accepting the offer, the firm earns a fraction less than 1 − βt of the period
profits. By rejecting the offer, the firm (in expectation) earns a fraction 1 − βt of the surplus, since
with probability 1 − βt the firm earns the whole surplus, and with probability βt the firm earns
nothing. Thus, the firm will always reject any offer bt > βt . By a similar line of reasoning, the firm
will always accept an offer bt ≤ βt .

The union may choose to propose bt strictly less than βt if doing so induces sufficiently high
investment by the firm that the higher future wage premia more than offsets the lower current
premium. Thus, the union may choose a sequence of bt ’s such that bt < βt for some periods t. If
so, then the decline of the Rust Belt generated by this version of the model would be lower than if
the union chose bt = βt in every t.

To assess the predictions of this model, we assign parameter values to match the same targets as
in the benchmark model, including the same targets for markups and wage premia. The union


                                                  27
chooses a state-contingent policy for its choice b. Formally, for a given endogenous state ZR ≡
(zR , z̃R , z˜S ), exogenous state θ , and given policy functions xR (ZR , θ ) and xS (ZS , θ ), we solve for a
policy function b(ZR , θ ). The Bellman Equation for the union’s problem can be written as
                                          n                        h            io
                                                                        ′     ′
                        VU (ZR ; θ ) = max bπ̃R (ZR , XR, θ ) + δ E VU ZR ; θ                             (13)
                                       b≤β


where the expectation E[·] is over realizations of θ ′ , and where the investment policy function
xR (zR , Z, θ ) by the Rust Belt takes as given the union’s policy function.

An equilibrium of this model consists of value functions and policy functions for (1) the union,
(2) the Rust Belt firms, and (3) the Rest-of-the-Country firms, such that (1), (2) and (3) solve their
problem taking the others’ policy rules as given, markets clear, and expectations are correct.

7.2. Quantitative Results

We begin by considering the same parameter values as in the benchmark model, and the same
policy experiment as the stochastic version of the model, which begins the economy in the high-
distortions state, θH , and moves to the low distortion state, θL , in 1985. One can think of the drop
in βt in 1985 as representing an exogenous decline in the probability that a strike will be successful;
this is consistent with Figure 3, which shows that strikes fell substantially at that time.

Our main finding is that the Rust Belt’s employment-share decline is identical to that of the bench-
mark model. The reason is that the the union always chooses bt = βt in this version, and the value
for β is the same as in the previous model. Thus, the hold-up is equally strong in this model as in
the benchmark model, and the quantitative predictions are the same.

To get some insight into when the forward-looking union may choose bt < βt , we conduct two
alternative quantitative experiments. In both experiments we set βt = 1 for all t, so that the union is
unconstrained by its choice of the share of current profits it should receive. In the first experiment,
we reduce ε , the expected probability of moving to the low-distortion state, to 0.01. This simulates
an environment where all parties expect the high distortions in output markets to be in place for a
long time. One may expect that this will give unions a stronger incentive not to take too much of
current profits, since by doing so they reduce future profits (and hence their future wage premia).
We find that lower ε is not enough for the union to exercise restraint: in this case the union proposes
bt = 1 each period. The reason is that the high markups imply high profits each period even when
the union takes all of the profits and the firm does not invest at all.

In the second alternative experiment, we increase φ , the catch-up parameter of the fringe, to φ = 1,
and we reduce the monopoly distortion to µ = 0. With these changes, the Rust Belt firms face


                                                      28
strong competition from the fringe each period, and must invest in order to earn any profits. In
other words, the escape-competition effect is particularly strong. Knowing this, the union takes
into consideration that the current-period profits are highly dependent on the firm’s investment,
and hence highly dependent on the union’s chosen share of the surplus. One may expect that the
unions choose a lower share in this case. Indeed, we find that the union proposes a 40-60 split, on
average over the time period. Since the producers accept any b ∈ [0, 1] in equilibrium, this means
that unions appropriate roughly 40 percent of the period profits and the firms keep the remainder.17
The reason is that, when competition in output markets is high, unions reduce the extent to which
they hold up the firm, since by holding up the firm they substantially reduce their own rents.

In conclusion, this extended model shows that when unions are given the option to exercise re-
straint, they do so only when output-market competition is strong enough. In contrast, when out-
put market competition is low, as in the benchmark parameterization of the model, unions find it in
their best interest to hold up the firm even if that chokes off investment. Thus, this extended model
paints a more nuanced picture of the interactions between competition in output markets and labor
markets. Our quantitive experiments here suggest that competition in output markets is a strong
complementary force to competition in labor markets.


8. Supporting Evidence
In this section we present additional evidence supporting the model’s predictions. We first discuss
some direct evidence that expenditures on research and development (R&D) were relatively low in
some important Rust Belt industries. Second, we show that technology adoption lagged in these
same Rust Belt industries. Finally, we look at evidence from the cross section of U.S. cities, and
show that cities that payed the highest wage premiums in 1950 tended to have the lowest employ-
ment growth from 1950 to 2000. This evidence supports our theory that a lack of competition and
low innovation played an important role in the decline of the Rust Belt.

8.1. R&D Expenditures

The first piece of evidence we consider is on R&D expenditures by industry. Expenditures on
R&D provides a nice example of costly investments that are taken to improve productivity, as in
the model. Evidence from the 1970s suggests that R&D expenditures were lower in key Rust Belt
industries, in particular steel, automobile and rubber manufacturing, than in other manufacturing
  17 Moreover,   the union’s proposal is (weakly) increasing in ε . When the economy is more likely to be in a more
competitive state (with fewer rents) tomorrow, the unions have stronger incentives to appropriate a large share of
today’s returns. In the extreme, when the economy transitions to the competitive state with certainty, then unions
choose bt = βt .



                                                       29
industries. According to a study by the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment (1980), the average
manufacturing industry had R&D expenditures totaling 2.5 percent of total sales in the 1970s.
The highest rates were in communications equipment, aircraft and parts, and office and computing
equipment, with R&D representing 15.2 percent, 12.4 percent and 11.6 percent of total sales,
respectively. Auto manufacturing, rubber and plastics manufacturing, and “ferrous metals,” which
includes steelmaking, had R&D expenditures of just 2.1 percent, 1.2 percent and 0.4 percent of
total sales.

8.2. Technology Adoption

Another proxy for productivity-enhancing investment activity is the rate of adoption of new tech-
nologies. For the U.S. steel industry before 1980, the majority of which was in the Rust Belt, there
is a strong consensus that adoption rates of the most important technologies lagged far behind
where they could have been. The two most important new technologies of the decades following
the end of WWII were the basic oxygen furnace (BOF) and the continuous casting method. Even
though U.S. steel producers had ample opportunity to adopt these technologies, they nonetheless
were laggards in adopting them (Adams and Brock, 1995; Adams and Dirlam, 1966; Lynn, 1981;
Oster, 1982; Tiffany, 1988; Warren, 2001).18

The view that technology adoption in the U.S. steel industry was inefficiently low is in fact con-
firmed by the producers themselves. In its 1980 annual report, the American Iron and Steel Institute
(representing the vertically integrated U.S. producers) admits that:

       Inadequate capital formation in any industry produces meager gains in productiv-
       ity, upward pressure on prices, sluggish job creation, and faltering economic growth.
       These effects have been magnified in the steel industry. Inadequate capital formation ...
       has prevented adequate replacement and modernization of steelmaking facilities, thus
       hobbling the industry’s productivity and efficiency (American Iron and Steel Institute,
       1980).

Similar evidence can be found for the rubber and automobile manufacturing industries. In rubber
manufacturing, Rajan, Volpin, and Zingales (2000) and French (1991) argue that U.S. tire man-
ufacturers missed out on the single most important innovation of the postwar period, which was
the radial tire, adopting only when it was too late (in the mid 1980s). The big innovator of the
   18 For example Lynn (1981) states that “the Americans appear to have had more opportunities to adopt the BOF

than the Japanese when the technology was relatively new. The U.S. steelmakers, however, did not exploit their
opportunities as frequently as the Japanese.” In continuous casting, adoption rates lagged as well. Only 15 percent
of U.S. steel capacity by 1978 involved continuous casting, compared to 51 percent in Japan, 41 percent in Italy, 38
percent in Germany, and 28 percent in France.


                                                        30
radial tire was (the French firm) Michelin (in the 1950s and 1960s). According to French (1991),
most of the U.S. rubber tire producers hadn’t adopted radials even by the 1970s, even as Michelin
drastically increased its U.S. market share. In auto manufacturing, the sluggish rate of technology
adoption is widely acknowledged by industry historians and insiders, such as Adams and Brock
(1995), Ingrassia (2011) and Vlasic (2011).

8.3. Cross Section of U.S. Cities

In this section, we look beneath the surface of the regional aggregates focused on until now, and
consider the cross-section of Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) within the United States. What
we find is that MSAs that had the lowest employment growth over the period 1950 to 2000 tended
to be those that paid workers the highest wage premiums in 1950.

The data we use for this analysis are the decennial census micro data from IPUMS. The unit of
geography is the MSA, which corresponds roughly to a city plus its surrounding suburbs. We
report MSA-level statistics for all MSAs in the country that are above a certain size threshold
(determined by the Census Bureau), usually around 100,000 people. We also focus attention on
3-digit MSAs as defined by IPUMS, as these have changed definition relatively infrequently over
time. We restrict the sample to all workers who report being primarily wage earners, as opposed
to the self-employed, and only those employed in the private sector.19

We construct our measures of wage premiums as follows. As is standard, we assume that under
competition, a worker’s wage should be proportional to her human capital. Following the tradition
of Mincer, we assume that a worker’s human capital is a function of her schooling and potential
work experience. We build on these assumptions by letting a worker’s wage depend on where
they live, with some regions offering a larger payment per unit of human capital than others. In
particular, we assume that the log hourly wage of worker i in region m is

                                                      4                        M
                                                                        j
                  log wi,m = α · SCHOOLi,m + ∑ β j · EX PERi,m +              ∑ Dm · πm + εi,m                  (14)
                                                     j=1                      m=1


where SCHOOLi,m and EX PERi,m represent years of schooling and potential experience, Dm is a
dummy for residing in region m, and εi,m is an error term. The coefficients α and β1 through β4
capture the returns to schooling and experience while the πm terms capture the “premium” that a
worker earns for living in region m controlling for schooling and experience. We estimate (14)
  19 Our results in this section corroborate the earlier results of Borjas and Ramey (2000), who document that indus-
tries paying the highest wage premiums in 1959 had the lowest employment growth through 1989. As many of the
high-wage industries in their study (e.g. autos and steel) were concentrated in the high-wage MSAs of our study (e.g
Detroit and Pittsburgh), we conclude that both sets of evidence are consistent with the basic prediction of the model.



                                                           31
                    6.0
                                                     ORL
                                                                    PHX       RAL
                                                    AUS
     Employment Growth 1950 to 2000



                                                                  GRB
                                                     TAM                 ATL SDG             SJO
                                                                        CHT
                            4.0




                                                                                 SLC          SAC
                                                   GNA                  DAL ABQ
                                                             NSV              DEN    HOU
                                                    COM     LTL
                                                            SAT MIACHR
                                                                    NOR           WAS
                                                                                BAT      KAL
                                                JCK               JSV MAD                  GRR TAC  SEA
                                                           AUG MOB      STO
                                                                        SCR   FRE       MININD
                                                                                        TUL
                                                  MNTLUB      ATCRCMCHO
                                                                    ELP
                                                                      WICHAR CLB
                                                                       OKC        GRN  SAG PTV
                                                                                             FTW
                                                    WAC                                        LNG
              2.0




                                                                  SHV
                                                                LAN  ASHYOR        SYR
                                                                      KNX
                                                                        LIN
                                                                        LIN
                                                                          CDR            RCFWLM
                                                             MEMCOR           OMA KAN HAM  GALLOS
                                                                                                SPO
                                                                                                  RCH
                                                    SAV          BRK       AMRSXF  DES
                                                                                    LUI         DAY
                                                                   PORNOL ROA REA      ALT
                                                                                      ALL       BEA  JCS
                                                         CLM                      BAL
                                                                                    CIN
                                                                                   PEO   TEREVA AKR
                                                                                        STL
                                                                       TOP BIR
                                                                            PRO  MUN
                                                                                  ALB
                                                                                               MIL
                                                                                               TOLRAC
                                                                                     JOH CAN CLE DET
                                                                            UTI
                                                                              ERE
                                                                            DEC       PHIBNG
                                                                                          TRE
                                                                    WIF         BOSSPH              CHI  SOB
                                                                                      SIXDAV
                                                                                    DUL
                                                                       SPR   PUE         HRT  PIT
   0.0




                                                                                        BUF      WARSFR
                                                                MAN
                                                                                           BRG
                                                                                        NHANYO FLI
                                                                           WOR

                                      −0.4                 −0.2                 0.0                0.2           0.4
                                                                        Wage Premium in 1950


                                             Figure 5: Wage Premiums and Employment Growth across MSAs

using the IPUMS micro data from 1950, and take the πm terms as our measure of wage premiums
by MSA.

Figure 5 shows the wage premium in 1950 (normalized to 0) plotted against the annualized growth
in employment from 1950 to 2000. Rust Belt MSAs are displayed in black, while the rest are grey.
As can be seen in the figure, there is a negative correlation between the two variables, with regions
with the highest premiums in 1950 tending to have the worst subsequent employment growth. The
correlation coefficient is -0.44, and is significant at well below the 1-percent level. Among the
MSAs with the highest wage premiums are South Bend, IN (SOB), Detroit, MI (DET), Jackson,
MI (JCS), Chicago-Gary-Lake, IL (CHI), Pittsburgh, PA (PIT), Youngstown-Warren, OH (WAR),
and Flint, MI (FLI). Each of these MSAs was home in 1950 to a major manufacturing center in the
automobile or steel industries.20
  20 One  potential alternative theory of the wage premiums in the Rust Belt is that workers there tended to be of
higher-than-average ability. This could be the case, say, if talented workers in the 1950s tended to be attracted dis-
proportionately to the Rust Belt regions because labor markets there were strong at the time. One piece of evidence
against this hypothesis is that workers in industries common in the Rust Belt tended to suffer some of the largest wage


                                                                              32
9. Conclusion
This study documents four facts about the decline of the Rust Belt: (1) the slow and persistent de-
cay of its employment share beginning in 1950, (2), its significant wage premium, (3), its relatively
low labor productivity growth rate, and (4), a large change in all of these pattern beginning around
the 1980s. To interpret these facts we develop a model economy that features limited competition
in Rust Belt output markets and the conflicted labor relations between labor and management that
characterized the region’s industries for decades. We find that lack of competition was an impor-
tant contributing factor to the decline of the Rust Belt, and that the increase in competitive pressure
around the 1980s accounts for the large change in the pattern of the decay in the Rust Belt employ-
ment share at that time. In our model, the decline of the Rust Belt reflects interactions between
output-market competition and labor-market competition that led Rust Belt producers to innovate
at a relatively low rate, and in turn fostered a shift of economic activity to the rest of the country.

The substantial loss of Rust Belt employment raises the important question of why management
and labor were not able to develop a more efficient way of sharing the rents in Rust Belt industries
in order to stem employment loss. Our model predicts that the Rust Belt’s employment losses
would not have been as high had unions and firms been able to commit to long-term agreements.
In reality, there are a number of unique factors characterizing Rust Belt labor relations that likely
contributed to the inability of these players to commit in the long term. Specifically, as noted
by former UAW President Bob King, labor conflict and mistrust characterized these industries
for decades. Management often refused to cooperate with organized labor by providing them
with information on profitability and industry health that was not accessible in public records.
One possibility is that asymmetric information prevented the two parties from committing long
term. Future research should further analyze the role of bargaining between workers and firms on
innovation and productivity growth.




losses in percent terms after a (plausibly) exogenous displacement, compared to workers in other industries (Car-
rington and Zaman, 1994; Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan, 1993). Carrington and Zaman (1994) find that displaced
workers in the typical industry lost about 10 percent of their pre-displacement wage when moving to a new job. In
contrast, workers in the “primary metal manufacturing” industry lost around 26 percent of their wages, and workers in
“transport equipment manufacturing” and “rubber and plastics manufacturing” lost around 20 percent.

                                                        33
References
ACEMOGLU , D.,   AND    U. A KCIGIT (2011): “Intellectual Property Rights Policy, Competition and
  Innovation,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1), 1–42.

ACEMOGLU , D., U. A KCIGIT, N. B LOOM ,       AND   W. K ERR (2013): “Innovation, Reallocation and
  Growth,” Unpublished Manuscript, MIT.

ACEMOGLU , D., AND J. ROBINSON (2013): Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity,
 and Poverty. Crown Business.

ACIKGOZ , O. T., AND B. K AYMAK (2014): “The Rising Skill Premium and Deunionization,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 63, 37–50.

A DAMS , W.,   AND   J. B ROCK (eds.) (1995): The Structure of American Industry. Prentice-Hall,
  Inc.

A DAMS , W.,   AND   J. B. D IRLAM (1966): “Big Steel, Invention, and Innovation,” Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 80(2), 167–189.

AGHION , P., U. A KCIGIT,     AND   P. H OWITT (2014): “What Do We Learn From Schumpeterian
  Growth Theory?,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 2B,
  pp. 515–563.

AGHION , P., N. B LOOM , R. B LUNDELL , R. G RIFFITH ,      AND   P. H OWITT (2005): “Competition
  and Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 701–
  728.

A MERICAN I RON AND S TEEL I NSTITUTE (1980): “Steel at the Crossroads: The American Steel
  Industry in the 1980s,” .

B ERNDT, E. R., A. F. F RIEDLAENDER ,     AND   J. S.-E. W. C HIANG (1990): “Interdependent Pric-
  ing and Markup Behavior: An Empirical Analysis of GM, Ford and Chrysler,” NBER Working
  Paper No. 3396.

B LANCHARD , O., AND L. K ATZ (1992): “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 1992(1).

B LOOM , N., M. D RACA ,    AND   J. VAN R EENEN (2011): “Trade Induced Technical Change? The
  Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity,” NBER Working Paper 16717.



                                                 34
B ORJAS , G. J., AND V. A. R AMEY (1995): “Wage Inequality and Trade,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 110, 1075–1110.

          (2000): “Market Responses to Interinustry Wage Differentials,” NBER Working Paper
  7799.

B RIDGMAN , B. (2011): “Competition, Work Rules and Productivity,” Unpublished Manuscript,
  Bureau of Economic Analysis.

B RODA , C.,   AND   D. W EINSTEIN (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121(2).

BUERA , F. J., AND J. P. K ABOSKI (2008): “Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change Fit the
 Data?,” Journal of the European Economic Association.

C ARRINGTON , W., AND A. Z AMAN (1994): “Interindustry Variation in the Costs of Job Displace-
  ment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 12(2), 243–275.

C OLE , H. L., AND L. E. O HANIAN (2004): “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
  Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 779–816.

C OLE , H. L., L. H. O HANIAN , A. R IASCOS ,        AND   J. A. S CHMITZ J R . (2005): “Latin America
  in the Rearview Mirror,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52.

C OLLARD -W EXLER , A., AND J. D E L OECKER (2012): “Reallocation and Technology: Reallo-
  cation and Technology: Evidence from the U.S. Steel Industry,” Unpublished Manuscript, New
  York University.

C ORRADO , C., C. H ULTEN ,       AND   D. S ICHEL (2005): “Measuring Capital and Technology: An
  Expanded Framework,” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy, pp. 11–46. National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

C RANDALL , R. W. (1981): The U.S. Steel Industry in Recurrent Crisis. Brookings Institution
  Press.

D INLERSOZ , E.,     AND   J. G REENWOOD (2012): “The Rise and Fall of Unions in the U.S.,” Unpub-
  lished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

D INLERSOZ , E., J. G REENWOOD ,        AND   H. H YATT (2014): “Who do Unions Target? Unionization
  over the Life-Cycle of U.S. Businesses,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

D UNNE , T., S. K LIMEK , AND J. A. S CHMITZ (2010): “Competition and Productivity: Evidence
  from the Post WWII U.S. Cement Industry,” Unpublished Manuscript, U.S. Census Bureau.

                                                    35
FARBER , H., AND B. W ESTERN (2001): “Accounting for the Decline of Unions in the Private
  Sector, 1973-1998,” Journal of Labor Research, 22(3), 459–485.

F EYRER , J., B. S ACERDOTE ,   AND   A. D. S TERN (2007): “Did the Rust Belt Become Shiny? A
  Study of Cities and Counties That Lost Steel and Auto Jobs in the 1980s,” Brookings-Wharton
  Papers on Urban Affairs, pp. 41–102.

F REEMAN , R. B., AND S. N ICKELL (1988): “Labour Market Institutions and Economic Perfor-
   mance,” Economic Policy, 3(6), 63–80.

F RENCH , M. J. (1991): The U.S. Tire Industry. Twayne Publishers, Boston.

F USS , M., AND L. WAVERMAN (1991): “Productivity Growth in the Motor Vehicle Industry,
   1970-1984: A Comparison of Canada, Japan, and the United States,” in Productivity Growth in
  Japan and the United States, ed. by C. Hulten, pp. 85–108. University of Chicago Press.

G LAESER , E. L., AND G. A. P ONZETTO (2007): “Did the Death of Distance Hurt Detroit and
  Help New York?,” Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University.

G OLDFIELD , M. (1987): The Decline of Organized Labor in the United States. The University of
  Chicago Press, Chicago.

H ERRENDORF, B., R. ROGERSON , AND A. VALENTINYI (2014): “Growth and Structural Trans-
  formation,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf, vol. 2B.
  Elsevier.

H ERRENDORF, B., AND A. T EIXEIRA (2011): “Barriers to Entry and Development,” International
  Economic Review, 52(2), 573–602.

H OGAN , W. T. (1971): Economic History of the Iron and Steel Industry in the United States,
  vol. 4. Lexington Books, D.C. Heath and Company.

H OLMES , T. J. (1998): “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence
  from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(4), 667–705.

H OLMES , T. J., D. K. L EVINE ,      AND   J. A. S CHMITZ (2012): “Monopoly and the Incentive
  to Innovate When Adoption Involves Switchover Disruptions,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 4(3), 1–33.

H OLMES , T. J., AND J. A. S CHMITZ (2010): “Competition and Productivity: A Review of Evi-
  dence,” Annual Review of Economics, 2, 619–642.


                                                 36
H UDSON , R., AND D. S ADLER (1989): The International Steel Industry: Restructuring, State
  Policies, and Localities. Routledge.

I NGRASSIA , P. (2011): Crash Course. Random House, New York.

JACOBSON , L. S., R. J. L ALONDE , AND D. G. S ULLIVAN (1993): “Earnings Losses of Displaced
  Workers,” American Economic Review, 83(4), 685–709.

K AHN , M. E. (1999): “The Silver Lining of the Rust Belt Manufacturing Decline,” Journal of
  Urban Economics, 46, 360–376.

K LIER , T. H. (2009): “From Tail Fins to Hybrids: How Detroit Lost its Dominance of the U.S.
  Auto Market,” Economic Perspectives, 30(2), 2–13.

L IEBERMAN , M. B.,      AND   D. R. J OHNSON (1999): “Comparative Productivity of Japanese and
  U.S. Steel Producers, 1958-1993,” Japan and the World Economy, 11, 1–27.

LYNN , L. (1981): “New Data on the Diffusion of the Basic Oxygen Furnace in the U.S. and Japan,”
  Journal of Industrial Economics, 30(123-135).

M C G RATTAN , E. R. (2012): “Transition to FDI Openness: Reconciling Theory and Evidence,”
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(4), 437–458.

M C G RATTAN , E. R., AND L. E. O HANIAN (2010): “Does Neoclassical Theory Account for the
  Effects of Big Fiscal Shocks? Evicence From World War II,” International Economic Review,
  51(2), 509–532.

M C G RATTAN , E. R., AND E. C. P RESCOTT (2010): “Technology Capital and the U.S. Current
  Account,” American Economic Review, 100(4), 1493–1522.

N GAI , R. L., AND C. A. P ISSARIDES (2007): “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of
  Growth,” American Economic Review, 97(1).

N ORSWORTHY, J., AND D. H. M ALMQUIST (1983): “Input Measurement and Productivity
  Growth in Japnese and U.S. Manufacturing,” American Economic Review, 73(5), 947–967.

O STER , S. (1982): “The Diffusion of Innovation among Steel Firms: The Basic Oxygen Furnace,”
  Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1), 45–56.

PARENTE , S. L.,   AND   E. C. P RESCOTT (1999): “Monopoly Rights: A Barrier to Riches,” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 89(5), 1216–1233.



                                                 37
PAVCNIK , N. (2002): “Trade Liberalization, Exit and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from
  Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245–276.

P ETERS , M. (2013): “Heterogeneous Mark-Ups, Growth and Endogenous Misallocation,” Unpub-
  lished Manuscript, London School of Economics.

R AJAN , R. G., P. VOLPIN ,   AND   L. Z INGALES (2000): “The Eclipse of the U.S. Tire Industry,” in
  Mergers and Productivity, ed. by S. N. Kaplan, pp. 51–92. University of Chicago Press.

R APPAPORT, J. (2007): “Moving to Nice Weather,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37,
  375–398.

R EDER , M. W. (1988): “The Rise and Fall of Unions: The Public Sector and the Private,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 2(2), 89–110.

RUGGLES , S. J., T. A LEXANDER , K. G ENADEK , R. G OEKEN , M. S CHROEDER , AND M. S OBEK
 (2010): “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0,” [Machine-readable database].
 Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

S CHMITZ , J. A. (2005): “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic Recovery
   of the U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following Their Early 1980s Crisis,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 113(3), 582–625.

S YVERSON , C. (2011): “What Determines Productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2),
   326–365.

TASCHEREAU -D UMOUCHEL , M. (2012): “The Union Threat,” Unpublished Manuscript, The
  Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.

T IFFANY, P. A. (1988): The Decline of American Steel. Oxford University Press.

U.S. BUREAU    OF   L ABOR S TATISTICS (1975): “BLS Bulletin 1370-12, Employment and Earn-
  ings, States and Areas 1939-1975,” U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. O FFICE OF T ECHNOLOGY A SSESSMENT (1980): “Technology and Steel Industry Com-
  petiveness,” U.S. Government Printing Office.

V LASIC , B. (2011): Once Upon a Car: The Fall and Resurrection of America’s Big Three Auto
  Makers–GM, Ford, and Chrysler. Harper Collins.

WARREN , K. (2001): Big Steel: The First Century of the United States Steel Company, 1901-2001.
 University of Pittsburgh Press.

                                                  38
YOON , C. (2012): “The Decline of the Rust Belt: A Dynamic Spatial Equilibrium Analysis,”
 Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.



                        Appendix (for Online Publication)

A. Computational Procedure
We solve the dynamic program using a piecewise linear value function with interpolation and
multi-grid value function iteration. Since an individual producer takes the policies of all other
producers as given, we nest the various value function iterations appropriately.

We initiate the computational procedure by solving the producers’ problem in the (absorbing)
competitive state. Since the economy is symmetric with respect to Rust Belt and Rest-of-Country
producers, we can characterize the equilibrium technology investment x along the balanced growth
path as the solution to a single non-linear equation. In the perfect foresight version of the model,
the economy transitions to this stationary state in a finite number of periods and we denote the
corresponding calendar year by T . For this reason, the entire dynamic program is stationary.

Characterizing the dynamic equilibrium along the unbalanced growth path is computationally
more challenging. To illustrate the procedure, we describe the solution algorithm for a single
iteration in the sequence of Bellman equations indexed by t ∈ {1950, 1955, . . ., T }. In particular,
let us consider the procedure when the economy when the economy is in (βT −5 , µT −5 ) (that is, the
last period before the economy reaches the balanced growth path).

It is computationally convenient to exploit a scale invariance property of the model. What matters
is the productivity of an individual producer i relative to all other producers in the economy, and
not the absolute level z(i). We express all productivities – idiosyncratic and aggregate – relative to
the Rest of the Country producers and organize the state space on grid with N points. Moreover,
let i index the idiosyncratic productivities and j does the same for the productivities of all other
producers in the economy.

With this in mind, let us consider the problem of an individual Rust Belt producer with productivity
zR (i) when all other Rust Belt producers use the technology z̃R ( j) and the productivity of all ROC
producers is z̃S ( j). In general, ˜ denotes states and policies of a producer’s peers.

To begin with, the producers using the technologies z̃R ( j) and z̃S ( j) make technology investments
according to their respective policy
                                                         state (βT , µT ). Let this initial policy of all
                                          functions in the
                             0   z̃R ( j)
the Rust Belt producers be x̃R z̃ ( j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5 . Given next period’s value function, denoted
                                   S




                                                    39
by VR (·;βT , µT ), an individual Rust     Belt producer makes a profit-maximizing technology invest-
          zR ( j) z̃R ( j)
ment x z̃ ( j) , z̃ ( j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5 that depends on the idiosyncratic and aggregate states of the
           S        S
economy. We compute this investment for each pair (i, j) ∈ {1, . . ., N} × {1, . . . , N}.

Next, we update the policy functions of i’s peer producers in the Rust Belt. For each (i, j), their
technology investment is given by:
                                                                                                              
              z̃R (i)
   x̃1R                                         = λ x zz̃R(( j)j) , z̃z̃R(( j)j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5 + (1 − λ )x̃0R z̃z̃R(( j)j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5
                                                                                                                                                   
              z̃S ( j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5                  S           S                                               S


Note that the update assumes individual producers have not, in the past,
                                                                      deviated from the symmet-
                                                                                          
                                                                                                              zR ( j)
ric equilibrium. That is, for all (i, j), the “innovation” is given by x                                      z̃S ( j) , ·, ·; βT−5 , µT −5    rather
                                  
        zR (i)
then x z̃ ( j) , ·, ·; βT−5 , µT −5 .
                S

We then iterate to convergence over x̃n−1      n
                                      R and x̃R , for n ∈ {1, 2, . . .}. Since VR (·; βT , µT ) is piecewise
linear, we have to anticipate the possibility that the iteration over the policy functions may not
converge in the neighborhood of a kink (i.e. a grid point). Whenever such a trap emerges, we add
a grid point to the state space in a way that smoothes the value function locally and we update the
dimensions of all other policy and value functions analogously.21 Once the policy functions have
converged we compute the value function VR0 (·; βT−5 , µT −5 ).

Next, we solve the problem of a producer
                                        in the Rest ofthe Country. Importantly, the initial policy
                                                            z̃ (i)
function of all other producers x̃0S z̃ R( j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5 takes into account the Rust Belt produc-
                                       S
ers’ investment choices from the previous
                                                   step. An individual  Rest of the Country producer’s
                                           zS (i) z̃R ( j)
investment decision is denoted by x z̃ ( j) , z̃ ( j) , 1; βT −5 , µT −5 and the iteration to convergence
                                                                   S       S
over policy functions is analogous to the procedure for Rust Belt producers. Once the sequence of
policies has converged, we compute VS0 (·; βT −5 , µT −5 ).

Lastly, we iterate over the Rust Belt and Rest of the Country’s producers’ problem to compute the
sequences of value functions {VRm (·; βT −5 , µT −5 ),VSm (·; βT−5 , µT −5 )}m=1,2,... until VRm (·; βT −5 , µT −5 ) =
VRm−1 (·; βT −5 , µT −5 ) and VSm (·; βT−5 , µT −5 ) = VSm−1 (·; βT −5 , µT −5 ). Put differently, we stop when
the investment decisions of the former are best responses to the latter and vice versa.

Once we have solved the dynamic program for (βT −5 , µT −5 ) we proceed in exactly the same way
                                                     T −1950
for the entire sequence {θT −5t }t=25                          .




  21 We       would like to thank Jesùs Fernandez-Villaverde for suggesting this multi-grid value function iteration.

                                                                               40
B. Appendix Tables and Figures

                           Table 5: Relative Wages of Rust Belt Workers

                                                                                 Relative Wages
                                                                             1950               2000

   Manufacturing workers                                                      1.13               1.02
   All workers                                                                1.17               1.01
   Full-time workers                                                          1.17               1.04
   All Workers + more detailed race controls                                  1.16               1.03
   All Workers + more detailed race & schooling controls                      1.14               1.00

   Note: Relative Wages are defined as one plus the coefficient in a Mincer-type log-wage regression of
   a dummy variable taking the value of 1 for workers living in the Rust Belt, and 0 otherwise, interacted
   with years 1950 and 2000. The controls in the regression are educational attainment dummies, a quartic
   polynomial in potential experience, and dummies for full-time status, immigrant status, nonwhite status,
   sex, year, and year X Rust Belt interaction terms.




                                                     41
       1.2
       1.15
Relative Wage
      1.1
       1.05
       1




                1950         1960           1970          1980          1990     2000

                                              Model              Data



                       Figure 6: Wage Premium of the Rust Belt: Model and Data




                                                   42
       Table 6: Labor Productivity Growth in Rust Belt Industries, Expanded Definition
                                                                       Annualized Growth Rate, %
                                                                 1958-1985     1986-1997    1958-1997
 Blast furnaces, steelworks, mills                                  0.9           7.6           2.8
 Construction and material handling machines                        0.9           2.1           1.3
 Engines and turbines                                               2.3           2.8           2.5
 Farm machinery and equipment                                       1.7           2.3           1.9
 Iron and steel foundries                                           1.5           2.3           1.7
 Leather products, except footwear                                  2.3           1.4           2.0
 Leather tanning and finishing                                      0.7           4.5           1.8
 Machinery, except electrical, n.e.c                                1.0           1.5           1.2
 Metal forgings and stampings                                       1.5           2.8           1.9
 Metalworking machinery                                             0.9           3.5           1.6
 Misc. fabricated metal products                                    1.1           1.7           1.3
 Misc. paper and pulp products                                      2.6           1.9           2.4
 Misc. plastics products                                            3.2           2.8           3.1
 Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment                         2.5           3.8           2.9
 Office and accounting machines                                     4.8          −1.3           3.1
 Other primary metal industries                                    −1.9           7.5           0.8
 Other rubber products, plastics, footwear & belting                2.7           2.0           2.5
 Paints, varnishes, and related products                            3.2           2.2           2.9
 Photographic equipment and supplies                                4.8           5.1           4.9
 Pottery and related products                                       0.7          −1.0           0.2
 Railroad locomotives and equipment                                 1.6           3.0           2.0
 Screw machine products                                             1.3           1.1           1.2
 Sugar and confectionary products                                   3.4           3.1           3.3
 Rust Belt, Expanded Definition weighted average                    2.1           2.9           2.3
 Manufacturing weighted average                                     2.6           3.2           2.8
Note: Rust Belt Industries, Expanded Definition are defined as industries whose employment shares in the Rust
Belt region are more than one-half standard deviation above than the industry mean. Labor Productivity Growth is
measured as the growth rate of real value added per worker. Rust Belt weighted average is the employment-weighted
average productivity growth rate for Rust Belt industries under the expanded definition. Manufacturing weighted
average is the employment-weighted average growth over all manufacturing industries. Source: Author’s calculations
using NBER CES productivity database, U.S. census data from IPUMS, and the BLS.




                                                       43
           Table 7: Sensitivity Analysis to Investment-to-Output Ratio
Investment / GDP                                      8.0%             8.5%              9%

Rust Belt Employment-Share Decline                     9.1              11.4             14.6
ROC Markup                                           17.5%            18.0%             18.5%
Rust Belt Markup 1950-1985                           32.1%            32.0%             31.6%
Rust Belt Markup 2000                                24.0%            24.0%             23.8%
Wage Premium 1950-1985                               12.1%            12.0%             11.9%
Wage Premium 2000                                     2.0%             2.0%             1.9%
Note: Rust Belt Employment-Share Decline is the percentage point decline in the share of manu-
facturing employment in the Rust Belt. Wage Premium in the Rust Belt is the model’s relative wage
of Rust Belt workers to other workers between 1950 and 1980.




               Table 8: Sensitivity Analysis to Elasticity of Substitution
             Substitution Elasticity Rust Belt Employment-Share Decline

             σ = 2.4                                         10.6
             σ = 2.7 (benchmark)                             11.4
             σ = 3.0                                         12.2
              Note: Rust Belt Employment-Share Decline is the percentage point
              decline in the share of manufacturing employment in the Rust Belt.




                                               44
