NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER TREATMENT USE ON CRIME:
EVIDENCE FROM PUBLIC INSURANCE EXPANSIONS AND HEALTH INSURANCE PARITY MANDATES
Hefei Wen
Jason M. Hockenberry
Janet R. Cummings
Working Paper 20537
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20537
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We appreciate helpful comments on earlier drafts of this work from Chad Meyerhoefer, Sara Markowitz,
Alison Cuellar, as well as participants at the 2014 ASHEcon Fifth Biennial Conference and the 2013
AcademyHealth's Annual Research Meeting, and seminar participants at Emory University. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hefei Wen, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Substance Use Disorder Treatment Use on Crime: Evidence from Public Insurance
Expansions and Health Insurance Parity Mandates
Hefei Wen, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings
NBER Working Paper No. 20537
October 2014
JEL No. I11,I13,K14,K42
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of increasing the substance use disorder (SUD) treatment rate on reducing violent
and property crime rates, based on county-level panels of SUD treatment and crime data between 2001
and 2008 across the United States. To address the potential endogeneity of the SUD treatment rate
with respect to crime rate, we exploit the exogenous variation in the SUD treatment rate induced by
two state-level policies, namely insurance expansions under the Health Insurance Flexibility and
Accountability (HIFA) waivers and parity mandates for SUD treatment. Once we address the endogeneity
issue, we are able to demonstrate an economically meaningful reduction in the rates of robbery,
aggravated assault and larceny theft attributable to an increased SUD treatment rate. A back-of-theenvelope calculation shows that a 10 percent relative increase in the SUD treatment rate at an average
cost of $1.6 billion yields a crime reduction benefit of $2.5 billion to $4.8 billion. Our findings suggest
that expanding insurance coverage and benefits for SUD treatment is an effective policy lever to
improve treatment use, and the improved SUD treatment use can effectively and cost-effectively
promote public safety through crime reduction.
Hefei Wen
Emory University
Department of Health Management
and Policy
1518 Clifton Rd
Atlanta GA, 30322
hwen2@emory.edu
Jason M. Hockenberry
Department of Health Policy and Management
Rollins School of Public Health
Emory University
1518 Clifton Rd
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
jason.hockenberry@emory.edu

Janet R. Cummings
Emory University
Department of Health Policy
and Management
1518 Clifton Rd
Atlanta GA, 30322
jrcummi@emory.edu

“Punishment is the last and the least effective instrument in the hands of the legislator for the
prevention of crime.”
~ John Ruskin (1819-1900)

1. Introduction
Substance use and crime are two of the most intractable social ills facing the United
States, and they are inextricably linked. A positive correlation between substance use and crime
has been observed in arrestee drug test results and inmate drug reports. Among arrestees who
were booked on violent or property crimes, one in every four tested positive for illicit drug use at
the time of arrest (ONDCP 2012). Moreover, among prison inmates charged with violent crimes,
52 percent reported being under the influence of alcohol or drugs when committing the crime, or
committing the crime to acquire money to purchase drugs; among those charged with property
crimes, this number is 39 percent (Miller, Levy et al. 2006).
To the extent that this observed correlation involves causality running from substance use
to crime, interventions to reduce substance use should also reduce crime. Nonetheless, empirical
evidence suggests that punitive approaches to substance control such as prohibition and the “war
on drugs” have not led to significant crime reduction (Miron 1999; Kuziemko and Levitt 2004;
Markowitz 2005)1.

1

Miron (1999) used a century-long time-series trend of the U.S. national homicide rate from 1900 to
1995, and demonstrated that alcohol and drug prohibition was positively associated with homicide rate
and accounted for half of the variation in the homicide rate. The author further proposed a “violence-asdispute-resolution” hypothesis that prohibition enforcement encouraged the substitution of violent for
nonviolent dispute resolution in illegal markets. Kuziemko and Levitt (2001) used state-level crime data
between 1980 and 2000, and demonstrated that a 15-fold increase in drug-offense incarceration during the
study period reduced total crime rate by no more than 3%. A back-of-the envelope estimate suggested that
locking up drug offenders crowded out the criminals with higher marginal risks of recidivism, therefore
investment in drug-offense incarceration was unlikely cost-effective. Markowitz (2005) used individuallevel victimization surveys in the early 1990s, and demonstrated that higher beer taxes and higher cocaine
prices only slightly lowered the probability of assault and robbery victimizations. These findings raised
questions on the “war on drugs” into which limited resources were diverted away from other crime
prevention programs.
1

In this paper we explore an area that has garnered relatively little attention in the
economic literature on crime reduction, namely treatment for substance use disorder (SUD). We
examine the effect of increasing the local SUD treatment rate on reducing violent and property
crime rates based on county-level panels of SUD treatment and crime data between 2001 and
2008 across the United States. A major empirical concern in examining this relationship is that
the local SUD treatment rate is potentially endogenous to crime rates. To address this concern we
exploit the exogenous variation in the local SUD treatment rate induced by two state-level
policies which expanded health insurance coverage for those with SUD. These two policies are
the Health Insurance Flexibility and Accountability (HIFA) waivers (CMS 2001) and parity
mandates for SUD treatment (SAMHSA 2006). The IV estimates reveal that an increase in the
SUD treatment rate leads to an economically meaningful reduction in the rates of specific types
of crimes (i.e., robbery, aggravated assault and larceny theft) for which theory suggests an
increase in the SUD treatment rate should have an effect.
This study has implications for both public safety policy and health policy. Previous
studies of the economic benefits of SUD treatment have often emphasized the direct health
returns on treatment through recovery from addiction and the related productivity gains (Belenko
et al. 2005). We instead focus on the public finance aspects of SUD treatment and crime
reduction. Our estimates demonstrate a benefit-cost ratio of 1.6 to 3.0, that is, a 10 percent
relative increase in the SUD treatment rate at an average cost of $1.6 billion yields a crime
reduction benefit of $2.5 billion to $4.8 billion. This downstream benefit to public safety
represents a sizable fraction of returns on SUD treatment. Specifically, as the U.S. criminal
justice system scales back mandatory minimum sentences for low-level drug and other minor

2

offenders who may also be substance users, replacing incarceration with better access to SUD
treatment can be a cost-effective investment in public safety.
Furthermore, the first stage of our IV estimation is of interest in its own right. It provides
previously undocumented evidence of a significant increase in the SUD treatment rate arising
from public insurance expansions. This has direct relevance to the current health care reform
discussions surrounding insurance expansion and “mainstreaming” of SUD treatment2. The
Affordable Care Act (ACA) is expected to substantially expand insurance coverage. Much of this
expansion will occur through Medicaid and in the health insurance exchanges, and will include
coverage for those with SUDs who are also in the age groups more likely to commit these
crimes. Because many SUD treatment services are classified as an “Essential Health Benefit”,
they must be offered by plans in the health insurance exchanges and offered at parity with
medical/surgical benefits. In addition, those with SUDs are recognized as a “medically frail”
population for which a broad range of evidence-based treatment services should be available and
fully covered under Medicaid (Beronio, Glied, and Frank 2014)3. We show that previous policies

2

SUD treatment has been predominantly provided in a separate specialty setting and operated as an
independent part of the overall health care system. Under the current health care reform, incentives to
create better integrated, person-centered health care hold the potential for integrating SUD treatment into
the mainstream behavioral and general health care systems. Community mental health centers (CMHCs),
which already provide some specialty SUD treatment, may be motivated by financial incentives to
provide more comprehensive community-based SUD treatment. Non-specialty providers, such as health
centers with the focus on primary care delivery, are also uniquely positioned to respond to the increased
demand for SUD treatment arising from insurance expansion and parity legislation, and thereby become
another major source of integrated care (Buck 2011).

3

Although it is expected that demand for SUD treatment would increase as a result of insurance
expansions under the ACA, the current system’s capacity to supply SUD treatment may not suffice to
meet the increased demand. Some supply-side barriers, for instance, are workforce shortage with
declining number of training programs and graduates, lack of infrastructure and resources distributed to
minority communities and rural areas, the reluctance of providers to accept Medicaid and other insurance
for which the reimbursement rate is relatively low, and the challenge with the federal-state-local
partnership in financing and delivery SUD treatment (Mechanic 2014; Cummings et al. 2014; Bishop et
al. 2014). Therefore, expanding supply-side capacity may also be necessary and critical for the increased
3

that expanded insurance coverage and benefits people with SUDs increases their treatment use,
and that doing so led to a cost-effective public health approach to crime reduction.
2. Background
2.1 Theories of Substance Use, SUD Treatment and Crime
Contemporary criminological theories suggest that substance use is one of the root causes
of crime. The most cited criminological theory on this causal relationship is Goldstein’s (2003)
tripartite model, in which three hypotheses are provided to explain how substance use causes
violent and property crimes. First, the pharmacological hypothesis states that violence may occur
as a direct result of the intoxication. Intoxication of certain substances may trigger aggression
and lead to violent offenses, or alternatively inhibit vigilance and result in victimization. Second,
the economic motivation hypothesis states that substance users and addicts commit incomegenerating crimes to finance their substance use habits. Economic motivation is particularly
pronounced among young people and those with low income from legal activities. The third
hypothesis, the institutional hypothesis, states that being involved in an illegal drug market can
expose one to an increased risk of criminal offense and victimization: crime may arise when a
drug buyer robs a dealer of the drugs, when a drug dealer collects debts, and when rival drug
gangs dispute over territories or compete for monopolistic power (Goldstein 2003).
A systematic review of three-decade long literature concludes that, for all three
hypotheses Goldstein proposed, empirical support exists, yet causal interpretations are difficult
to make (Bennett, Holloway et al. 2008). Unobserved third factors, whether they be personal,
situational, or environmental (e.g., low self-control, early-life trauma, social inequality, as well
demand for SUD treatment arising from the ACA expansions to be fully realized. However, this is outside
the purview of this study.
4

as poverty and other forms of social deprivation), may be the underlying causes of both
substance use and crime. Nonetheless, to the extent that substance use is on the causal pathway
to crime, SUD treatment should have the potential not only to reduce substance use but also to
reduce crime.
Though motivated by the intuition of Goldstein’s tripartite model, our theoretical
framework draws more directly upon Becker’s rational choice model of crime (Becker 1968).
Based on Becker’s model, we specify the following structural relationship between substance use
and crime:
Crimei,j,t = f(Substance Use i,j,t , Substance Use i’,j,t , Law Enforcement j,t , X1 i,,j,t , X2 i’,,j,t , Z1 j,t )

(1)

In the structural equation, criminal offense or victimization is a function of the substance
use by the potential perpetrator Substance Use
Substance Use

i’,j,t

i,j,t

, the substance use by the potential victim

, the law enforcement resources Law Enforcement j,t, the other observed and

unobserved individual factors associated with the propensity for criminal offense X1 i,,j,t and the
propensity for criminal victimization X2 i’,,j,t , as well as the observed and unobserved contextual
factors Z1 j,t that help create or limit opportunities for crime.
Instead of estimating a structural relationship between substance use and crime, this
paper estimates a reduced-form relationship between SUD treatment and crime. We derive the
reduced-form equation by expressing the original terms of the substance use by the perpetrator
and the victim as a function relating their substance use to SUD treatment:
Substance Use i,j,t = f(SUD Treatment i,j,t , Law Enforcement j,t , X3 i,,j,t , Z2 j,t )

(2)

Substance Use i’,j,t = f(SUD Treatment i’,j,t , Law Enforcement j,t , X4 i',,j,t , Z2 j,t )

(3)

where substance use by the potential perpetrator Substance Use i,j,t and by the potential
victim Substance Use i’,j,t is a function of SUD treatment use SUD Treatment j,t, the law enforcement
resources Law Enforcement j,t, the other observed and unobserved individual factors of the
5

perpetrator and the victim X3 i,,j,t and X4 i’,,j,t that are associated with the propensity for substance
use, as well as the observed and unobserved contextual factors Z2 j,t that help create or limit the
opportunities for substance use.
Substituting Equations (2) and (3) into the structural equation of crime Equation (1), we obtain
the following reduced-form equation:
Crimei,j,t = f(SUD Treatment i,j,t , SUD Treatment i’,j,t , Law Enforcement j,t , X1 i,,j,t , X2 i’,,j,t , X3 i,,j,t , X4 i’,,j,t , Z1 j,t , Z2 j,t) (4)

There is limited availability of individual person-level representative data that capture
SUD treatment use and criminal behavior. An alternative to individual-level analysis is to
estimate the aggregate effect of SUD treatment on crime:
Crime

Rate

j,t

=

f(SUD

Treatment

Rate

j,t

,

Law

Enforcement

Level

j,t

,

Zj,t

)

(5)

where the local aggregated rate of crimes Crime Rate

j,t

is a function of the local

aggregated rate of SUD treatment use SUD Treatment Rate j,t, the local aggregated leve of law
enforcement resources Law Enforcement Level j,t, and other aggregated factors that are correlated
with both the SUD treatment rate and crime rate.
Our study estimates the reduced-form effect of increasing SUD treatment use on reducing
crimes. Although we cannot explicitly estimate substance use, we assume that this reduced-form
effect of increasing SUD treatment use on reducing crime comes mainly from the reduction in
substance use. While our approach does not provide a direct estimate of the amount of crime that
arises from more substance use problems, it provides a direct answer to the policy question of
how much crime would be reduced by higher level of SUD treatment use. The estimated crime
reduction effect of increasing SUD treatment use can, in turn, be used in comparison to other
crime-reduction policies on a cost-benefit basis.
6

As shown in Equations (1) to (4), both treatment and enforcement can be potential
strategies to reduce substance use and crime. With respect to the crime-reduction effect of
enforcement, existing evidence has suggested that enforcement may neither be an effective nor a
cost-effective strategy.
First, enforcement may not effectively raise the prices of substances beyond the short
term. Although some enforcement shocks may create temporary increases in the prices, their
long-term equilibrium effect on price is at best modest (Caulkins Reuter 1998). Second, the
effectiveness of enforcement can be further limited by the inelastic demand for substance use. A
key insight from Becker and Murphy’s (1988) model of rational addiction is that “adjacent
complementarity” can make a rational substance user unresponsive to a temporary price increase,
even a large spike (Becker and Murphy 1988, 1991)4. The degree of price elasticity may even be
lower if time-inconsistent, present-bias preferences for substance use are taken into account
(Gruber and Koszegi 2001, O'Donoghue and Rabin 1999)5. Third, even if we assume
enforcement can increase the equilibrium price of substances and reduces substance use, at the
margin enforcement may still cost more than they save. For instance, punitive approaches would
impose direct costs on the criminal justice system, and a potential negative spillover into public
4

According to the B-M model, “adjacent complementary” or reinforcement means that the addictive
goods/bads consumed in different time periods are complements. Because of the complementarity of
addictive consumption across time, an increase in the addictive stock increases the marginal utility of
current addictive consumption, which in turn, increases the future utility. Therefore, as Becker and
Murphy (1991) point out, “[since temporary police crackdowns on drugs] raises current but not future
prices … [and it] would even lower future prices if drug inventories are built up during a crackdown
period, there is no complementary fall in current use from a fall in future use. Consequently, even if drug
addicts are rational, a temporary war that greatly raised street prices of drugs may well have only a small
effect on drug use.” (Becker and Murphy 1991, pp. 241)
5

According to the G-K model, the self-control problem in impulsive consumption is characterized by a
relatively high discounting rate over short horizons compared to the discounting rate over long horizons,
which introduce a “time inconsistency” between the present and future preferences and a “present bias” to
dynamic decision making. Under this time-inconsistency assumption, the demand for substance use with
respect to a temporary price increase would be lower than under the B-M framework of rational, timeconsistent addiction.
7

safety costs due to an increased violence in illegal markets; the direct criminal justice costs and
the spillover public safety costs are unlikely to be offset by the savings in health care costs and
the costs of productivity losses related to substance use (Donohue, Ewing and Peloquin 2001;
Miron 1999)6. Given the limited effect of enforcement on the equilibrium price of substances, the
inelasitic demand for substance use in response to price increases, and the relatively high costs
directly imposed on criminal justice and spilling over onto public safety, Becker, Murphy, and
Grossman (2006) conclude that the current level of enforcement may far surpass the socially
optimal level7.
As an alternative to enforcement, SUD treatment is better able to reduce substance use at
much lower cost, therefore more effectively and cost-effectively reducing crime. After three
decades of advances in the science of the human brain (Leshner 1999, McLellan et al. 2000),
contemporary neurobiology research recognizes addiction as a chronic disease of brain reward
centers and ties clinical phenomena of the disease to specific neuronal mechanisms and
pathological processes (Dackis and O'Brien 2005; Everitt and Robbins 2005; Kalivas and
Volkow 2005). This deeper understanding of the nature of substance use and addiction has led to
the development of SUD treatment services based on scientific knowledge and empirical
evidence. These evidence-based services combine pharmacotherapies (e.g., medications such as
naltrexone for alcohol use, methadone and buprenorphine for opioid use, etc.) with cognitive
behavioral interventions, integrate medical treatment with support services (e.g., ancillary mental
health services, housing assistance, social skill development, mentoring and peer support, etc.),
6

In addition to the negative externalities on public safety, equity concerns have been raised, as racial
profiling in arrests, prosecutions, and incarcerations may take a disproportionately heavy toll on racial
minorities (Banks 2003, Bobo and Thompson 2006, Fellner 2009).

7

As such it is difficult to justify the current drug war regime from the perspective of social welfare
maximization, unless the justification is based on interest group power rather than social welfare
considerations (Becker, Murphy and Grossman 2006).
8

and are tailored to individual needs (Leshner 1999). There is now clear evidence for the
effectiveness of the SUD treatment: as longitudinal studies have shown, 40 to 60 percent of the
clients who received recovery/rehabilitation-oriented SUD treatment are continuously abstinent
from substance use, and an additional 15 to 30 percent have not resumed abuse or dependent use
at follow-up one-year after treatment (McLellan et al. 2000). Furthermore, these effective
services can be provided at a relatively low marginal cost and with relatively small negative
externalities8.
Another advantage of SUD treatment over enforcement is that the inelastic demand for
substance use may render the marginal enforcement inefficient, but would not affect the
efficiency of SUD treatment. In fact, expanded treatment may help increase the price elasticity of
demand for substance use and improve the efficiency of enforcement. By alleviating the
reinforcement effect of substance use, SUD treatment can reduce the degree of adjacent
complementary between the marginal utility of current addictive consumption and future utility.
SUD treatment can also serve as a pre-commitment device to address the self-control problem,
thereby reducing the degree of time inconsistency in demand for substance use (McLellan 1996,
Ainslie and Monterosso 2003). Lower degrees of adjacent complementary and time
inconsistency result in a higher degree of price elasticity of demand for substance use, which in
turn may improve the efficiency of the existing level of enforcement as discussed earlier
(Becker, Murphy, and Grossman 2006).
2.2. Literature on SUD Treatment and Crime Reduction

8

There are “Not In My Back Yard” (i.e., NIMBY) concerns that the development of a SUD treatment
facility in a community may reduce residential property value and bring an influx of non-locals that
threaten community cohesion and place a strain on public resources. Yet, there is no empirical evidence
for these claims.
9

Despite those appealing advantage of SUD treatment over enforcement in reducing
substance use and crime, this area has garnered relatively little attention in the economic
literature on crime reduction. Only a limited number of studies in the clinical and criminological
literature have examined the crime reduction effect of SUD treatment use, and most of them have
relied on individual-level self-reported crime data among substance users receiving SUD
treatment. According to one of the most comprehensive meta-analyses covering empirical studies
between 1965 and 1996, SUD treatment achieves, on average, a more than 50 percent reduction
in the individual likelihood of committing crime (Prendergast, Podus et al. 2002).
However, concerns have been raised over both internal validity and external validity of
these individual-level studies. First, selection bias may occur if those substance users who selfrefer to treatment are also more self-motivated to change their behavior during and after the
treatment process. Selection bias may also occur in coerced treatment regimes. Courts and other
law enforcement agencies are likely to “cherry-pick” offenders with less severe addictions and
less adverse life circumstances, and assign them to treatment programs in addition to or in lieu of
incarceration (Chandler, Fletcher, and Volkow 2009; Taxman, Henderson, and Belenko 2009).
The incentive for “cherry-picking” results from the linkage of funding for drug courts and
diversion programs to their success rates. Second, “regression-to-the-mean” may further bias the
positive findings if substance users tend to seek treatment when their substance use and related
consequences have reached an uncomfortable intensity. In this scenario, similar behavioral
changes may still be observed even in absence of treatment. Third, the reliability of self-reported
crime has been called into question. This is particularly true in the tails of the distribution of
criminal activity frequency: infrequent offenders tend to underreport criminal behavior and
frequent offenders tend to overstate their criminal involvement (Levitt 1996). Finally, the
10

generalizability of most individual-level studies is limited to a specific type of treatment received
by a specific group of substance users in a specific geographic area.
Our study provides the first county-level and Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA)-level
estimates for the effect of increasing the SUD treatment rate on reducing violent and property
crime rates. An aggregate-level analysis can alleviate the selection and self-reporting issues
inherent in most individual-level studies. Moreover, an aggregate-level analysis is more
generalizable and salient to policy, as it captures the population-level effect of SUD treatment
use on crime reduction.
3. Data
Our data is a panel of annual, county-level observations between 2001 and 2008. Data
sources include the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), the National Survey of Substance Abuse
Treatment Services (N-SSATS), and other nationally representative datasets that provide
supplementary information on important local-level socioeconomic and policy context.
3.1 Dependent Variable: Crime Rates
County-level crime rates (Crime Ratec,s,t) were collected annually by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI) in the UCR 2001-2008, and were calculated based on the number of
crimes reported to the police of all law enforcement agencies within each given county c over an
entire calendar year t9 (Crime Ratec,s,t: number of crimes reported to all police agencies per 1,000
residents).

9

The UCR 2001-2008 uses the following imputation procedures to deal with the missing data: the crime
data for an agency reporting 12 months were used as submitted. Data for an agency reporting 3 to 11
months were augmented by a weight of 12 divided by the number of months reported; data for an agency
reporting 1 to 2 months were imputed based on the other agencies located in the same geographic stratum
within a state and reporting 12 months of complete data. No imputation was conducted for any agency
missing data for all 12 months (Lynch and Jarvis 2008)
11

UCR county-aggregate crime data are available for the eight Part I crime categories,
namely criminal homicide, forcible rape, aggravated assault, robbery, burglary, larceny theft,
motor vehicle theft, and arson. The first four crime categories are collectively referred to as
violent crime, while the latter four as property crime10.
3.2 Primary Independent Variable: SUD treatment rate
The county-level SUD treatment rate was derived from facility-level information on
annual SUD treatment counts in the N-SSATS 2000, 2002-200811. N-SSATS covers all known
specialty SUD treatment facilities12 across the United States and achieved 92-95 percent
response rates during the study period, allowing for a nearly complete enumeration of specialty
SUD treatment services in the United States.

10

It has been well-recognized that the UCR data are the product of a set of social processes such that
some crimes become “official” and “public facts” while others do not. Legal severity, victim-offender
relationships, desires of the complainant, and the extent to which citizens and police see an incident as a
public or private matter are all criteria related to reporting (Gove, Hughes, and Greerken 1985).
Nonetheless, Gove, Hughes, and Greerken (1985) provide a strong argument that the UCR provides valid
and reliable indicators of the Part I (index) crimes, which consist of relatively severe crimes likely to pass
through the citizen and police filters and officially reported. Furthermore, if the measurement error in
UCR data is simply random noise, our estimates would still be consistent (albeit with less precision),
since crime rates are the dependent variables. To the extent that we obtain similar estimates from different
sources of variation in the data (e.g., county- or CBSA-level analysis, instrumenting with one or both
policy instruments, with or without state-specific linear trends), the measurement error is unlikely to
seriously bias our estimates (Katz, Levitt, and Shustorovich 2003).
11
Note that in 2002, the N-SSATS survey date was changed from September to March to enhance the
response rate, leaving a gap period from September 2000 to March 2001 with no data collected.
Accordingly, the annual treatment data (representing SUD treatment from April 2001 to March 2002) was
matched with the same-year annual crime data (representing reported crimes from January 2002 to
December 2002) for the year of 2002 and for each year afterward; while the 2000 treatment data
(representing SUD treatment from October 1999 to September 2000) was paired with the 2001 crime data
(representing crimes from January 2001 to December 2001).
12

Specialty SUD treatment facility, according to N-SSATS, is defined as a hospital, a residential SUD
facility, an outpatient SUD treatment facility, a mental health facility with an SUD treatment program, or
other facility with an SUD treatment program providing the following treatment services: (a) Outpatient,
inpatient, or residential/rehabilitation SUD treatment; (b) Detoxification treatment; (c) Opioid treatment
programs (OPT) such as methadone and L-α-acetyl-methadol (LAAM) maintenance; or (d) Halfway
house services that include SUD treatment.
12

All surveyed facilities were requested to report the total SUD treatment counts in the
most recent 12 months prior to the survey. N-SSATS specified that the treatment count should
only include the initial entry of a client into treatment; subsequent visits to the same service or
transfer to a different service within a single continuous course of treatment were excluded. The
facility-level treatment counts were then aggregated to each county c in each year t to determine
the county-level annual SUD treatment rate (SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t: number of SUD treatment
entries into all specialty SUD treatment facilities per 1,000 residents).
3.3 Other Controls
County-level covariates include demographic characteristics, economic conditions, and
law enforcement resources. Demographic characteristics including age distribution and
racial/ethnic composition of the population were measured as the percentage of county residents
who were (1) between the ages of 15 and 3413, (2) Black, (3) Hispanic/Latino, (4) Asian, and (5)
members of other racial/ethnic groups. Economic conditions were measured as the county’s (6)
median household income, (7) poverty rate14, and (8) unemployment rate15. Law enforcement
resources, another mechanism by which crime could potentially be deterred, were measured as
(9) the number of sworn officers per 1,000 residents16. We used both contemporaneous and one-

13

Adolescents and young adults aged 15-34 are at high risk of participating in substance use (SAMHSA
2011) and in substance-related crimes (Brame and Piquero 2003).
14

Poverty rate is calculated for the civilian noninstitutionalized population based on household income,
household size, and household composition, relative to a set of dollar value thresholds called the “federal
poverty level (FPL)”. Institutionalized persons, those in military group quarters, and those living in
college dormitories, and unrelated children under the age of 15 are excluded from the numerator and
denominator when calculating the poverty rate.
15

Unemployment rate is calculated as the number of unemployed persons (aged 16 and above) divided by
the number of persons in the labor force (aged 16 and above). The numerator and denominator do not
include institutionalized persons or those without employment who are not seeking employment.
16

Sworn officers, according to UCR, are defined as full-time, sworn personnel with full arrest powers
including the chief, sheriff or other head of the agency as of October 31.
13

year lagged values of law enforcement resources to account for the immediate and delayed effect
of their deterrence on crime (Levitt 1997). The demographic and economic measures were drawn
from the Area Health Resource File; the law enforcement measure was taken from the UCR.
Furthermore, we included contemporaneous and one-year lagged values17 of state
government expenditures in several key domains to account for the public investment that may
help reduce crime. Measures of state government expenditures include the dollar per capita
spending on: (1) education, (2) police protection and correction, (3) hospital and health, and (4)
welfare and other domains (e.g., government administration, highways, natural resources, etc.).
The information on state government expenditures was compiled by the Census Bureau from the
Annual Survey of State Government Finances. Two additional state-level measures were
included to capture other relevant changes in the state policy environment during the study
period: (5) state excise tax rates on beer18, and (6) amount of the Substance Abuse Prevention
and Treatment Block Grant (SAPTBG) allocated to states that may affect their SUD treatment
system capacity. The information on state beer tax and SAPTBG funding was compiled by the
Alcohol Policy Information System (APIS) and the Treatment Improvement Exchange (TIE)
database, respectively.
4. Estimating the Effect of the SUD treatment rate on Crime Rate Using OLS
To estimate the effect of the SUD treatment rate on crime rates, we begin with a simple
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression based on the following specification:

17

We conducted extensive checks for the lag structure of state government expenditures. One might
expect, for instance, that the expenditure on education or other prevention pathways may have a delayed
effect on crime rates, so we assessed whether spending levels two and three years prior affected crime
rates. Two- and three-year lagged values of state government expenditures were neither individually nor
jointly significant in predicting crime rates, and thus excluded from our model specifications.
18

State beer tax is defined as specific excise taxes levied per gallon at the wholesale or retail level.
14

Crime Ratec,s,t = β1 + β2 SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t + β3 X1 c,s,t + β4 X2 s,t + ρc + τt + εc,s,t

(6)

where c denotes county, s denotes state, t denotes year. ρc represents county fixed effects
and τt represents year fixed effects. The two-way (i.e., county and year) fixed effects account for
the time-invariant county heterogeneity and the national secular trend in crime rates. X1 c,s,t is a
time-varying, county-level vector of demographic, economic and law enforcement factors that
may be correlated with both the local crime rates and the local SUD treatment rate. X2 c,s,t is a
time-varying state-level vector of government expenditures on crime-related functions, beer tax
rates, and the SAPTBG funding amount. Standard errors were clustered at the state level to
correct for serial correlation. The clustered standard errors allow for arbitrary within-state
correlation in the error terms but assume independence across the states (Bertrand, Duflo et al.
2004).
Equation 5 was estimated using each Part I crime category as the dependent variable in
eight separate models. Equation 5 was also estimated for two additional models in which the
dependent variable was the sum total of the four violent crimes or four property crimes,
respectively. In theory, the crime-reduction effects of SUD treatment should be concentrated
among crimes related to substance use, and in which the substance users involved would be
likely to seek SUD treatment if available and within their budget constraint. We would therefore
expect the effect of an increased the SUD treatment rate to be concentrated in lower-level
property and violent crimes such as theft, robbery and assault, but not in crimes typically
committed by more ‘hardcore’ criminals such as homicide and rape.

15

The first two columns of Table 2 presents the OLS estimates for two analytic samples:
(1) an unbalanced panel consisting of all 23,537 non-missing observations (i.e., 3,016 counties19
over an average of 7.8 years); and (2) a balanced panel limited to 22,328 observations (i.e., 2,791
counties that had all data available over the 8-year period).
Note that the primary unit of analysis in our study is county-year. Although county is the
smallest geographic area identified in the UCR and the N-SSATS data, it may be too small to
capture the potential area where people engage in SUD treatment and crime. In this sense, the
crime-reduction effect of the increased SUD treatment rate in one county may spill over into the
neighboring counties. To check the robustness of the county-level analysis, we aggregated the
data to a higher level, the Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA) level. A CBSA is a geographic
area defined by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) based around an urban center of
at least 10,000 residents and adjacent areas that are socioeconomically tied to the urban center as
determined by commuting patterns. The term “CBSA” refers collectively to both metropolitan
statistical areas (MSAs) and micropolitan statistical areas (µSAs). We excluded the 1354 nonCBSA rural counties, which only account for 4 percent of the overall SUD treatment rate and 6
percent of the overall crime rate. We converted the remaining 1788 counties to 941 CBSAs (i.e.,
335 MSAs and 526 µSAs), and subsequently separated those CBSAs across multiple states20 to
accommodate the state-level instrumental variables we would introduce later to our analysis (see

19

The original sample includes all 3,143 counties across the U.S. 127 counties with missing data on any
study variable for at least 7 years were excluded from the analysis, resulting in the inclusion of 3,016
counties in the unbalanced panel.
20

For instance, Boston-Cambridge-Quincy is a CBSA that consists of 5 Massachusetts counties and 2
New Hampshire counties. Given that Massachusetts implemented an HIFA-waiver expansion between
2007 and 2008, while New Hampshire implemented an SUD parity mandate between 2004 and 2008, we
aggregated the 5 Massachusetts counties to a CBSA-like group, and aggregated the 2 New Hampshire
counties to another CBSA-like group.
16

Sections 5 and 6). The final CBSA-level samples thus include an unbalanced panel of 981
CBSA-like units over 7.9 years and a balanced panel of 928 CBSA-like units over 8 years.
According to the OLS estimates, the local SUD treatment rate is unrelated to most of the
local crime rates. At the county level, a statistically significant crime-reduction effect of the SUD
treatment rate was only found in the case of aggravated assault. The estimated effect size,
however, is very small: an increase in the SUD treatment rate by one per 1,000 residents only
reduced the aggravated assault rate by about 0.002 per 1,000 residents. Translating the estimated
marginal effect into percentage change and elasticity, we found that a 10 percent relative
increase in the SUD treatment rate reduced the aggravated assault rate by a relative 0.1 percent at
the county level, equivalent to a treatment-crime elasticity of -0.01. The CBSA-level estimates
are similar to the county-level estimates, except for a statistically significant reduction in the
robbery rate shown in some of the specifications. However, the effect size is even smaller for
robbery than for aggravated assault: a 10 percent relative increase in the SUD treatment rate
reduced the robbery rate by a relative 0.06 percent at the CBSA level, or a treatment-crime
elasticity of -0.006.

Neither of the naïve estimates indicates any economically meaningful

relationship between the local SUD treatment rate and crime rates.
5. HIFA-Waiver Expansions & SUD Parity Mandates: Instrumental Variables
5.1. Endogeneity of the SUD treatment rate with Respect to Crime Rates
In our OLS estimation, the effect of the local SUD treatment rate on crime rates is
identified using county and year fixed effects to isolate the within-county variations in crime
rates over time. Nonetheless, we suspect that the OLS estimates may underestimate the crimereduction effect of the SUD treatment rate for multiple reasons. First, reverse causality may exist
as higher crime rates translate back to a higher SUD treatment rate through drug courts or
17

diversion programs offered to a select group of non-violent offenders in need of treatment.
Failing to address this “structural endogeneity” may result in a downward-biased OLS
estimate21. Second, we cannot measure important variables that may be correlated both with the
SUD treatment rate and with crime rates. Some of these omitted variables, such as underlying
changes in the county-level prevalence of substance use and the fluctuations in market
factors22may affect the SUD treatment rate and crime rates in the same direction23. This
unobserved heterogeneity may also bias the OLS estimates towards the null hypothesis.
To address these modelling concerns we employ a set of instrumental variables that are
strongly related to SUD treatment, but are otherwise unrelated to crime. The instruments are two
state-level policy shocks that occurred during the 2000s, namely the Health Insurance Flexibility
and Accountability (HIFA)-waiver expansions and SUD health insurance parity mandates.
Below we provide the institutional/intuitive support for the credibility of our policy instruments.
Sections 6 and 8 proceed with the statistical evidence on the strength and validity of the
instruments.
5.2. Treatment Gap & Limited Insurance Coverage for SUD Treatment

21

The naïve solution of replacing or instrumenting the endogenous variable with its lagged form is
problematic if the error terms are in effect serial-correlated.
22

Reliable data on the market price of substances are difficult to obtain especially for illicit drugs. The
most commonly used source is the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration’s System to Retrieve
Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE) dataset. However, STRIDE prices may not represent market
prices, and are consequently not reliable for the purpose of economic and policy analysis (Horowitz
2001). As French and Popovici (2011) pointed out, “part of the difficulty here is that conventional prices
for illicit drugs are not readily available and alternative measures are not yet found.”
23

For instance, a surge in methamphetamine price as a result of a crackdown on local labs may be
correlated with an increase in the SUD treatment rate, and also correlated with an increase in crime rates:
some methamphetamine users would respond to the higher price by seeking treatment to help quit drug
use, whereas others may resort to crime to help fund their addiction.
18

An estimated 23 million Americans suffered from SUDs in 2010, of which only 11
percent received specialty SUD treatment for their condition (SAMHSA 2011). The lack of
health insurance coverage and the lack of adequate insurance benefits for SUD treatment were
cited as major financial barriers to SUD treatment among those who perceived a need for
treatment (SAMHSA 2011).
People with SUDs are overrepresented among the uninsured, largely because they are
more likely to be out of the workforce, unemployed or part-time working poor who can neither
obtain insurance through an employer-sponsored plan nor afford insurance in the individual
market (Wu, Kouzis, and Schlenger 2003). And among them, only a small proportion who meet
the “categorical eligibility” criteria24 are qualified for Medicaid coverage. Left uninsured, those
with SUDs are unable to get access to the treatment they need.
While the lack of health insurance coverage may pose financial barriers to SUD treatment
for the uninsured, those covered by private health insurance can also face financial barriers due
to the inadequate insurance benefits for SUD treatment. Although benefits for SUD treatment are
typically covered by private health insurance, discriminatory restrictions are often imposed on
these SUD benefits. In 2008, SUD benefits in more than 80 percent of private health plans were
subject to higher cost sharing or more treatment limitations than benefits for comparable
medical/surgical treatment (BLS 2009).
24

As a means-tested health insurance program for the most vulnerable populations in society, Medicaid
traditionally covered only certain categories of families and individuals. Childless adults without
disabilities were not eligible for Medicaid in most states regardless of their income level. The income
eligibility threshold for adult members of poor families was much higher than the threshold for their
dependent children. During the early 2000s, the national median income threshold for an adult from a
low-income family was 60% of the FPL; in over 20 states the threshold was lower than 50% of the FPL
(KFF 2013). Furthermore, a substance user who is disabled may still be deemed ineligible for Medicaid if
his/her disability was solely caused by substance use (KFF 2013). The expansions of Medicaid eligibility
during the late 1980s and the 1990s were largely targeted at children from low-income families and
pregnant women, thus having little impact on SUD treatment use among the adult population.
19

During the past decade, two sets of state-level policies have significantly reduced the
financial barriers to SUD treatment and consequently increased the SUD treatment rate. These
are the Health Insurance Flexibility and Accountability (HIFA)-waiver expansions and SUD
parity mandates.
5.3. Insurance Expansions under HIFA Waivers
The Health Insurance Flexibility and Accountability (HIFA) initiative was introduced by
the Bush administration in August 2001 to encourage innovative approaches by states to
reducing the number of uninsured Americans. The HIFA initiative enables states to apply for
waivers that provide a high level of policy flexibility and federal matching funds to reshape state
Medicaid programs and State Children’s Health Insurance Programs (SCHIPs) (CMS 2001).
Several states took advantage of the HIFA waivers to expand insurance coverage to people who
did not fall into the traditional welfare-based categories: low-income adults who were
nondisabled, childless, or from qualified poor families (Coughlin, et al. 2006). The expanded
income eligibility threshold varied from state to state, up to a maximum of 200% of the
FPL25(Atherly, Coulam et al. 2012).
As noted by Atherly and colleagues (2012), fifteen states received approval for HIFA
waivers between 2001 and 2008, and seven of the fifteen waiver states implemented actual and
comprehensive insurance expansions to low-income adults. Across these seven states, the authors
found that the HIFA-waiver expansions increased the probability of being insured by 6
percentage points, or a relative 13 percent among the targeted low-income adult populations
(Atherly, Coulam et al. 2012). Sommers and colleagues (2012) focused on the three “early HIFA
25

Federal matching funds were provided for all low-income adults with family incomes below up to
200% FPL if states included them in the expansion. The actual income threshold of the expanded
Medicaid eligibility is left to the state discretion.
20

states” that adopted expansions between 2001 and 2002, and found a 14 percent decrease in the
rate of financial-related delays in care attributable to the HIFA-waiver expansions (Sommers,
Baicker et al. 2012). If the HIFA-waiver expansions improved insurance coverage among lowincome adults and improved their health care use in general, they should also have the potential
for improving their use of SUD treatment.
5.4. Parity Mandates for SUD treatment
To address the discriminatory restrictions in SUD benefits in private health insurance
market, SUD parity was first introduced during the early 1980s in several states, primarily in the
South. The SUD parity mandates have since been enacted by more than half of the states. These
mandates require private group health plans26 to provide benefits for SUD treatment that are no
more restrictive than for medical/surgical treatment (SAMHSA 2006).
Between 2000 and 2008, ten states implemented SUD parity laws mandating insurance
benefits for SUD treatment to be offered on par with those for comparable medical/surgical
treatment, with respect to cost sharing (e.g., deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, and out-ofpocket expenses), treatment limitations (e.g., annual or lifetime limits on number of visits or
hospital days), or both (SAMHSA 2006). Wen and colleagues (2013) found that the
implementation of state parity mandates increased state-aggregate SUD treatment rate by a
relative 9 percent in specialty SUD treatment facilities. Dave and Mukerjee (2011) assessed a set
of broadly defined behavioral health parity laws, and they found that state implementation of a
parity mandate was associated with a reduction in uninsured admissions and out-of-pocket costs

26

Most state-level parity laws apply only to employment-based group health plans, leaving the individual
(non-employment based) health insurance market unregulated. Some parity laws also exempt small
employers with fewer than 50 or 20 employees. Moreover, the federal pre-emption by the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 does not allow state legislatures to impose health
insurance regulations on self-insured business.
21

for people treated in specialty SUD treatment facilities that received public funding. Taken
together, existing evidence on parity mandates suggests that, by requiring SUD benefits to be
offered on par with comparable medical/surgical benefits, SUD parity mandates may improve
SUD treatment use.
6. Estimating the Effect of Instrumental Variables on Endogenous SUD treatment rate
We created two state-level dichotomous indicators (HIFAs,t and Paritys,t) to capture the
implementation of HIFA-waiver expansions in four states27 (i.e., Illinois, 2003-2008; Maine,
2003-2008; New Mexico, 2006-2008; and Massachusetts 2007-2008) and the implementation of
SUD parity mandates in seven states28 (i.e., Montana 2003-2008, Rhode Island 2003-2008,
Maine 2004-2008, New Hampshire 2004-2008, Oregon 2007-2008, Wisconsin 2005-2008, and

27

Oregon in 2002 and Michigan in 2004 also expanded Medicaid programs under HIFA waivers.
However, the expansion program in Michigan, the Adult Benefits Waiver (ABW), does not cover
specialty SUD treatment. It only covers medically necessary mental health services provided through
Community Mental Health Centers. Oregon’s expansion program, the Oregon Health Plan Standard
(OHP-S) initially covered specialty SUD treatment. In response to a growing fiscal crisis and special
interest power, Oregon closed new enrollment to the OHP-S during the subsequent year and eliminated
SUD benefits for the enrollees remaining in the program. (Coughlin et al. 2006; Oberlander 2007)
Therefore Oregon and Michigan were not considered as “HIFA states” in the study.
28

“Parity states” included the states that first implemented SUD parity mandates during the study period
and those that improved the comprehensiveness of their laws during the study period. Although the parity
mandates differ in their comprehensiveness (i.e., full parity, partial parity, and parity-if-offered), we
created a single generic indicator to capture the implementation of any SUD parity mandate during the
study period regardless of its comprehensiveness and relative improvement in its comprehensiveness.
Note that among the 7 “parity states”, Wisconsin implemented parity-if-offered in 2005; Montana and
New Hampshire implemented partial parity in 2003 and 2004, respectively; West Virginia implemented
full parity in 2005; Rhode Island (2002), Maine (2003), and Oregon (2007) improved their parity
mandates from partial parity to full parity (Wen 2013). In an alternative specification, we also created
three indicators for each level of comprehensiveness of the laws, which did not significantly change the
F-statistics in the first-stage TSLS (not shown).
22

West Virginia 2005-2008). HIFAs,t and Paritys,t were assigned a value of 1 for each full year
subsequent to the year in which the legislation was first implemented or improved29.
The effect of HIFA-waiver expansions and parity mandates on the endogenous SUD
treatment rate were estimated using a two-stage least squares (TSLS) regression, based on the
following specifications of the first stage:
SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t = α1 + α2 HIFAs,t + α3 Xc,s,t + α4 Xs,t + ρc + τt + εc,s,t

(7)

SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t = α1 + α2 HIFAs,t + α3 Paritys,t + α4 Xc,s,t + α5 Xs,t + ρc + τt + εc,s,t

(8)

Equation 6 estimates the effect of HIFA-waiver expansions alone on the SUD treatment
rate, while Equation 7 estimates the effect of both instruments.30 In both models, we included ρc
and τt to adjust for the time-invariant county heterogeneity and the national secular trend. We
also included the full set of covariate vectors Xc,s,t and Xs,t to account for the time-varying countylevel and state-level confounders. Standard errors in the first stage were clustered at the state
level to correct for the serial correlation.
The bottom panel of Table 3 presents the first-stage TSLS regression estimates at the
county level for the unbalance panel (Column 1 and 2) and the balanced panel (Column 3 and 4).
The implementation of HIFA-waiver expansions alone increased the county-level SUD treatment
rate by 2.4 to 2.5 per 1,000 residents, equivalent to a relative 19 to 20 percent increase in
treatment rate. The implementation of an SUD parity mandate (when the HIFA indicator was
also included) increased the SUD treatment rate by 0.9 to 1.0 per 1,000 residents, or a relative 7

29

Note that HIFA-waiver expansions in Arizona and New York and SUD parity mandates in Kentucky,
Michigan and Delaware were implemented since 2001, which leaves almost no pre-implementation
period for these states. Thus we did not classify them as “HIFA states” or “parity states”.
30

The implementation of SUD parity mandates alone also significantly increased the SUD treatment rate.
Although individually significant at the 0.05 level, the F-statistics were only 3.7 and 5.4 for this
specification, indicating that it was a potentially weak instrument. Therefore, we did not use Paritys,t as an
instrument on its own in our main results.
23

to 8 percent increase. The F-statistics across all models exceed the critical values for Stock and
Yogo (2002) weak instrument test31.
7. Re-estimating the Effect of the SUD treatment rate on Crime Rates: Main Results
We re-estimated the effect of the SUD treatment rate on crime rates using the TSLS,
treating the SUD treatment rate as endogenous and instrumenting it with the policy indicators of
HIFA-waiver expansions and SUD parity mandates. In the second stage we replaced the
observed values of SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t in Equation 8 with its predicted values derived from
the respective first stage. The predicted values of SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t capture the exogenous
variation in the county-level treatment rate induced by the two state-level policies:
Crime Ratec,s,t = β1 + β2 SUD Treatment Ratec,s,t (Predicted) + β3 Xc,s,t + β4 Xc,s,t + ρc + τt + εc,s,t
(9)

The top panel of Table 3 presents the second-stage TSLS estimates for the county-level
crime rates when instrumenting with HIFA-waiver expansions alone (Column 1 and 3), and
when instrumenting with both policies (Column 2 and 4). The TSLS estimates suggest that a
statistically significant crime-reduction effect is present in three subcategories, namely robbery,
aggravated assault, and larceny theft. An increase in the SUD treatment rate of 1 per 1,000
residents reduced the robbery rate by 0.03 per 1,000 residents. The estimated effect is consistent
across all specifications. Moreover, an increase in the SUD treatment rate also reduced the
31

We also aggregated the data to the state level and the pre/post two-time period and re-estimated the
effect of policy instruments on the SUD treatment rate. We used Donald and Lang (2007) method coupled
with the two-step procedure described in Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2001, pp. 267) to
accommodate the different effective times of the policies. Despite such an approach being quite
restrictive, we found that the implementation of HIFA-waiver expansions alone increased the state-level
SUD treatment rate by 2.47 per 1,000 residents (S.E.=0.89, t=2.80), with an F-statistic of 7.8. When
including both policies simultaneously, the implementation of HIFA-waiver expansions increased the
treatment rate by 2.33 per 1,000 residents (S.E.=1.02, t=2.28); the implementation of SUD parity
mandates increased the SUD treatment rate by 1.73 per 1,000 residents (S.E.=0.58, t=3.01), with an Fstatistic of 6.6.
24

aggravated assault rate, with the effect size ranging from -0.1 to -0.2 per 1,000 residents. We also
found a significant reduction in property crimes, which was largely driven by a -0.4 to -0.5 per
1,000 residents estimated effect of increased SUD treatment on larceny theft.
Translating the estimated marginal effects into percentage changes, a 10 percent relative
increase in the SUD treatment rate led to a relative 3 percent reduction in the robbery rate, a
relative 4 to 9 percent reduction in the aggravated assault rate, and a relative 2 to 3 percent
reduction in the larceny theft rate. Stated another way, the treatment-crime elasticity is -0.3 for
robbery, -0.4 to -0.9 for aggravated assault, and -0.2 to -0.3 for larceny theft. The sizeable crimereduction effect of SUD treatment on robbery and aggravated assault suggests that, through
reduced substance use, SUD treatment may reduce the risk of personal violence that is likely to
occur as a result of intoxication, which corresponds to Goldstein (2003)’s pharmacological
hypothesis. The sizeable effect on robbery and larceny theft suggests that SUD treatment may
also reduce the motivation for financing substance use habits through illegal activities, which
corresponds to Goldstein (2003)’s economic motivation hypothesis.
Table 3 also contains the TSLS estimates at the CBSA level. The first stage indicates
that the policy instruments remain strong, and the crime-reduction effect of the increased SUD
treatment rate remains significant for the rate of robbery, aggravated assault, and larceny theft.
However, the effect sizes in these specifications are smaller, especially for aggravated assault
rate.
Generally the TSLS estimates are robust to the balancing of panels and the re-aggregation
of data from the county level to the CBSA level. Note, however, that the simple OLS estimates
are substantially different in magnitude from the TSLS estimates across all crime subcategories,
an indication of omitted variable bias in the OLS estimates. Moreover, the differences between
25

the OLS estimates and the TSLS estimates are larger for the subcategories of property crimes
than for those of violent crimes, which further suggests that the reverse causality from nonviolent offense to court-coerced SUD treatment may also bias the OLS estimates.
8. Checking for the Validity of the Instrumental Variables
Given the novelty of our instrumental variables and the dramatic changes from the OLS
estimates to the TSLS estimates, the validity of the instruments warrants closer scrutiny. The
number of instruments we identified allows for an overidentification test of the exclusion
restrictions. The results from these tests (not shown) lend support to the exogeneity of both
instruments with respect to crime rates of all subcategories. In addition to the overidentification
test, specifications with a series of lagged and leading policy indicators were estimated (Table 4)
to check for the policy endogeneity of our two instruments. Only the contemporaneous and
lagged policy indicators have a significant effect on the SUD treatment rate and crime rates32,
while all the leads have insignificant effects with effect sizes close to zero33. This indicates that it
is the policy shocks of HIFA-waiver expansions and SUD parity mandates that drive the changes
in the SUD treatment rate and subsequent reduction in crime rates, rather than some past shock
to the SUD treatment rate and/or crime rates leading to the adoption of the policies that expanded
health insurance coverage for those with SUD. As such, the policy instruments we use appear to
be exogenous.
To further test the validity and strength of our instruments, we added state-specific linear
time trends ρs t in both stages of the TSLS regressions to account for the unobserved state-level

32

Table 4 only presents the estimated effects on total crime rate. We also replaced the total crime rate
with the rates of eight crime subcategories and found similar results.
33

In addition to the one- and two-year leads, we also included three-year leads and more. The effects of
these leads on the SUD treatment rate and crime rates were virtually zero.
26

factors that evolve over time at a constant rate (e.g., public sentiment towards crime and
addiction). We found that in the first stage, the effect of the implementation of HIFA-waiver
expansions on the SUD treatment rate was robust to the inclusion of state-specific linear trends
(Table 5 bottom panel). With regard to the second stage, the point estimates of the effect of the
SUD treatment rate on crime rates are similar to the main results, but these effects are not
precisely estimated (Table 5 top panel).
9. Discussion
SUD treatment holds the potential not only to reduce individual substance use, but also to
promote public safety by reducing crime. One contribution of our study is that we uncovered a
heretofore unrecognized relationship between the implementation of HIFA-waiver expansions
and the increase in the SUD treatment rate. While this finding is interesting in and of itself, it
also provides a potential avenue for solving the issue of joint determination of SUD treatment
and crime that may seriously bias the simple OLS estimates towards zero. By instrumenting with
the HIFA-waiver insurance expansion policy and the SUD parity mandate, we were able to
address the endogeneity of the SUD treatment rate with respect to crime rates. We find a sizable
effect of the increased SUD treatment rate on crime reduction.
The study findings highlight that a relative 10 percent increase in the SUD treatment rate
can reduce the robbery rate by 3 percent, reduce the aggravated assault rate by 4 to 9 percent, and
reduce the larceny theft rate by 2 to 3 percent. To better understand the public policy
implications of these estimates, we further provide a speculative cost-benefit calculation.
The best available estimates of the costs of crime come from Rajkumar and French
(1997) and McCollister et al. (2010), which estimate the per-offense cost of crime across all
major crime categories. These estimated costs of crime attempt to capture the direct tangible
27

losses to crime victims and to the criminal justice system, the opportunity costs associated with
the criminal’s choice to engage in illegal rather than legal activities, as well as indirect and
intangible losses suffered by crime victims, including pain and suffering, decreased quality of
life, and psychological distress. Based on Rajkumar and French (1997) and McCollister et al.
(2010), the annual costs are roughly $15 billion to $19 billion for robbery, $8 billion to $25
billion for aggravated assault, and $65 billion to $92 billion for larceny theft (2008 dollars).
Given that the national expenditures for SUD treatment is approximately $16 billion annually
(Mark, Levit et al. 2007), a 10 percent increase in treatment rate at an average cost of $1.6 billion
can yield an average benefit of $2.5 billion to $4.8 billion from reducing crime rates. The
benefit-cost ratio of SUD treatment with respect to crime reduction ranges from 1.6 to 3.0. To
put these numbers into context, incarceration, which has been attributed to one third of the crime
decline during the 1990s, has a benefit-cost ratio centered around 1.5 (Levitt 1996; Levitt 2004).
Therefore, SUD treatment not only appears to be a more effective but also a more cost-effective
alternative to incarceration at reducing crime.34
On August 12, 2013, during a speech to the American Bar Association’s House of
Delegates in San Francisco, Attorney General Eric Holder called for a “sweeping, systemic
change” to the “ineffective and unsustainable” drug war regime. The centerpiece of Holder’s
new agenda is to scale back mandatory minimum sentences for low-level drug offenders, and to
replace incarceration with SUD prevention and treatment. Among the 700,000 inmates released
annually from federal and state jails/prisons, an estimated two thirds have behavioral health

34

A further consideration is that the preliminary cost-benefit calculation reflects the national average cost
of providing SUD treatment, rather than the marginal costs of an additional substance user entering
treatment in response to the policies aimed to improve access to care. We expect the latter to be even
lower, and we plan to conduct a more accurate cost-benefit analysis based on additional sources such as
Medicaid claim data.
28

problems including SUDs, and under the ACA more than half of those former inmates are
expected to gain health insurance coverage and access to care (Cuellar and Cheema 2012)35. Our
study findings suggest that expanding insurance coverage and benefits for SUD treatment is an
effective policy lever to encourage treatment use, and a higher level of SUD treatment use can
cost-effectively reduce crime.

35

Cuellar and Cheema (2012) estimated that 730,000 inmates were released from federal and state prisons
during 2009; among them 245,000 could enroll in Medicaid under the ACA expansion, and 172,000
could be eligible for federal tax credits to defray the cost of purchasing insurance from the exchanges.
Furthermore, the combination of Medicaid coverage and the receipt of behavioral health services
including SUD treatment is shown to be associated with a 16 percent reduction in recidivism rate and
fewer jail days in the one-year follow-up period, according to a study on inmates with serious mental
illness released from jails in King County, Washington and Pinellas County, Florida (Morrissey et al.
2007). The positive findings, however, may be upward biased by the selection issue we mentioned in
Section 2.2.
29

TABLE 1. SUMMARY STATISTICS OF THE STUDY VARIABLES
County-Level
Mean (S.D.)

CBSA-Level
Mean (S.D.)

DEPENDENT VARIABLES:
Total Crime Rate (per 1,000 residents)
Violent Crime
Criminal Homicide
Forcible Rape
Robbery
Aggravated Assault
Property Crime
Burglary
Larceny Theft
Motor Vehicle Theft
Arson

40.11 (17.80)
4.93 (3.36)
0.06 (0.06)
0.36 (0.37)
1.51 (1.41)
3.01 (2.06)
35.18 (15.45)
7.44 (3.83)
23.40 (10.19)
4.08 (3.29)
0.25 (0.21)

41.42 (13.80)
4.85 (2.49)
0.05 (0.04)
0.38 (0.29)
1.37 (1.00)
3.05 (1.69)
36.56 (12.35)
7.82 (3.33)
24.40 (8.55)
4.08 (2.65)
0.27 (0.19)

PRIMARY INDEPENDENT VARIABLE:
SUD Treatment Rate (per 1,000 residents)

12.81 (10.24)

13.15 (8.49)

27.71 (3.99)
12.78 (13.26)
13.91 (15.76)
4.32 (5.62)
2.74 (4.01)
47.94 (12.88)
12.56 (5.05)
5.14 (1.95)
2.33 (2.54)

27.96 (3.61)
10.72 (10.27)
15.15 (16.86)
4.14 (5.75)
2.97 (4.09)
46.73 (10.08)
12.76 (4.30)
5.23 (2.00)
2.61 (2.02)

15.43
1.83
3.24
22.62
0.23
5.52

15.52
1.83
3.26
22.44
0.24
5.57

Summary Statistics

COVARIATES:
County Demographics, Economics, & Enforcement:
% Age 15-34
% African/Black
% Hispanic/Latino
% Asian
% Other Racial/Ethnic Origins
$ Median Family Income ($1,000)
% Poverty
% Unemployment
% Sworn Officers
State Government Expenditures ($1,000 per capita):
$ Education
$ Police Protection & Correction
$ Health & Hospital
$ Welfare & Other Domains
$ State Beer Excise Tax Rates ($ per gallon)
$ State SAPTBG Funding ($ per capita)
30

(3.20)
(0.44)
(1.22)
(6.44)
(0.16)
(0.78)

(3.28)
(0.45)
(1.24)
(6.23)
(0.17)
(0.84)

TABLE 2. ESTIMATED EFFECT OF SUD TREATMENT RATE ON COUNTY- & CBSA-LEVEL CRIME RATES: OLS RESULTS
County-Level
Unbalanced Panel
Balanced Panel
(1)
(2)
DEPENDENT VARIABLES: Crime Rates per 1,000 residents

OLS Estimates

Violent Crime
Criminal Homicide
Forcible Rape
Robbery
Aggravated Assault

CBSA-Level
Unbalanced Panel
Balanced Panel
(3)
(4)

-0.002* (0.001)

-0.003* (0.001)

-0.002*

-7.98e-7 (5.64e-5)

-4.75e-5 (4.78e-5)

-1.14e-4 (7.50e-5)

-9.96e-5 (7.20e-5)

-2.05e-4 (1.43e-4)

-2.64e-4 (1.80e-4)

-2.25e-4 (1.94e-4)

-2.47e-4 (1.95-4)

-1.83e-4 (1.48e-4)

-1.23e-4 (1.73e-4)

-6.75e-4* (2.76e-4)

-6.52e-4* (2.76e-4)

-0.002† (0.001)

-0.002† (0.001)

-0.001

(0.001)

-0.001

(0.001)

0.002

-0.003

(0.01)

-0.004

(0.01)

-5

-3.22e

2.27e-5 (1.13e-4)

1.09e-4 (1.30e-4)

-6.46e-5 (1.87e-4)

-2.71e-5 (1.97e-4)

# Observations

23,537

22,328

7,790

7,419

6.98e

-4

(0.001)

-4

-3.46e

9.86e

4.40e-4 (0.005)

-0.002

-4

(0.001)

-4

(0.002)

6.99e

2.21e-4 (0.004)

(0.006)

-0.002† (0.001)

Property Crime
Burglary
Larceny Theft
Motor Vehicle Theft
Arson

-5

(0.006)

(0.001)

7.79e

-4

(8.63e )

5.10e

-5

(0.003)

-7.04e

(0.008)

-0.003

-4

(8.84e )

Note: † p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001; Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level.

31

-5

1.45e

-5

(2.65e-5)
(0.008)
(8.66e-4)

TABLE 3. ESTIMATED EFFECT OF SUD TREATMENT RATE ON COUNTY- & CBSA-LEVEL CRIME RATES: TSLS RESULTS
County-Level
Unbalanced Panel
Balanced Panel
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
DEPENDENT VARIABLES: Crime Rates per 1,000 residents
-0.14†
-0.13*
-0.24*
-0.21*
Violent Crime Rates
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.10)
0.0002
0.001
0.0006
0.001
Criminal Homicide
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.01
-0.01
-0.005
-0.02
Forcible Rape
(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.03)
†
*
†
-0.03
-0.03
-0.04
-0.03†
Robbery
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
*
†
*
-0.12
-0.10
-0.16†
-0.18
Aggravated Assault
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.09)
(0.09)
TSLS Estimates

CBSA-Level
Unbalanced Panel
Balanced Panel
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.11
(0.09)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.01
(0.06)
-0.03*
(0.01)
-0.08†
(0.05)

-0.09†
(0.05)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.006
(0.04)
-0.03*
(0.01)
-0.06
(0.04)

-0.14*
(0.05)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.02†
(0.01)
-0.02*
(0.01)
-0.08*
(0.04)

-0.12*
(0.04)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.02
(0.01)
-0.02*
(0.01)
-0.07*
(0.04)

-0.52
(0.34)
-0.03
(0.06)
-0.43†
(0.26)
-0.06
(0.06)
-0.004
(0.005)

-0.58†
(0.35)
-0.05
(0.07)
-0.46†
(0.27)
-0.07
(0.05)
-0.005
(0.006)

-0.42
(0.36)
-0.01
(0.05)
-0.38
(0.24)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.0006
(0.002)

-0.43†
(0.26)
-0.04
(0.06)
-0.36†
(0.22)
-0.04
(0.03)
-0.002
(0.004)

INSTRUMENTS: (Stage-I Dependent Variable: SUD Treatment Rate per 1,000 residents)
2.50***
2.67***
2.60***
2.57***
3.96**
HIFA (0/1)
(0.52)
(1.26)
(0.41)
(0.35)
(0.47)
*
*
0.91
0.86
Parity (0/1)
(0.42)
(0.45)

3.93**
(1.21)
1.47*
(0.72)

4.36**
(1.41)

4.32**
(1.38)
1.39*
(0.65)

# Observations
‡
F-statistic

7,790
9.4

7,419
17.6

7,419
10.8

Property Crime Rates
Burglary
Larceny Theft
Motor Vehicle Theft
Arson

-0.67*
(0.32)
-0.05
(0.08)
-0.50†
(0.28)
-0.13
(0.09)
0.001
(0.005)

23,537
42.0

-0.72†
(0.41)
-0.07
(0.09)
-0.55*
(0.30)
-0.11†
(0.06)
-0.0004
(0.01)

23,537
29.5

-0.67*
(0.31)
-0.05
(0.11)
-0.52
(0.33)
-0.10
(0.06)
0.004
(0.003)

-0.71†
(0.42)
-0.07
(0.10)
-0.54†
(0.34)
-0.11
(0.07)
-0.001
(0.01)

22,328
24.6

22,328
14.6

7,790
14.1

Note: † p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001; Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
‡
Stock-Yogo (2005) weak identification test critical values based on maximal TSLS size of a 5% Wald test of β = β0 (size test):
K1=1 & L1=1: 10%: 16.38; 15%: 8.96; 20%: 6.66; 25%: 5.53; K1=1 & L1=2: 10%: 19.93; 15%: 11.59; 20%: 8.75; 25%: 7.25.

32

TABLE 4. ESTIMATED EFFECT OF PAST & FUTURE POLICY CHANGES ON SUD TREATMENT RATE & CRIME RATES (checks for policy endogeneity)
LPM Estimates
POLICY LAGS & LEADS:
HIFA (0/1)

County-Level Unbalanced Panel
SUD Treatment Rate
Total Crime Rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2.43***
(0.41)

1-Year Before THIFA
Year of THIFA
1-Year After THIFA
2-Year After THIFA
0.96*
(0.43)

0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.07
(0.07)
-0.12†
(0.07)
-0.08†
(0.05)

1-Year Before TParity
Year of TParity
1-Year After TParity
2-Year After TParity
23,537

23,537

-0.14**
(0.05)
-0.32
(0.72)
-0.43
(0.67)
2.06*
(0.98)
2.64**
(0.67)
1.06
(0.86)

0.87*
(0.44)

-0.04
(0.03)
0.14
(0.53)
-0.07
(0.43)
0.98*
(0.48)
0.55
(0.34)
0.56
(0.35)

2-Year Before TParity

# Observations

2.44***
(0.52)

-0.33
(0.72)
-0.43
(0.67)
2.05*
(1.01)
2.62***
(0.52)
1.59†
(0.95)

2-Year Before THIFA

Parity (0/1)

-0.11†
(0.08)

County-Level Balanced Panel
SUD Treatment Rate
Total Crime Rate
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

-0.008
(0.03)
0.01
(0.07)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.02†
(0.01)
-0.006
(0.004)
23,537

23,537

0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.10
(0.08)
-0.12*
(0.05)
-0.07†
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.02)

0.14
(0.53)
-0.07
(0.43)
0.98*
(0.48)
0.55
(0.34)
0.56
(0.35)
22,328

22,328

-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.02†
(0.01)
-0.007
(0.006)
22,328

Note: † p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001; Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
‡
THIFA and TParity indicate the first full year after the effective time of HIFA-waiver expansion and SUD parity mandate, respectively.

33

22,328

TABLE 5. ESTIMATED EFFECT OF SUD TREATMENT RATE ON CRIME RATES, ADDING STATE-SPECIFIC LINEAR TREND (robustness checks)
County-Level
Unbalanced Panel
Balanced Panel
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
DEPENDENT VARIABLES: Crime Rates per 1,000 residents
-0.15
-0.13
-0.15†
-0.16*
Violent Crime Rates
(0.14)
(0.11)
(0.08)
(0.08)
-0.002
-0.002
-0.0005
-0.0008
Criminal Homicide
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.01
0.01
0.008
0.005
Forcible Rape
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.04)
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02†
Robbery
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
*
-0.15
-0.17
-0.14†
-0.15
Aggravated Assault
(0.14)
(0.12)
(0.07)
(0.08)
TSLS Estimates

Property Crime Rates
Burglary
Larceny Theft
Motor Vehicle Theft
Arson

-0.67
(0.48)
-0.23†
(0.13)
-0.36
(0.31)
-0.07
(0.05)
-0.003
(0.004)

-0.77
(0.52)
-0.24†
(0.13)
-0.42
(0.34)
-0.10
(0.06)
-0.005
(0.006)

-0.76†
(0.39)
-0.24*
(0.11)
-0.44†
(0.25)
-0.07
(0.04)
-0.007
(0.004)

-0.86*
(0.39)
-0.26*
(0.12)
-0.49†
(0.26)
-0.11*
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.008)

CBSA-Level
Unbalanced Panel
Balanced Panel
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.18
(0.20)
-0.008
(0.007)
0.02
(0.08)
-0.03
(0.02)
-0.19
(0.12)

-0.13
(0.21)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.10
(0.12)

-0.22
(0.19)
-0.007
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.02)
-0.05
(0.03)
-0.13
(0.10)

-0.15
(0.14)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.01)
-0.09
(0.08)

-0.78
(0.58)
-0.26
(0.18)
-0.39
(0.24)
-0.14
(0.11)
-0.01
(0.01)

-0.80
(0.56)
-0.20
(0.14)
-0.44†
(0.24)
-0.15†
(0.07)
-0.006
(0.006)

-0.83
(0.55)
-0.27†
(0.16)
-0.41
(0.32)
-0.16
(0.14)
-0.009
(0.009)

-0.82†
(0.47)
-0.23
(0.21)
-0.43†
(0.23)
-0.16*
(0.08)
-0.005
(0.006)

2.47*
(1.17)
2.03†
(1.12)
7,790
3.1

2.90*
(1.29)

2.77*
(1.14)
2.00†
(1.05)
7,419
3.5

INSTRUMENTS: (Stage-I Dependent Variable: SUD Treatment Rate per 1,000 residents)
3.99**
3.95*
3.52**
3.50**
2.58**
HIFA (0/1)
(1.50)
(1.62)
(1.06)
(1.26)
(1.07)
0.50
0.48
Parity (0/1)
(0.98)
(0.82)
23,537
23,537
22,328
22,328
7,790
# Observations
‡
8.9
4.6
11.1
5.6
4.3
F-statistic

7,419
5.5

Note: † p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001; Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level;
‡
Stock-Yogo (2005) weak identification test critical values based on maximal TSLS size of a 5% Wald test of β = β0 (size test):
K1=1 & L1=1: 10%: 16.38; 15%: 8.96; 20%: 6.66; 25%: 5.53; K1=1 & L1=2: 10%: 19.93; 15%: 11.59; 20%: 8.75; 25%: 7.25.

34

REFERENCES
Ainslie, George, and John Monterosso. 2003. "Hyperbolic discounting as a factor in addiction: A
critical analysis" in Heather, Nick, and Rudy E. Vuchinich, eds. Choice, Behavioural Economics and
Addiction: 35-61. Elsevier: Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Atherly, Adam, Bryan E. Dowd, Robert F. Coulam, and Gery Guy. 2012. "The effect of HIFA
waiver expansions on uninsurance rates in adult populations." Health Services Research 47(3pt1),
939-962.
Banks, R. Richard. 2003. "Beyond profiling: Race, policing, and the drug war." Stanford Law
Review, 56(3): 571-603.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Michael Grossman. 2006. "The market for illegal goods: the
case of drugs." Journal of Political Economy, 114(1): 38-60.
Belenko, Steven R., Nicholas Patapis, and Michael T. French. 2005. "The economic benefits of drug
treatment: A critical review of the evidence for policy makers." Alcohol & Drug Problem
Association of North America. Accessed 03/22/2013 from:
http://www.fccmh.org/resources/docs/EconomicBenefits_of_Drug_Trx_02.05_.pdf
Bennett, Trevor, Katy Holloway, and David Farrington. 2008. "The statistical association between
drug misuse and crime: a meta-analysis." Aggression and Violent Behavior, 13(2): 107-118.
Beronio, Kirsten, Sherry Glied, and Richard Frank. 2014 "How the Affordable Care Act and Mental
Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act Greatly Expand Coverage of Behavioral Health Care." The
Journal of Behavioral Health Services & Research, 2014 Issue: 1-19.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates?." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.
Bishop, Tara F., Matthew J. Press, Salomeh Keyhani, and Harold Alan Pincus. 2014. "Acceptance of
insurance by psychiatrists and the implications for access to mental health care." JAMA Psychiatry,
71(2): 176-181.
Bobo, Lawrence D., and Victor Thompson. 2006. "Unfair by design: The war on drugs, race, and the
legitimacy of the criminal justice system." Social Research: An International Quarterly, 73(2): 445472.
Brame, Robert, and Alex R. Piquero. 2003. "Selective attrition and the age-crime relationship."
Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 19(2), 107-127.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2009. "National Compensation Survey: Health Plan Provisions in
Private Industry in the United States, 2008." Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Labor Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). Accessed 03/22/2013 from:
http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/detailedprovisions/2008/ebbl0042.pdf
Chandler, Redonna K., Bennett W. Fletcher, and Nora D. Volkow. 2009. "Treating drug abuse and
addiction in the criminal justice system: improving public health and safety." JAMA, 301(2): 183-190.
Caulkins, Jonathan, and Peter Reuter. 1998. "What price data tell us about drug markets." Journal of
Drug Issues, 28: 593-612.
35

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). 2001. "Health Insurance Flexibility and
Accountability (HIFA) Demonstration Initiative." Baltimore, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services (HHS) Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Center for Medicaid and CHIP
Services (CMCS); 2001. Accessed 03/22/2013 from: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HIFA
Coughlin, Teresa A., Sharon K. Long, John A. Graves, and Alshadye Yemane. 2006. "An early look
at ten state HIFA Medicaid waivers." Health Affairs, 25(3), w204-w216.
Cuellar, Alison E., and Jehanzeb Cheema. 2012. "As roughly 700,000 prisoners are released annually,
about half will gain health coverage and care under federal laws." Health Affairs 31(5): 931-938.
Cummings, Janet R., Hefei Wen, Michelle Ko, and Benjamin G. Druss. 2014. "Race/ethnicity and
geographic access to Medicaid substance use disorder treatment facilities in the United States."
JAMA Psychiatry, 71(2): 190-196.
Dackis, Charles, and Charles O'Brien. 2005. "Neurobiology of addiction: treatment and public policy
ramifications." Nature: Neuroscience, 8(11): 1431-1436.
Dave, Dhaval, and Swati Mukerjee. 2011. "Mental health parity legislation, cost-sharing and
substance-abuse treatment admissions." Health Economics, 20(2): 161-183.
Donald, Stephen G., and Kevin Lang. 2007. "Inference with difference-in-differences and other panel
data." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 221-233.
Donohue III, John J., Benjamin Ewing, and David Pelopquin. 2011. "Rethinking America’s illegal
drug policy." National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. w16776.
Everitt, Barry J., and Trevor W. Robbins. 2005. "Neural systems of reinforcement for drug addiction:
from actions to habits to compulsion." Nature: Neuroscience, 8(11): 1481-1489.
Fellner, Jamie. 2009. "Race, drugs, and law enforcement in the United States." Stanford Law &
Policy Review, 20: 257-292.
French, Michael T., and Ioana Popovici. 2011. "That instrument is lousy! In search of agreement
when using instrumental variables estimation in substance use research." Health Economics, 20(2):
127-146.
Gerstein, Dean R., and Lawrence S. Lewin. 1990. "Treating drug problems." New England Journal of
Medicine, 323(12): 844-848.
Goldstein, Paul J. 2003. "The drugs/violence nexus." Crime, 4: 96.
Gove, Walter R., Michael Hughes, and Michael Geerken. 1985. "Are uniform crime reports a valid
indicator of the index crimes? An affirmative answer with minor qualifications." Criminology, 23(3):
451-502.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 2013. "Medicaid: A Primer: Key Information on the Nation’s
Health Coverage Program for Low-Income People." Menlo Park, CA: The Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation (KFF) The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured; 2013. Accessed
03/22/2013 from: http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2010/06/7334-05.pdf
Kalivas, Peter W., and Nora D. Volkow. 2005. "The neural basis of addiction: a pathology of
motivation and choice." American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(8): 1403-1413.
36

Katz, Lawrence, Steven D. Levitt, and Ellen Shustorovich. 2003. "Prison conditions, capital
punishment, and deterrence." American Law and Economics Review, 5(2): 318-343.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "An empirical analysis of imprisoning drug
offenders." Journal of Public Economics, 88(9): 2043-2066.
Leshner, Alan I. 1999. "Science-based views of drug addiction and its treatment." JAMA, 282(14):
1314-1316.
Levitt, Steven D. 1996. "The effect of prison population size on crime rates: evidence from prison
overcrowding litigation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 319-351.
Levitt, Steven D. 1997. "Using electoral cycles in police hiring to estimate the effect of police on
crime." American Economic Review, 87(3): 270-290.
Levitt, Steven D. 2004. "Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: four factors that explain the
decline and six that do not." The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1): 163-190.
Lynch, James P., and John P. Jarvis. 2008. "Missing data and imputation in the uniform crime reports
and the effects on national estimates." Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 24(1): 69-85.
Mark, Tami L., Katharine R. Levit, Rosanna M. Coffey, David R. McKusick, Henrick J. Harwood,
Edward C. King, Ellen Bouchery, James S. Genuardi, Rita Vandivort-Warren, Jeffrey A. Buck,
Katheryn Ryan. 2007. "National Expenditures for Mental Health Services and Substance Abuse
Treatment, 1993-2003." Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services (HHS) Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Center for Mental Health Services
(CMHS); 2007. Accessed 03/22/2013 from
http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//SMA07-4227/SMA07-4227.pdf
Markowitz, Sara. 2005. "Alcohol, drugs and violent crime." International Review of Law and
Economics, 25(1): 20-44.
McCollister, Kathryn E., Michael T. French, and Hai Fang. 2010. "The cost of crime to society: new crimespecific estimates for policy and program evaluation." Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 108(1): 98-109.
McLellan, A. Thomas, David C. Lewis, Charles P. O'Brien, and Herbert D. Kleber. 2000. "Drug
dependence, a chronic medical illness." JAMA, 284(13): 1689-1695.
McLellan, A. Thomas, George E. Woody, David Metzger, James McKay, Jack Durell, Arthur I.
Alterman, and Charles P. O'Brien. 1996. "Evaluating the effectiveness of addiction treatments:
reasonable expectations, appropriate comparisons." The Milbank Quarterly, 74(1): 51-85.
Mechanic, David. 2014. "More people than ever before are receiving behavioral health care in the
United States, but gaps and challenges remain." Health Affairs, 33(8): 1416-1424.
Miller, Ted R., David T. Levy, Mark A. Cohen, and Kenya L. C. Cox. 2006. "Costs of alcohol and
drug-involved crime." Prevention Science, 7(4): 333-342.
Miron, Jeffrey A. 1999. "Violence and the US prohibitions of drugs and alcohol." American Law and
Economics Review, 1(1): 78-114.
Model, Karyn E. 1993. "The effect of marijuana decriminalization on hospital emergency room drug
episodes: 1975–1978." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88(423): 737-747.
37

Morrissey, Joseph, Gary Cuddeback, Alison E. Cuellar, and Henry Steadman. 2007. "The role of
Medicaid enrollment and outpatient service use in jail recidivism among persons with severe mental
illness." Psychiatric Services, 58(6): 794-801.
O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. "Doing it now or later." American Economic Review,
89(1): 103-124.
Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). 2012. "Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program
II 2010 Annual Report." Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy, Execrutive Office
of the President; 2012. Accessed 03/22/2013 from:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/policy-and-research/adam2010.pdf
Prendergast, Michael L., Deborah Podus, Eunice Chang, and Darren Urada. 2002. "The effectiveness
of drug abuse treatment: a meta-analysis of comparison group studies." Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 67(1): 53-72.
Rajkumar, Andrew S., and Michael T. French. 1997. "Drug abuse, crime costs, and the economic
benefits of treatment." Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 13(3): 291-323.
Shea, John. 1997. "Instrument relevance in multivariate linear models: a simple measure." Review of
Economics and Statistics, 79(2): 348-352.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Katherine Baicker, and Arnold M. Epstein. 2012. "Mortality and access to care
among adults after state Medicaid expansions." New England Journal of Medicine, 367(11): 1025-1034.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). 2011. "Results from the
2010 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings." Rockville, MD:
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services (HHS) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality (CBHSQ); 2011.
Accessed 03/22/2013 from:
http://www.samhsa.gov/data/NSDUH/2k10ResultsRev/NSDUHresultsRev2010.htm
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). 2006. "State Mandates for
Treatment for Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorders." Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health
and Human Services (HHS) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS); 2006. Accessed 03/22/2013 from:
http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content/SMA07-4228/SMA07-4228-A.pdf
Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. "Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression."
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. w284.
Taxman, Faye S., Craig E. Henderson, and Steven Belenko. 2009. "Organizational context, systems
change, and adopting treatment delivery systems in the criminal justice system." Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 103: S1-S6.
Wen, Hefei, Janet R. Cummings, Jason M. Hockenberry, Laura M. Gaydos, and Benjamin G. Druss.
2013. "State parity laws and access to treatment for substance use disorder in the United States:
implications for federal parity legislation." JAMA Psychiatry, 70(12): 1355-1362.
Wu, Li-Tzy, Anthony C. Kouzis, and William E. Schlenger. 2003. "Substance use, dependence, and
service utilization among the US uninsured nonelderly population." American Journal of Public
Health, 93(12), 2079.
38

