                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CASHIER OR CONSULTANT? ENTRY LABOR MARKET CONDITIONS, FIELD
                    OF STUDY, AND CAREER SUCCESS

                                          Joseph G. Altonji
                                            Lisa B. Kahn
                                           Jamin D. Speer

                                        Working Paper 20531
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20531


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2014




We thank Erica Blom and Sarah Amanda Levis for helping us with some early data issues, and David
Card, Alex Mas, Paul Oyer, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at CUNY, Columbia,
Dartmouth, Duke, IZA, LSE, NBER, Queens University, University of Toulouse, and Yale University
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

Â© 2014 by Joseph G. Altonji, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.
Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success
Joseph G. Altonji, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer
NBER Working Paper No. 20531
September 2014
JEL No. J24,J31

                                               ABSTRACT

We analyze the early labor market outcomes of U.S. college graduates from the classes of 1974 to
2011, as a function of the economic conditions into which they graduated. We have three main findings.
First, poor labor market conditions substantially disrupt early careers. A large recession at time of
graduation reduces earnings by roughly 10% in the first year, for the average graduate. The losses
are driven partially by a reduced ability to find employment and full-time work and partially by a roughly
4% reduction in hourly wage rates. Second, these effects differ by field of study. Those in majors with
typically higher earnings experience significantly smaller declines in most labor market outcomes
measured. As a result, the initial earnings and wage gaps across college majors widen by almost a
third and a sixth, respectively, for those graduating into a large recession. Most of these effects fade
out over the first 7 years. Those in higher paying majors are also slightly less likely to obtain an advanced
degree when graduating into a recession, consistent with their relative increase in opportunity cost.
Our third set of results focuses on a recent period that includes the Great Recession. Early impacts
on earnings are much larger than what we would have expected given past patterns and the size of
the recession, in part because of a large increase in the cyclical sensitivity of demand for college graduates.
The effects also differ much less by field of study than those of prior recessions.


Joseph G. Altonji                                      Jamin D. Speer
Department of Economics                                University of Memphis
Yale University                                        jspeer@memphis.edu
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
joseph.altonji@yale.edu

Lisa B. Kahn
Yale University
School of Management
P. O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lisa.kahn@yale.edu
1 Introduction
The impact of the Great Recession was widespread, with unemployment rates doubling for

nearly all subgroups of the population. Recent college graduates, whose unemployment rate
                                                                                            1
increased from 9% in 2007 to a peak of 17.6% in 2009, were no exception.                        Research on

previous recessions suggests this group will experience signicant earnings losses over their

careers, relative to their luckier counterparts who graduated just before or just after the
             2
recession.       Research also suggests that college graduates face sizeable earnings dierences
                                         3
depending on their eld of study.            It is natural to then ask whether, and how, earnings

dierences across eld of study interact with the business cycle.                What kinds of students

are most prone to the impacts of entry conditions?                 Does an engineering student, who

typically earns 75% more than an education major, retain or even expand that advantage

when graduating into a recession? Or, does the general lack of opportunity compress these

earnings dierences?

    Why might recent graduates be particularly sensitive to economic conditions? Workers

graduating into a recession will likely match to lower level starting jobs than their luckier

counterparts (Devereux 2002). Highly mobile young workers (Topel and Ward 1992) may

recover from early set-backs through job movement, though perhaps more gradually in the

face of fewer vacancies per worker. However, a poor early start, possibly including time spent

in unemployment, could put college graduates in jobs with fewer training and promotion
                                                           4
opportunities, resulting in a lasting disadvantage.

    Why might the eects of economic conditions at graduation depend on eld of study?

College majors dier widely in the skill requirements of their degrees and subsequent jobs,

   1 These numbers are from the School Enrollment Supplement to the Current Population Survey and are
based on graduates aged 20 to 29 who completed a bachelor's degree in the calendar year of the survey.
   2 Kahn (2010) estimates that white men graduating in the worst part of the 1981-82 recession earned
over 20% less, relative to those graduating in nearby peaks, and these eects partially persisted for 15-20
years. Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz (2012) nd somewhat similar eects on men in Canada over a
twenty-year period, though magnitudes and persistence are weaker. They also nd impacts are worse for
lower-skilled college graduates.
   3 For example, Altonji, Blom, and Meghir (2012) show that earnings dierences across college majors can
be as large as the overall college-high school premium. They provide a survey of the literature on the returns
to college major.
   4 Though the literature on the career eects of entry conditions is sparse on underlying mechanisms, Kahn
(2010) suggests that human capital disparities are a likely driver. Consistent with this notion, eects are
typically worse for higher human capital individuals for whom post-schooling skill accumulation is likely more
important. For example, college graduates face larger, more persistent impacts than do high school graduates;
white men experience worse wage outcomes than women and minorities (see Kondo (2008) and Hershbein
(2012)). Human capital disparities across cohorts arise in Gibbons and Waldman's (2006) task-specic human
capital model where workers entering rms in worse economies start out in lower level jobs and therefore
lag behind on task-specic human capital in more important jobs years later. The Gibbons-Waldman model
was designed to explain (among other things) persistent earnings dierences across rm-entry cohorts found
in Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994). In contrast Beaudry and DiNardo (1991) show that while labor
market conditions at point of entry into a rm matter, the best labor market over a worker's tenure matters
most for earnings. They posit this is driven by bargaining and imperfect mobility.




                                                      3
                                                                      5
as well as their labor market opportunities in good times.                These dierences could result

in a dierential ability to nd good initial placements, which could lead to better career

trajectories or help avoid path dependence and earnings losses that come from time spent

outside of full-time work (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo (2013), Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz

(2010)). Ability dierences might also translate into a dierential ability to upgrade from
                            6
poor initial placements.        It is also likely that training opportunities and skill appreciation

will be more important for career paths in some majors than in others.                    For high-return

majors, post-schooling human capital accumulation might be more important (though this is

actually an open question), yielding more scope for negative impacts of entry conditions. Will

a general higher ability of high-return majors help them weather an early downturn, or will

a potential for greater mismatch between the degree and opportunities for skill accumulation

and advancement in initial job placements cause relatively worse outcomes?

       In this paper, we analyze the short- and medium-term career outcomes of college grad-

uates as a function of economic conditions at graduation and college major.                      The data

requirements are formidable. We combine seven data sets with information on earnings and

eld of study for U.S. college graduates graduating between 1974 and 2011. The combined

data set yields coverage of multiple business cycles and features larger sample sizes than the

typical cohort-based analyses in this literature.         We characterize 51 college majors by the

average earnings premium in the major. We then estimate impacts of graduating in times

of higher unemployment across these skill groups for a range of labor market outcomes over

the rst 13 years of a career.

       We address three main questions. First, what is the eect of graduating into a recession

for the average college major? We improve on previous research by examining this question

over a long time period in the U.S. with multiple expansions and recessions. Second, how

does the eect of a recession vary by college major?               Third, have the answers to these

questions changed in the Great Recession?

       Consistent with the previous literature, we nd that graduating from college in times

of higher unemployment is associated with signicant earnings losses for the average ma-
       7
jor.       Earnings decline by roughly 10% in the rst year after graduation for a worker who

graduated with a four percentage point higher unemployment rate (the increase seen in a

   5 For example, Turner and Bowen (1999) show substantial variation in average SAT scores across college
major, and Arcidiacono (2004) and Altonji et al. (2012) show that the ordering of majors by average earnings
is very similar to the ordering by average SAT math score.
   6 Shimer (2004) points out that the expected return to job search will positively impact search intensity,
and Oreopoulos et al. (2012) view their nding that in Canada, more-skilled graduates catch up more quickly
from poor initial conditions as supporting a model of dierential search intensity.   Furthermore, Wozniak
(2010) nds that geographic location choices of college graduates are more sensitive to local labor market
conditions than are those of high school graduates, supporting the idea that higher-skilled workers search
more intensively.
   7 This summary of the evidence for the average major is based on estimates from our combined data set
as well as those from the March CPS, where we do not know college major, but can estimate the eect of
entry conditions for the average graduate.


                                                     4
large recession). This eect partially persists for the rst several years of a career, averaging

to a roughly 1.8% earnings loss per year over the rst 10 years.                This result is similar to

Oreopoulos et al.'s (2012) estimate but smaller and less persistent than Kahn's (2010).

    We then examine the channels through which recessions aect labor market outcomes,

focusing on employment, full-time status, wage rates, and occupational attainment.                       We

nd that the earnings losses are accounted for by a combination of hours reductions and

wage rate reductions. We nd only modest impacts on the probability of being employed

but larger impacts on the probability of working full-time. Workers are about 5 percentage

points less likely to be working full time in their rst year out of college, though this eect

does not persist past the rst three years after graduation. Wages are 4% lower in the rst

year after graduating into a large recession, and average about 1.5% per year over the rst

10 years.   We also nd small negative impacts on occupation quality, as measured by the

earnings return to the occupation, but no eect on occupation match quality, as measured

by whether the occupation is typical for one's major.

    Regarding the second question, we nd that those in high-paying majors are somewhat

sheltered from the negative eects of graduating into a recession. A major that typically earns

one standard deviation above the mean (such as civil engineering or accounting) experiences

only about half the earnings losses of a major that typically earns at the mean (journalism

or engineering technology).        This means that high-return majors increase their earnings

advantage by almost a third when graduating into a large recession, and this eect persists

for 7 years into a career. By the same token, those in elds that typically earn one standard

deviation below the mean (tness and nutrition, commercial art and design) experience

earnings losses that are about 50 percent larger than those of the average major.

    The dierential earnings eect across college majors is due to a combination of dierential

eects on wages, employment, occupational attainment, and hours.                     For example, high-

earning majors increase their wage advantage by 15% when graduating into a large recession,

and this eect persists for several years. Occupations also seem to be an important margin

for the dierential eects. Higher earning majors are dierentially more likely to be in higher
                                                                                    8
paying occupations and in occupations that are typical for their major.

    Educational attainment might also be impacted by labor market entry conditions because

they change the opportunity cost of remaining in school. Most research has focused on the

impact of local labor market conditions on high school completion and college enrollment,
                                                                                            9
and surprisingly little attention has been paid to the graduate school decision.                We examine

   8 Liu, Salvanes, and Sorensen (2012) analyze the eects of graduating from college into a recession in
Norway and nd initial impacts on wage rates as well as persistent impacts on unemployment. They show that
an important channel through which these eects operate is the ability to nd work in a high-paying industry.
Similarly, Oyer (2008) nds persistent earnings losses for MBAs graduating into recessions, attributing much
of this eect to initial industry placement. Oyer (2006) also nds persistent eects of entry conditions on
prestige of institution for economics PhDs.
   9 Exceptions include Kahn (2010) on educational attainment, and Bedard and Herman (2008) and Johnson
(2013) on enrollment. See, for example, Card and Lemieux (2001) for more on high school graduation and

                                                     5
the probability of attaining an advanced degree and nd small positive eects for those

graduating into a recession.       These eects are muted for higher-skilled majors, consistent

with the relative changes in opportunity costs.            This represents the broadest evidence to

date on the subject of graduate educational attainment.

    It is possible that the relative advantage of higher-skilled majors graduating into a reces-
                                                                           10
sion is driven by a dierential cyclicality in their labor demand.              To examine this mecha-

nism, we construct and analyze the cyclicality of a major-specic unemployment rate; this

is the rst such analysis to our knowledge. We use annual Current Population Survey data

and the industry-occupation distribution for each major from a subset of our data to con-

struct the unemployment rate in the industry-occupation cells that a given major tends to

enter into. We indeed nd a negative correlation between skill level and cyclicality of the

major-specic unemployment rate, but it is small. A one standard deviation increase in skill

level of the major reduces its cyclicality by only 10%, relative to the average major.

    The nal set of results concerns those who graduated into the Great Recession of 2007-09.

First, we present evidence that 2004-2011 graduates saw much larger per-unit impacts of the

aggregate unemployment rate on earnings  between two and three times the size of the

earlier period. We document that these changes are associated with a large increase in the

cyclicality of demand for college graduates. Second, the relative advantage of high-skilled

majors graduating into a recession has been cut in half. This may be due in part to an increase

in cyclicality of demand for high-skilled majors relative to the average major, although this

is probably only part of the story.          Therefore, it appears that the Great Recession was

much harsher overall for recent graduates than we would have expected given the size of the

aggregate unemployment rate increase, and these eects were more evenly distributed across

majors.

    Our work is most closely related to Oreopoulos et al. (2012), who use Canadian university-

employer-employee matched data to study the earnings eects of graduating in times of

higher unemployment, and how these eects vary with the skill level of the graduate. They

nd smaller and less persistent eects for workers who went to better schools, majored in

more dicult subjects, and received better grades.             They nd that these groups are able

to catch up more quickly through upgrading on rm quality. Our result that higher-skilled

majors fare relatively better when graduating into a worse economy is entirely consistent

with their work. We oer the rst results on this question for the United States, and provide

an analysis over a long time horizon with large sample sizes. We also measure a number of

other outcomes, such as employment, wage rates and occupational and educational attain-

ment, that were unavailable in the administrative data set used by Oreopoulos et al. (2012).

Though we cannot measure rm quality in our data, we use occupation earnings dierentials

college attendance as a function of local labor market conditions.
  10 Since those with high-return majors tend to work in high-paying industries, such a mechanism would
be inconsistent with the literature on cyclical upgrading. That literature nds that employment in higher
paying industries is more cyclical than in lower paying industries (Bils and McLaughlin 2001).
                                                     6
and the propensity to be in a popular occupation given one's major to assess the quality of

jobs workers enter into over the business cycle and across college major.

    This paper proceeds as follows.          We discuss our data sources and some measurement

issues in section 2 before describing methodology in section 3. Section 4 presents our core

results on earnings, wages, employment, and occupational and educational attainment for

the average graduate and discusses how these results have changed for graduates in recent

years, including the Great Recession. Section 5 examines dierential eects across major,

including an examination of the eects of recessions and college major on graduate education.

Section 6 examines demand cyclicality across college majors as a potential explanation for

our results. Section 7 concludes.




2 Data
2.1 Data Sources
In order to estimate the short- and medium-term eects of initial economic conditions on

labor market outcomes across college major, with coverage over several national expansions

and contractions, we pool multiple data sources: two National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth

(the NLSY79 and NLSY97), the National Survey of College Graduates for 1993 (NSCG93)

and 2003 (NSCG03), the Baccalaureate and Beyond 1993 (BB93) and 2008 (BB08), the

National Longitudinal Study 1972 (NLS72), the Survey of Income and Program Participation

(SIPP) 1984 through 2008 panels, and the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2009-
        11
2012.

    These surveys are chosen because they contain information on both college major and

labor market outcomes. To better align the length of time individuals can be observed post-

college graduation across data sets, we restrict attention to workers between ages 22 and 35
                                                                    12
and those who are between 0 and 13 years out of college.                 The pooled data contain college

graduates who graduated between 1974 and 2011, with an unbalanced panel of labor market
                                               13
outcomes measured from 1977 to 2012.                Appendix table 1 reports this coverage by survey.

We provide a description of each survey and details of specic variable creation in the online

data appendix.

  11 We do not use the 1985 SIPP panel, which does not have college major information, or the 1989 SIPP
panel, which was abandoned and did not produce enough follow-up waves to be useable.
  12 We also exclude workers who graduated before age 20 or after age 24 (roughly a quarter of graduates in
surveys where we can determine timing of college graduation). We feel it is appropriate to restrict attention
to a sample that more closely represents the typical student. In all surveys but the ACS, we know or can
infer year of college graduation. For the ACS, we take advantage of quarter of birth information to impute
graduation year as the year an individual was likely age 22 in May of that year, the most common graduation
age in the other data sets.
  13 Though we also have data on college graduates from 1971-73, the samples are small in those years, and
are therefore lost when we apply cell-size restrictions, described below.



                                                       7
    The goal in this paper is to estimate the impacts of entry conditions on subsequent la-

bor market outcomes. We use the census division unemployment rate in the year of college

graduation as an indicator of entry conditions, hereafter              Uc .   The subscript     c   stands for the
                                                                                           14
college graduation cohort, which we dene as a division-graduation year.                        The unemploy-

ment rate is highly visible and is the most commonly used measure of economic conditions
                                                                                                15
in prior work (see, for example, Kahn (2010) and Oreopoulos et al. (2012)).

    To provide a sense of sample coverage, appendix table 2 presents the number of observa-

tions in the pooled sample by       Uc   and years since graduation (hereafter potential experience).

We have substantial sample sizes at both low and high levels of unemployment. However,

the pooled data are heavily skewed towards low graduation-year unemployment rates. This

is because the ACS is much larger than the other data sets and its graduates tend to be from

low unemployment years (with the exception of the most recent graduates from these sur-

veys, who graduated into the Great Recession). This feature of our data leads us to employ

a two-step estimation procedure, described in more detail below, that allows us to put equal

weight on each cohort-potential experience cell. With this approach we can characterize the

overall impact of graduating into a period of high unemployment across the long time period

spanned by our data sets. Estimates from an unweighted sample would instead primarily

reect the recent period. Since the nature of labor market shocks surely varies over time, we

also report how the eects of entry conditions diered in the years surrounding the Great

Recession.

    This collage of data (hereafter, the combined sample) aords a number of advantages

over the previous literature  for example, the excellent coverage displayed in appendix table

2, as well as the ability to analyze the dierential eects of entry conditions across college

major. However, surveys will naturally dier to some extent in terms of variable denitions,

sample sizes, and coverage.         Below, and in the data appendix, we describe our eorts to

create a uniform data set, despite these dierences. We also provide a companion analysis

using the Current Population Survey March Supplement (CPS). The main advantage of the

CPS is that it provides fairly uniform coverage of labor market outcomes for all potential

experience levels over a long time period. Its main disadvantages for our purposes are that it

does not identify year of graduation or census division of graduation, and it does not contain

information on college major. However, we can analyze the impact of entry conditions for the

  14 We use annual measures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics to reduce noise in the measure itself and
because we cannot determine month of graduation in most data sets.
  15 Our results are robust to using national unemployment rates, as well as state-level rates. While the
national economy is likely the most relevant for college graduates, a more disaggregated measure provides
useful variation to supplement the time series. However, local unemployment rates introduce noise generated
by our inability to pinpoint the location of college graduation in some surveys. We instead must sometimes
impute state of college graduation with current location of residence (see the online data appendix for details).
Balancing these tensions, we compromise with the 9 census divisions as the geographic level of analysis. This
takes advantage of spatial variation in entry conditions but does not generate as much additional noise as
imputing state of college graduation  even if workers move across state lines after college, they are less likely
to move across divisions.

                                                        8
average major, imputing timing of graduation by using the year of birth and assuming census

division at graduation is the same as current census division. We present these alongside

results from our main data set in section 4.



2.2 Labor Market Outcome Measures
In the subsequent sections, we measure the impacts of             Uc   on annual earnings, wage rates,

employment, full-time employment (working at least 35 hours per week), and occupational

attainment. We pay particular attention to dening these variables as consistently as possible

across surveys. (See online appendix table 1 for a detailed description of variable creation

across surveys).
                                                                                                         16
    In all analyses we exclude enrolled workers to better isolate prime work experience.

Our primary outcome of interest is annual earnings over the previous calendar year or 12-

month period, since this measure reects earning power as well as the ability to obtain
              17
work hours.        For wages and occupation outcomes (described in more detail in section 4)

we restrict attention to those with a valid earnings measure so we can use these variables
                                      18
to diagnose the earnings eect.            We also analyze employment and full-time employment

(working at least 35 hours per week) on the full sample (with no earnings restrictions).

    In table 1, we report weighted summary statistics, calculated by assigning equal weight to

each cohort-potential experience cell. This most closely represents the weighting for the two-

step estimation procedure described below. Panel A summarizes variables for the earnings

sample. Average annual earnings in our data is about $47,000 in 2006 dollars. The average

graduation year is 1990 and the average year of an earnings observation is 1997. As noted

above, the pooled sample yields substantial variation in the unemployment rate at time

of graduation, ranging from 2.8% to 12.5%.               In the earnings sample, 96% were employed

and 87% were employed full time. Without earnings restrictions (the sample used to study

these outcomes), the employment rate and the full-time employment rates are 89% and 77%,

respectively.



2.3 Characteristics of College Majors
A primary goal of this paper is to estimate the dierential eects of labor market conditions

across college majors. In most data sets, we can easily classify college major into a set of

  16 In the NSCG93, we cannot infer enrollment status. In the NLS72, we do not have enrollment status
after 1976.
  17 We restrict the sample to those earning at least $500 (in 2006 dollars) and top code at $400,000. We
exclude earnings in the year of college graduation since this could partially reect income while in school.
Earnings in the NSCG93 (non-census measure), NSCG03, and BB93 reect annual salary in the current job,
since realized annual earnings is not available.
  18 Wages are further restricted to be greater than $0 and are bottom- and top-coded to be between $5 and
$250 per hour.



                                                     9
                                                                                  19
51 categories commonly used by the Department of Education.                             In principle, we could

estimate a separate          Uc   eect for each of the 51 major categories, but that quickly becomes

intractable. Instead we categorize majors by the typical earnings return to the major and

ask whether high- and low-return majors are dierentially impacted by entry conditions.

      We regress log earnings on major xed eects and controls in the pooled data (excluding

the SIPP) on a sample of older workers (age 36 to 59) with at least a college degree who
                                          20
report being employed full time.               The age restriction excludes the regression sample used to

estimate the eect of entry conditions on labor market outcomes, reducing any simultaneity
             21
concerns.         We then standardize the major xed eects to be mean zero and standard
                   22
deviation one.          We denote these standardized xed eects as            Î² major .
      Table 2 reports the values of         Î² major   for each of the 51 Department of Education major
                                               23
categories, from highest to lowest.                 Chemical and electrical engineering, nance, and eco-

nomics have the highest earnings returns, while philosophy and religion, several arts elds,
                                                                                   24
and library science and non-secondary education have the lowest.




3 Econometric Model and Methods
3.1 Regression Specication
To estimate the eect of the unemployment rate at graduation on labor market outcomes,

and how this varies across college majors, we use the following specication.



                        Yict = Î²1 Xit + Î²2 Uc + Î²3 Uc P Eit + Î²4 Uc P Eit2 +Î²6 Î²imajor P Eit
(1)                                     +Î²7 Î²imajor Uc + Î²8 Î²imajor Uc P Eit + Î³major + ict
  19 The exception is the SIPP, which has one classication of 20 categories in panels 1984-1993 and another
with 18 categories from 1994-2008. We explain how we use and combine these categories below.
  20 The controls in this regression are identical to those used in our main specication, described below,
(excluding   Uc , Î² major   and their various interactions) except here we include a third order term in potential
experience since this sample is much older. We also control for whether the worker has obtained an advanced
degree to help distinguish the return to the major from returns to postgraduate education. We weight this
regression with survey weights that are normed so that the weight of each survey is proportional to its size.
  21 This age restriction necessarily excludes the NLS72, the NLSY97, and both BB panels.
  22 For the SIPP, which contains two separate major classications, we estimate a similar log earnings
regression, treating the sets of 20 and 18 major classications as roughly 38 separate majors, and obtain
major xed eects.       We standardize these by subtracting the mean for the SIPP majors and dividing by
the standard deviation of the non-SIPP majors, so that the units are comparable.               Note that the age
and education sample restrictions are identical to those for the pooled sample, but in SIPP the full-time
restriction is imposed by retaining only those who were employed full-time in at least three-quarters of the
survey months that year.
  23 Values for the two SIPP classications can be found in online appendix tables 2a and 2b.
  24 It is important to note that a few of the categories combine majors that pay quite dierently. An extreme
case is philosophy and religion, which combines philosophy, a relatively high paying humanities major, with
religious studies, which pays less, and theology and religious vocations, which pays substantially less. Altonji
et al. (2012, supplemental table 3) report that philosophy and religious studies majors earn about 30%
more than theology and religious vocations majors.


                                                           10
      In equation (1),           Yict   is a labor market outcome measured in year                    t,   for an individual    i,
in college graduation cohort                   c    (division-graduation year), and          Xit    is a set of control vari-
         25
ables.         We also control for major xed eects                     (Î³major ), and allow the earnings return to the
                                                                                    26
major,        Î² major ,   to vary with       P Eit    (potential       experience).    We dene P Eit as the number of

years since college graduation rather than actual labor market experience, which could be
                                                                                                           27
endogenously related to                 Uc   and is not observed in most of our data sets.

      Uc   measures labor market entry conditions, dened as the deviation of the division un-

employment rate from the sample mean of 6.3% in the year of college graduation.                                              The

coecient         Î²2   on   Uc   measures the impact of entry conditions on initial labor market out-
                                                               28
comes (the year following graduation).          Î² major , the earnings return to the major, is
                                                                     Since
                                                                                        29
standardized to be mean 0, the main eect of Uc is the impact for the average major.       To

measure the persistence of this impact, we interact Uc with a quadratic in P Eit . Results are

robust to only including a linear interaction, and to controlling for potential experience with

3-year buckets and allowing these to interact with                            Uc .
      The coecient           Î²7    measures the dierential impact of entry conditions across college

major on initial labor market outcomes. We include the three way interaction                                     Î²imajor Uc P Eit
to allow the dierential eect to vary with experience. Again, results are not sensitive to the
                                                                30
functional form of the persistence term.

     25 The controls included in         Xit   are survey xed eects, a quadratic in potential experience, gender,
race/ethnicity, gender interacted with race/ethnicity and potential experience, division of graduation xed
eects, and a cubic time trend in              t.    Survey xed eects are: NLSY79, NLSY97, NSCG93, NSCG93 data
from the 1990 decennial census, NSCG03, BB93, BB08, NLS72, early SIPP (panels 1984-1993), later SIPP
(panels 1996-2008), and the ACS (waves 2009-2012). As we describe below, some of these will enter into the
rst step regression while others enter into the second step.
     26 We treat the early and late SIPP major categories as separate majors from the 51 Department of
Education categories. This gives us a total of 89 majors.
     27 In practice, we subtract 1 from             P Eit   so that the interaction terms are 0 in the year after graduation,
yielding a more natural interpretation for the main eects (the rst year after graduation).
     28 One might worry that students endogenously respond to labor market conditions when choosing when to
graduate from college. Kahn (2010) addressed this issue by instrumenting for graduating conditions with the
unemployment rate at age 22. As a robustness check, we estimate the reduced form based on this instrument
(since our two-step estimation procedure makes instrumenting dicult). Specically, we replace                         Uc   with a
weighted average of unemployment rates experienced at age 22 and 23, with two-thirds weight on the former
and one-third on the latter. We use the weighted average because graduation ages have increased compared
to Kahn's sample period. We obtain very similar results, suggesting endogenous timing of college graduation
is not a concern. One might also be concerned that students choose their college major in response to the
business cycle. Blom (2012) does nd that students shift to higher-return majors when economic conditions
are worse at age 20, resulting in an increased supply and possible negative selection of high-return majors
graduating into a recession, relative to a boom. This selection would work against our ndings below that
high-return majors fare relatively better than low-return majors when graduating into a recession.
     29 We standardized based on the regression sample used to estimate                 Î² major .   Thus the average major is
dened on the sample of workers age 36-59, employed full-time, with more weight placed on the larger data
sets.
     30 Results are robust to a number of additional control variables. Specically, the inclusion of survey-
graduation year xed eects and survey-potential experience interactions, and                         Î² major   interacted with a
cubic time trend do not change the point estimates and actually improve precision. The survey interactions
are useful since outcome measures vary slightly across surveys (see online appendix table 1). The time trend
in   Î² major    controls for dierences in the return to skills over time. Results are also robust to educational
attainment controls, though we prefer to omit these since they could be endogenously related to labor market
                                                                       11
    Note that the interpretation of the parameters is aected by the fact that entry division

unemployment rates are positively correlated with the unemployment rates at 1 and 2 years

experience, so a worker leaving school in a recession is likely to experience more than just
                                                    31
one bad year of labor market conditions.                 Since we do not control for unemployment rates

between the time of graduation and         t, the terms involving Uc absorb the                  eects of variation

in labor market conditions          between c and t. Our results can then be                     interpreted as the

overall eect of graduating into a time of high unemployment, say, including a part that

arises because the worker is likely to experience a couple of years of bad conditions.                                 We

could instead isolate the partial eect of           Uc   by controlling for the values of unemployment

during the years between      c and t.    Results are qualitatively robust to this specication, which
                                        32
we discuss in more detail below.



3.2 Two-Step Estimation Procedure
In practice, we cannot obtain the average eect of                   Uc   over the entire sample period by

estimating the regression model in equation (1) on the pooled data.                             These data are not

balanced across time or across experience levels and are instead heavily skewed towards

recent cohorts because of the ACS. We would prefer to weight the data more equally across

years; this is especially important if the eect of            Uc   varies over time.

    One way to estimate average eects over the time period we study is to weight each

cohort-potential experience cell equally.            However, this method is accompanied by a large

loss in eciency, since it upweights noisy small cells and downweights precisely estimated

large cells. There is no way around some degree of ineciency if we want equal weighting.

However, we attempt to retain some of the precision given in the larger cells through a

two-step estimation procedure.

    We rst estimate a regression of a labor market outcome on the control variables, weight-

ing observations with survey weights (to take full advantage of the extra precision from

larger data sets). We then collapse residuals to the major-cohort-potential experience cell

(we denote this    mcp-level, where m is major, c is division-graduation year, and p is potential
                                                                                                                        33
experience) and use these in a second step regression to estimate the coecients of interest.

In this second step regression, we weight the data so that the distribution of observations

entry conditions. Instead we examine educational attainment as an outcome in table 6 below.
  31 The partial correlations of division unemployment rates between        t   and   t + 1,   and between   t   and   t+2
are 0.78 and 0.40, respectively, controlling for division xed eects and a cubic time trend. They are small
and insignicant for the next several years thereafter.
  32 This robustness analysis closely follows that of Oreopoulos et al. (2012).
  33 In the rst step regression, we include survey xed eects, gender, race/ethnicity, the interaction between
gender and race/ethnicity, and interactions of potential experience with gender and with race/ethnicity.
Thus, our estimates of the   mcp    xed eects control for dierential sorting across majors by gender and
race/ethnicity.   The remaining controls are included in the second step along with the key explanatory
variables. We also include survey dummies in the second step because some of them are dropped in the rst
stage due to collinearity within   mcp-cell.   Because values in the second step are collapsed to the            mcp-level,
the survey controls are the shares of each data set within each cell.
                                                          12
across college majors,           m,   in a given         cp-cell,    matches the empirical distribution, but each
                                           34
cp-cell   gets the same weight.

    Since the unit of observation in the second step is at the                                 mcp-level,   we are naturally

worried that some cells made up of very few observations will have too large an inuence.

We address this concern in two ways. First, we drop all observations from graduation year-

potential experience cells with fewer than 100 observations to eliminate the inuence of the
                   35
smallest cells.         Second, we trim the             mcp-cell       xed eects from the rst stage regression to
                                      36
eliminate extreme outliers.                 We then estimate the second-step regression described above.

    In practice, we vary the control variables in the second-step regression depending on the

parameters of interest, balancing concern for bias against concern for sampling error. The

choice of controls drives the choice of how to cluster when estimating standard errors. When

estimating the coecients              Î²2 , Î²3 ,    and   Î²4   on   Uc , Uc P E     and   Uc P E 2 ,   we exclude graduation

year xed eects. This exclusion allows both national and division-specic time series varia-

tion to contribute to identication of these parameters. Using the national variation reduces

sampling error and reduces possible downward bias if division-specic variation in labor mar-

ket conditions matters less for college graduates than national variation. On the other hand,

unobserved trends in graduation year cohort characteristics could potentially aect the esti-
          37
mates.                              Î²2 , Î²3 , and Î²4 are clustered by cohort (division-graduation
               The standard errors for

year), the level of variation underlying Uc .
                                                                                         major
    For the parameters Î²7 and Î²8 governing the dierential eects of Uc across Î²               , time
                                                                   major
series variation is less important because of the variation in Î²         , so we include graduation

year xed eects. Given these and the major xed eects, we prefer to use robust standard

errors that simply account for heteroskedasticity.                           Standard error estimates are typically

larger when we instead cluster at the major-cohort level, but conclusions about statistical

signicance remain the same in most cases.                             For example, in the earnings regression, the
                                                               major
standard error for the coecient on                     Uc Î²             is about 25% larger when clustering at the
                          38
major-cohort level.

  34 Specically, we weight the second-step regression by the number of observations for a given dependent
variable in the   mcp-cell     divided by the number of observations in the             cp-cell.
  35 For earnings, wages, and occupational attainment, we restrict the analysis to cells with at least 100
earnings observations, to keep these samples as similar as possible. This removes about 19,000 person-year
observations, or 2.7% of our pooled, unweighted data. For employed and full-time status we drop cells with
less than 100 observations for employed, removing about 4,000 observations, or 0.5% of our data.
  36 We compute the residuals from a median regression of the                      mcp-cell   xed eects on survey controls, a
cubic time trend, a quadratic in        P E , Î² major ,   and    Î² major âˆ— P E ,   using second-stage regression weights. We
drop cells whose median regression residuals are in the top and bottom 2%. Trimming eliminates roughly
0.6% of the unweighted pooled sample.                 It does not change the point estimates, but improves precision
considerably.
  37 In practice, we obtain similar results when we use only the divisional variation by including graduation
year xed eects.
  38 We ignore serial correlation across clusters that might arise from sampling error in the estimated regres-
sors that we use, including       Î² major ,     because we think it is a second order issue in our case. See Murphy and
Topel (1985).



                                                                    13
4 The Eects of Entry Conditions on the Average Grad-
  uate
In this section, we discuss the impact of entry conditions on labor market outcomes for the

average major. The large sample sizes and the long time period covered by the main sample

and by the CPS represent a considerable improvement over the previous evidence on this

question for the U.S. We point out dierences between the combined sample results and the

CPS results as we go along, and provide a summary assessment at the end of section 4.1. We

begin with the evidence for the full sample period and then show that eects have become

larger in recent years.



4.1 Estimates for the Full Sample Period
Table 3 reports the impact of graduating into a large recession on a number of labor market

outcomes for workers at various experience levels, from the combined sample.                                        We dene

large as a 4 ppt increase in             Uc , the approximate shift of the national unemployment rate in
                                                               39
the large 1981-82 and 2007-09 recessions.                           The regression coecients underlying the results
                                                                                                             40
in table 3 can be found in appendix table 3 and online appendix tables 3-7.

    We begin with annual earnings in panel A, column 1. Row 1 displays the average impact of

graduating into a large recession on log annual earnings across the rst 10 years of experience,
                                                                                        41
-0.0135 (with a standard error of 0.011) log points per year.                                 The subsequent rows report

the experience prole starting with a large 0.118 (0.024) log point earnings loss in the rst

year out of school. This eect falls to 0.04 log points after 3 years of experience, but remains
                                                                                              42
signicant at the 1% level. The eect is entirely gone by year 7.
                                                                            43
    In table 4, we report estimates based on the CPS.                            The eect of      Uc   is smaller initially  a

  39 Since the model is linear in        Uc   and the parameters are identied by variation associated with booms as
well as recessions, our estimates equally apply to a 4 ppt shift from a large boom to an average economy
and can be used to characterize the advantage of graduating in a boom. We do not nd evidence that the
eect of   Uc   is nonlinear. See section 4.2.
  40 Estimates in table 3, column 1 can be calculated from the column labeled (1) in appendix table 3, by

computing       Î²Ë†2 Â· 4 + Î²Ë†3 P E Â· 4 + Î²Ë†4 P E 2 Â· 4   for the specied value of   P Eit .   Other columns of table 3 can be
computed similarly using online appendix tables 3-7.
  41 We t an unweighted average across the rst 10 years to avoid impacts of sample composition.
  42 As mentioned above, the estimated eect of U absorbs any impact of correlated unemployment rates
                                                  c
in surrounding years. We have experimented with controlling exibly for intervening unemployment rates
and nd fairly similar results. For example, following a similar specication to Oreopoulos et al. (2012),
we allow each unemployment rate since college graduation to impact earnings with a quadratic decay in
potential experience, but restrict adjacent unemployment rate years to have the same impact and decay
pattern. With these controls, the impact of               Uc   on earnings declines in magnitude by a quarter in the rst
year out, by a fth in the second year out, and is otherwise very similar.                     Furthermore the impact of     Uc
on earnings is far larger and more persistent than the impact of unemployment rates at 1 and 2 years of
potential experience.
  43 The CPS regressions, of course, do not include college major variables.                       Each potential experience-
graduation cohort cell is given equal weight to simulate the two-step estimation procedure we use in the
main sample. We impute division at time of college graduation with current division of residence and dene


                                                                     14
-0.07 (0.016) loss in the rst year after graduation (panel A , column 1)  but still signicant

at the 1% level. Furthermore, the experience prole has a more shallow decay. This results

in an average eect over the rst 10 years of experience of 0.022 (0.01) log earnings loss per

year, about double the magnitude in the combined sample, and signicant at the 5% level.

     The estimates for the two data sets bracket the results of Oreopoulos et al.                    (2012),

who nd that a 1 ppt increase in the national or provincial unemployment rate at college

graduation reduces earnings by roughly 2% in the rst year (or by 8% for a large recession)

before fading away over the next 5 years. They lie well below Kahn's (2010) estimates. She

nds an initial decline in pay rates of more than 20% for white males who graduated in the

worst part of the 1981-82 recession compared to those who graduated in the nearby booms,

in the U.S. Her estimates diminish over time but remain signicant well past 10 years out of

college.

     The remainder of tables 3 and 4 gives guidance as to whether these earnings eects are

driven by dierences in time spent working, wage rates, occupational attainment, or some

combination. Column 2 shows only modest impacts of entry conditions on the probability

of being employed.       In the combined sample (table 3, column2), the average impact over

the rst 10 years of a career is a 0.007 (0.004) decline in the probability of being employed,

statistically signicant at the 10% level. This is small compared to the mean probability of

being employed in this sample, 0.89. The experience prole is also surprising in that we nd

no eect early in a career. Sampling error is probably part of the story. In the CPS, where

we have consistent, large samples throughout the time period, the eect on employment is a

substantial -0.018 (0.005) in the rst year out, signicant at the 1% level. This eect halves

by three years out, is only signicant at the 5% level, and becomes small and insignicant

thereafter.

     We nd sizeable eects on the probability of full-time employment in both the combined

sample and the CPS. In the combined sample (table 3, column 3), a worker graduating into

a large recession is 0.066 (0.012) less likely to be employed full time in the rst year out of

school, statistically signicant at the 1% level. Compared to the mean probability of full-

time employment for this sample, 0.77, this eect is quite substantial. It is also large enough
                                                            44
to account for much of the rst-year earnings loss.              The eect then falls roughly in half by

3 years out but is still signicant at the 1% level, before becoming small and insignicant

thereafter.    The CPS estimates for the full-time probability are very similar, though only

about two-thirds the magnitude in the rst year out.

     Overall, a diculty obtaining work hours likely drives a substantial portion of the earnings

Uc   as a weighted average of the unemployment rate in that division when the worker was 22 and 23, with
two-thirds weight on the former. Dependent variables are dened with the same restrictions as in the main
sample, except that we cannot consistently observe whether a worker was enrolled, so we include all workers
meeting the other criteria. Regression output underlying table 4 can be found in appendix table 3 on earnings
and online appendix tables 3-6 for the other outcomes, under columns labeled (6).
  44 In our data, the gap in average earnings of full- and part-time workers is more than 1.0 log point.


                                                     15
eects. When we restrict the sample to those working full-time (not shown) we nd earnings

eects that are about half the magnitude of those presented here.                       We can also measure

hours worked in the CPS (though we cannot in many of the constituent data sets in the

combined sample). There we nd that even conditional on working during the year, the log

of annual hours worked is 0.0358 (0.01) lower in the rst year out after graduating into a

large recession, signicant at the 1% level (table 4, column 6). This eect does, however,

dissipate rapidly.

    To better understand eects on earning power, we next examine log hourly wage rates.

Both the combined sample and the CPS show initial wage losses from graduating into a

large recession of around 4% in the rst year out (columns 4 in tables 3 and 4), signicant

at the 1% level.       The CPS estimates are more persistent; even 10 years out the eect of

-0.014 (0.008) is signicant at the 10% level. On average over the rst 10 years, the CPS

shows an almost 2% wage loss per year, signicant at the 1% level. The average eect in the
                                                            45
combined sample is half that and not signicant.                 Our estimates are substantially smaller

in magnitude than those found by Kahn (2010), who also studies wage rates for graduates in

the 1980s. Though not shown, we also nd impacts of graduating into a recession are larger

for this group than for our sample as a whole.

    Wage rates could be impacted by entry conditions for a number of reasons. Early diculty

nding full-time employment or initial placements in lower-level or mismatched jobs could

impact human capital and limit possibilities for career advancement.                       To understand the

impact of entry conditions on occupational attainment, we exploit two occupation measures.

First, as a measure of overall job quality, we categorize occupations by average earnings
          46
return.        Second, to better understand mismatch, we use an indicator for whether a worker

is in an occupation typical of that major. We dene typical as being in one of the top 5

occupations for the major (hereafter         T op5),   but results are robust to varying the number
                                    47
of top occupations included.           The sample mean of this variable is 0.37. It is also worth
                                                                                                               48
noting that there is a 26% earnings return to being in a common occupation for one's major.

  45 One might have expected a more persistent eect on wages than earnings due to evidence on the conse-
quences of layos, which shows that employment and work hours recover fairly quickly following a layo but
wage losses persist. See, for example, Stevens (1997) and Altonji, Smith and Vidangos (2013). The timing of
the layo may also matter, as layos that happen during a recession have even larger negative eects (Davis
and von Wachter 2014).
  46 Using just ACS data for full-time employed, non-enrolled college graduates aged 25-59 earning at least
$500, we regress log earnings on occupation xed eects (using 1990 3-digit Census codes) and the same
controls included in equation 1 (excluding major xed eects,      Uc , Î² major   and their various interactions),
except we control for year xed eects so that the estimated occupation returns will be less sensitive to
aggregate conditions. Thus occupation quality (the occupation xed eect) is the average earnings return
to the occupation from 2009-2012.
  47 This variable is dened on the same sample as the occupation earnings return measure. We classify
the top 5 occupations for the whole sample period, meaning they are invariant to potential experience. See
Altonji et al. (2012) for evidence on the distribution of similar measures of occupation concentration across
college major by years of potential experience.
  48 We obtain this estimate from an earnings regression on our controls and major xed eects (not shown).
Kinsler and Pavan (2014) estimate returns to college majors accounting for the specicity of the skill learned

                                                       16
Naturally, the    T op5   measure can only be estimated in our combined sample.

    Results are reported in columns 5 and 6 of table 3 and column 5 of table 4.                     In both

data sets, we nd modest impacts of graduating into a large recession on occupation quality.

In the combined data, we estimate a large 0.026 (0.0089) reduction in earnings return to

the occupation in the rst year out, signicant at the 1% level.                This coecient is easily

interpreted since the occupation earnings return is in log earnings units. Thus the eect is

about one-quarter of the earnings eect and more than half the size of the wage eect, where

one would expect impacts on occupation quality to be concentrated. By the third year out

the coecient is less than half the magnitude and is no longer signicant. However, time

spent in lower-paying occupations in the rst few years out of school might impact wages

years later   holding occupation constant, since it might put workers on dierent trajectories for
training and advancement. Furthermore, the CPS shows the occupation eects themselves

might persist. In table 4, column 5, we estimate a smaller eect in the rst year out, -0.015

(0.009), signicant at the 10% level. The experience prole shows initial convergence, but

then divergence back to the same magnitude and signicance 10 years out.

    We do not nd any signicant impacts on our measure of match quality (table 3, column

6), the probability of being in a common occupation given one's major. The eect in the

rst year is -0.011 (0.014) and averages to -0.013 (0.008) over 10 years.                These eects are

modest relative to the sample mean of 0.37. They are also unlikely to have a large impact

on earnings, given the earnings return to         T op5   of 26%. However, given sampling error, we

cannot rule out modest-sized eects.

    To sum up, for the full sample period we nd that graduating into a time of high un-

employment results in substantial earnings losses early in a career.                The losses are driven

partially by an inability to obtain work hours and partially from a loss in earning power. Re-

sults are qualitatively similar across the combined data and the CPS, though magnitudes do

dier somewhat. The data sets are remarkably similar on full-time employment and wages.

The probability of full-time employment is reduced initially by roughly 0.05 (taking an av-

erage of the two estimates), and by 0.013 on average per year over the rst 10 years. Wages

are about 4% lower in the rst year and about 1.5% lower per year over the rst 10 years.

For employment and occupation quality, average impacts over 10 years are pretty similar

across data sets, though not the time path. While employment eects are small, it is likely

that a diculty obtaining jobs in high-paying occupations can account for some of the wage

and earnings losses. Point estimates on earnings eects are not quite as consistent across

data sets, ranging from -0.07 to -0.12 in the rst year out and -0.0135 to -0.022 averaged

over 10 years. Given that both data sets have advantages and disadvantages, we choose as

our preferred estimate an average of the two, roughly 10% earnings loss in the rst year and

and nd a signicant premium for workers who work in a eld related to their degree. They estimate a 30%
return for science majors to working in a job related to their major, similar to what we estimate here for the
full set of majors.


                                                     17
                                                                      49
1.8% loss per year on average over the rst 10 years.



4.2 Changes in the Link between Entry Conditions and Outcomes
The national unemployment rate was 9.3% in 2009 and 9.6% in 2010, 3.5 and 3.8 ppts

(respectively) above the national mean over this time period. The analysis thus far implies

that the outcomes for those graduating in 2009 or 2010 will be similar to those reported

in panel A of tables 3 and 4, which t the eects for a 4 ppt increase in the graduating
                          50
unemployment rate.

    However, we now present evidence that the eect of a one point change in                          Uc has increased
in recent years, suggesting that the consequences of graduating during the Great Recession

might be more severe than our basic results imply. Panel B of tables 3 and 4 reports early

career outcomes for those graduating into a large recession, allowing the eects to dier

for those graduating in 2004 or later. We chose this cuto date so that the post period

includes graduates from the Great Recession, as well as the preceding boom and subsequent
            51
recovery.        Naturally, for this group, we can only identify impacts early in a career.

    Both data sets show substantially larger, negative impacts in the rst year out in the

post period. For example, column 1 of table 3 shows that in the pre-2004 period, workers

graduating into a large recession earned 0.076 (0.0289) log points less in their rst year out.

In contrast, the tted impact for the same sized recession (4 ppt unemployment rate increase)

is more than three times as large for those graduating on or after 2004. Three years out, the

tted impact is still double the magnitude in the post-period, compared to the pre-period.

    Eects are fairly similar in the CPS (table 4, panel B). Impacts on earnings in the post-

period are double that of the pre-period at both 1 and 3 years out. In both data sets, we

also see much larger, negative employment eects in the post-period that are signicant at

both 1 and 3 years out. Impacts on full-time employment are large, negative, and signicant

in both pre- and post-periods, though the data sets dier on which period was worse. Wage

  49 In section 2 we discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the CPS versus the combined sample. One
important drawback in the CPS is an inability to date graduation. To the extent that eects on employment,
full-time status, and hours are relatively temporary, this would inuence eects on earnings in the early years
more than wage rates.
  50 We have also investigated the possibility that the eect of a change is          Uc   is bigger when   Uc   is high, in
which case the consequences of graduating during the Great Recession might be more severe than our results
imply. We estimated a version of our model that allowed the coecient           Î²2   to depend on whether    Uc    is above
or below its sample mean. In the CPS, the point estimates of the slope coecients are very close for all labor
market outcomes, and they are not signicantly dierent. In the combined data set, the estimates are less
precise but, if anything, the estimated eect of     Uc   is smaller in a recession than in a boom (not reported).
For example, in the case of earnings, the coecient       Uc   is -0.028 (.0065) when   Uc   is above its mean and -0.035
(.0080) when it is below its mean.
  51 Specically, we interact all of our key explanatory variables in (1) (P E , P E 2 , U , U P E , U P E 2 , Î² major ,
                                                                                          c   c       c
  major
Î²       P E , Uc Î² major , Uc Î² major P E ) with an indicator equaling 1 if the worker graduated in 2004 or later
(plus a main eect of graduating on or after 2004). Results in this section are similar when we use 2001 or
1998 as the cuto date. The regression coecients underlying the results in panel B of tables 3 and 4 can be
found in appendix table 3 and online appendix tables 3-7, under columns labeled (4) and (7), respectively.


                                                           18
rates exhibit a similar pattern to earnings, though in the combined data convergence is much

more rapid. Eects on occupational attainment do not present a consistent pattern.

     On balance, tables 3 and 4 show that the recent period was a much more dicult time

to graduate into a recession. Most eects remain worse three years after graduation, though

it remains to be seen whether these larger eects will persist beyond that.




5 Dierential Eects Across College Major
5.1 Earnings
Table 5 summarizes regression results on the interaction eects between                           Î² major , the earnings
return to the major, and the graduating unemployment rate (Uc ). In panel B, we report the
                                                                                                             major
dierential impact of graduating into a large recession for a high-return major (Î²                                   = 1),
                                                     major                                             52
compared to the average major (Î²                             = 0),   at various experience levels.          In panel A,
                                             major
we report the main eect of              Î²            as well the coecient on its interaction with potential

experience from a regression that omits major xed eects (column 2 in appendix table 3

and online appendix tables 3-7). The main eect of                        Î² major       for a given dependent variable

provides a natural benchmark in assessing the dierential impact of a large recession across

college majors. We also compare the dierential impact to the estimates of the eect of                                Uc
(the impact on the average graduate) based on the combined data sets, although we are

mindful of the fact that the CPS estimates of the average eect are somewhat dierent.

Aside from the need for data on college major, estimation of the dierential eects is easier

than estimation of the average eect, because it is identied primarily by variation within

graduation year/division cohorts.

     In the rst year after graduation, the loss from graduating into a large recession is 0.055

(0.011) log points less for a high-return major.                       That is, a high-return major gains back

nearly half the initial losses experienced by the average major (-0.12 from table 3). Earnings

inequality across majors thus widens by almost an additional third for those graduating into

a large recession (comparing the 0.055 to the main eect of a standard deviation increase

in   Î² major   on log earnings, 0.18). Over time, the dierential impacts gradually diminish. On

average over the rst 10 years of a career, high-return majors lose 0.020 (0.006) log points

less in earnings, relative to the average major graduating into a large recession.                              This is

more than a complete oset to the main eect reported in table 3, a 0.013 log point average

earnings loss.

     Our results on earnings are in line with Oreopoulos et al.                            (2012), who also nd that

higher-skilled graduates face smaller, less persistent earnings losses when graduating into

a recession.      In fact, our point estimates imply that a major with at least a 1.2 standard

  52 Estimates in the table can be calculated from columns labeled (3) in appendix table 3 and online appendix

tables 3-7, by tting   Î²Ë†7 Â· 4 + Î²Ë†8 P Eit Â· 4   for the specied value of   P Eit .
                                                                19
deviation larger       Î² major   (e.g., chemistry) will not experience a statistically signicant earnings
                                                       53
loss, even in the rst year out of school.

    Figure 1 plots earnings proles for dierent values of  Î² major and Uc , for an easier com-
                     54                                     major
parison of outcomes.    The blue lines show earnings for Î²        = 1.5 (electrical engineering,
                                                      major
for example). The purple lines show earnings for Î²          = 0 (e.g., journalism). The green
                          major
lines show earnings for Î²       = âˆ’1.5 (e.g., art history and ne arts). The solid lines show
earnings for those graduating in the average economy for our sample (Uc = 6.5); the dashed

lines t a 4 ppt lower Uc (boom). Finally, the dotted lines show a 4 ppt higher Uc (bust).

The average tted annual earnings in our sample is $92,000.

    Several interesting features stand out in this graph.                     First, the dierences in earnings

across majors are large and widen with experience. Second, entry conditions also matter.

At 1 year of potential experience, one can easily see the gap in earnings across boom and

bust cohorts (dashed and dotted lines, respectively) within major.                           The gap is largest for

the low-return major (green line). Correspondingly, the time it takes to overcome this gap

is longest for the low-return major. Also, it is better to graduate in a boom as a low-return

major than to graduate in a bust as an average major, at least initially (the dashed green

line is higher than the dotted purple line at 1 year of experience).                          However, it is always

better to be a high-return major, regardless of entry conditions, than the average major (all

the blue lines are above all the purple lines). The reason for this is that busts tend to widen

inequality, pushing workers away from the mean, while booms tend to narrow inequality.

Thus a high-return major graduating in a bust widens his or her advantage over the average

major, while a low-return major graduating in a boom narrows his or her disadvantage.



5.2 Other Labor Market Outcomes
Column 2 of table 5 presents results on the probability of being employed. Panel A shows

that workers with high-return majors have a small, but statistically signicant, employment

advantage that widens with experience; a major with a 1 standard deviation higher                                      Î² major
is 0.004 more likely to be employed and this advantage widens by 0.0012 each year. Panel B

shows that this initial employment advantage widens substantially when graduating into a

large recession. For example, the 0.0067 (0.004) impact on the employment probability in the

  53 We again point out that these eects subsume any impacts of economic conditions in the years surround-
ing college graduation, to the extent that unemployment rates are serially correlated. When we control for
the stream of unemployment rates an individual faces between college graduation and the period when labor
market conditions are measured, as described above, we obtain very similar results. Impacts on earnings are
reduced by about 0.01 log point.
  54 For each   Uc , Î² major , P E   combination, we t log earnings for a white woman in the omitted survey, using
the constants from the rst stage regression and a second-stage regression with no major or graduation
year xed eects, and coecients from our preferred specications for           Uc   and   Uc Î² major .   The   Uc   eect, its
interactions with    P E,   and the main quadratic in       PE   come from the specication in column 1 of appendix
table 3. The    Î² major   main eect and     PE   interaction are from column 2, and the    Î² major   interaction with      Uc
is from column 3. To convert to expected earnings, we take the anti-log of this plus 0.5 times the residual
variance from the rst stage, making the assumption that the errors are log normal.
                                                             20
rst year out implies a more than doubling of the initial gap. This eect is only marginally

signicant and fades quickly after the rst year. On the other hand, the probability of being

employed full-time (column 3) shows much larger and more persistent dierential eects.

From panel A, high-return majors are on average 0.051 more likely to be employed full-time,

a large advantage relative to the base probability of 0.77. This advantage gradually declines

in magnitude as workers gain experience.               From panel B, high-return majors graduating

into a large recession experience an additional 0.015 increase in their probability of being

employed full-time over the rst 10 years of their career.            The advantage is largest in the

rst year out when high-return majors increase their initial advantage by 0.03 (or 59%), and

it osets roughly half the impact on the average major (table 3, column 3). These eects

remain signicant through the 7th year.

    Thus, the dierential impact of graduating into a large recession on job-nding capability

can partially explain why the earnings eects are muted for high-return majors.                      At the

same time, even full-time workers experience large earnings dierentials across college major.

Though not shown here, we nd that the earnings eects are still about half as large when we

restrict the sample to full-time workers. Thus the dierential earnings eects must be driven

in part by a dierential impact on earning power, in addition to dierential impacts on the

ability to obtain work hours. Indeed, column 4 shows that high-return majors graduating

into a large recession also widen their advantage in hourly rates of pay. Panel A shows that

a one standard deviation higher          Î² major   is associated with a 0.15 log point higher wage rate

in their rst year out, with this advantage widening by 0.003 each year.                  Panel B shows

that this initial advantage widens by 15% when graduating into a large recession, with

impacts persisting for roughly as long as the earnings eect. Again, the dierential impact

for high-return majors osets roughly half of the initial eect on wages for the average major

graduating into a recession (table 3, column 4).

    Columns 5 and 6 present results on occupational attainment. From column 5, panel A,

high-return majors work in occupations that pay 0.13 log points more than the occupations

of the average major. Panel B shows that this initial occupational advantage widens by 0.011

log points (8%) for those who graduate into a large recession. This dierential advantage

dissipates with experience but is still signicant even 7 years out of school.               Thus, a sub-

stantial part of the earnings and wage eects could be driven by lower             Î² major   workers being
                                    55
relegated to lower quality jobs.

  55 Our estimates imply that much of the earnings dierential across college majors can be accounted for by
dierences in occupation quality. From panel A, a one standard deviation increase in   Î² major   is associated
with a 0.18 increase in log earnings (column 1, panel A), as well as an increase in occupational quality of
0.13 log earnings points (column 5, panel A). Taken at face value these estimates suggest that 71% of the
earnings return to college major is associated with access to higher-paying occupations, although this is an
overstatement because we did not control for college major when estimating the occupation xed eects.
Using the 171 major categories available in the ACS in a log wage equation, Altonji et al. (2012) report
that among men the standard deviation of college major coecients falls from 0.177 to 0.098 when detailed
occupation controls are added. The corresponding values for women are 0.146 and 0.074.


                                                        21
    Furthermore, while high-return majors are not more likely to be found in an occupation

common to other workers in their major (column 6, panel A), they are dierentially more

likely to be found in a top-5 occupation when graduating into a large recession (panel B).

Impacts actually become larger as workers gain experience, and are positive and signicant

over the rst ten years on average. It could be that early diculty nding good work impacts

one's ability to stay on track later in a career. Low          Î² major   graduates are less successful

in obtaining the types of jobs they had in mind when they chose their major, and likely

experience earnings losses as a result.

    On balance, table 5 shows that high-return majors increase their already strong advantage

when graduating into a recession; they experience signicantly milder eects along every

dimension we can measure. Early on, ability or versatility serves high-return majors well in

that they can nd higher paying jobs with more work hours. Early struggles for low-return

majors appear to stay with them since they are more likely to be mis-matched even years

later.



5.3 The Great Recession
Panel C presents estimates in which we allow the eects to dier for those graduating before
                                                                                             56
2004 and those graduating in or around the Great Recession (2004 or later).                       In tables

3 and 4, we found that the average major took a substantially larger earnings hit when

graduating in this later period.         Here, we nd for almost every outcome that the relative

advantage of high-return majors declines compared to the pre-2004 period. From column 1,

the earnings advantage for those graduating post-2004 is only half of what we would have

predicted from data before 2004 and the size of the recession.                Employment dierentials

essentially disappear, as does the dierential impact on obtaining a job in a high-paying

occupation, while high-return majors actually face relative disadvantages in nding full-time

work. We investigate these ndings further in the next section.



5.4 Additional Results and Discussion
We have estimated all of our results separately by gender and obtain very similar patterns.

Also, our results are robust to a number of alternative measures of the skill level of the

major, meaning our results are not particularly sensitive to the way we dene               Î² major .57
    Another way of characterizing college majors that is not necessarily reective of skill,

but could be particularly relevant over the business cycle, is by the degree of occupational

  56 Regression coecients underlying these estimates can be found in appendix table 3 and online appendix
tables 3-7, under columns labeled (5).
  57 For example, we nd similar results when using the average SAT math score in the major, as well as
an SAT-ACT composite, with both measures obtained from the Baccalaureate and Beyond panels. Also,
results are robust to using a proxy measure of the skill level required in the occupations a major typically
enters into, which uses O*NET task data on critical thinking and problem solving. Details of these analyses
are available upon request.
                                                    22
concentration. Some majors typically enter into a narrower set of occupations than others.

These majors might be more prone to sectoral shocks, since they have a less diverse set of

options. We have explored whether the eects of graduating into a recession depend upon

the occupational concentration of the major, dened as the share of graduates within a major

who are in the top 5 occupations for that major. Nursing, computer programming, and civil

engineering have the highest occupation concentration levels, while environmental studies,

lm and other arts, and other social sciences have the lowest.                 We nd modest negative

eects on earnings and wages in the rst few years out for majors with higher occupation

concentration graduating into a downturn, as well as large, negative, persistent impacts on

the probability of being in an occupation common to one's major. This is consistent with the

notion that versatility of a major is an important factor in weathering a recession. However,

we nd almost no correlation between average earnings return to a major and the occupation

concentration of the major. Consequently, these eects cannot help explain our nding that

earnings of high-return majors are less sensitive to recessions. Results for the occupational

concentration measure are available upon request.

    We have also investigated the impact of entry conditions on graduate educational attain-
                                                                          58
ment, a subject that has received little attention in the past.                Dierences in educational

attainment could aect earnings outcomes by altering the composition of recent college grad-

uates in the labor force across the business cycle. And, if many students graduating into

a recession are induced to obtain further schooling, they could eventually out-earn their

counterparts who graduated in better times. Table 6 contains the results of regressions for
                       59
graduate education.         We nd that a large recession is associated with a small but statisti-

cally signicant increase of 0.0048 in the probability of holding an advanced degree among

those with at least 5 years of potential experience. And, consistent with the changes in rel-

ative opportunity cost, higher      Î² major   majors experience a small but statistically signicant

osetting negative eect on advanced degree attainment when graduating into a bust. While

these eects are intuitive, they are too small to substantially impact sample selection across

years of potential experience.        Including enrolled workers and controlling for educational

attainments has little eect on the results reported above.

  58 Kahn (2010) shows that students graduating in the worst part of the 1981 recession obtain an additional
year of graduate school, on average, relative to those graduating in the best times. Bedard and Herman (2008)
examine the impact of state-level economic conditions on graduate enrollment for a sample of science and
engineering majors and nd counter-cyclical enrollment for males in Ph.D. programs, pro-cyclical enrollment
for males in Master's programs, and largely acyclical enrollment for women.      Johnson (2013) nds for a
more representative sample of college graduates that graduate enrollment is counter-cyclical for women and
acyclical for men.
  59 Due to diculties in dening graduate education across data sets, this analysis is restricted to the ACS
2009-2012. We focus on graduates from 1976 to 2007 with at least 5 years of potential experience.




                                                     23
6 Dierences in Demand Cyclicality Across Major
Above, we showed that high-skilled majors are somewhat sheltered from the negative eects

of graduating into a recession, relative to lower-skilled majors, but that this advantage

declined in the Great Recession.        Also, overall, recent college graduates fared much worse

in the Great Recession than what would have been predicted from past data, given the size

of the recession. Interestingly, both larger magnitude        Uc   eects and the smaller magnitude
       major
Uc Î²           eects do not appear to be solely a phenomenon of the Great Recession. We obtain

very similar results when we include graduates from 1998-2011 in the later period, which

includes both the dot com boom years of the late 1990s and the 2001 recession. That is,

graduates from the 2001 recession saw similar labor market impacts per unit change in                   Uc
as those from the Great Recession.

   There are a number of potential explanations for the dierent pattern in the recent two

recessions. First, both saw prolonged jobless recoveries, meaning unlucky recent graduates

might have had to spend more time on the sidelines.                This is consistent with the larger

negative impact of      Uc   on employment probabilities in the post-2004 period, shown in tables

3 and 4.        Second, the industries impacted by recessions have varied over time.                Earlier

recessions tended to generate disproportionate employment losses in manufacturing and/or

construction, from which college graduates as a group were likely sheltered. These industries

have been important in the recent two recessions, but the dot com bust also saw substantial

job loss in information technology, while the Great Recession saw substantial job losses

almost everywhere, including high-return elds like nance. These recessions may therefore

have been more costly to college graduates and in particular high-earning college graduates.

   In this section we explore whether dierences in demand cyclicality across college major

can account for the dierential impacts of entry conditions, and, whether changes in this

cyclicality across majors, or, for college graduates as a whole can explain the broader-based
                                                                               major
impacts of the Great Recession. We develop a major-specic unemployment rate (Uc     )
that varies over time and can proxy for major-specic labor demand conditions. The mea-

sure is based on industry-occupation-specic annual unemployment rates obtained from the

March CPS, which we then aggregate to the college major level using xed weights that
                                                                                               60
reect the occupation-industry composition of each major for workers aged 26-59.

  60 The major-specic unemployment rate is a weighted average of occupation-industry-specic unemploy-
ment rates, using shares from the major-occupation-industry mapping as weights. An unemployment rate is
dened as the number of unemployed people who report that their most recent job was in a given occupation-
industry cell divided by this plus employment in the occupation-industry cell. We use 3-digit 1990 Census
occupations and 12 major industry categories also based on 1990 Census codes. The major to occupation-
industry cell mapping is generated for the 51 Department of Education major categories using just the ACS
and NSCG samples (the largest of our data sets) for workers age 26-59. For the SIPP, we generate a cross-
walk between the Department of Education majors and the SIPP majors based on the names of the majors,
available in an online appendix. The demand measure for each SIPP category is the weighted average of the
demand measures for the constituent Department of Education majors. The weights are based on the shares
of each component Department of Education major category in our pooled data set, with SIPP excluded.
The mapping and weights are computed at the national level rather than the divisional level.
                                                   24
    Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between the major-specic unemployment rates and

aggregate conditions over time, plotting the average major-specic unemployment rate for

three groups of college majors  those in the top           Î² major   quartile, the middle 50% of majors,

and the bottom     Î² major   quartile  from 1971 to 2012, as well as the national unemployment
        61
rate.

    We wish to highlight three qualitative patterns in this graph before moving to a regres-

sion analysis. First, for almost all of the sample period, the unemployment rate is highest

for the low-earning majors (green line) and lowest for the high-earning majors (blue line).

This illustrates a potential confounding factor: unemployment rates reect both labor de-

mand conditions and the ability to nd employment given demand conditions. Below, we

will estimate how the major-specic unemployment rate moves with the aggregate unem-

ployment rate and how this varies with          Î² major .   There, controls for major xed eects will

remove permanent dierences across majors in the ability to nd employment. However, if

the importance of ability dierences varies over the business cycle, then dierences in the

sensitivity of major-specic unemployment rates to the aggregate unemployment rate are

not a clean measure of major-specic dierences in labor demand cyclicality.                     Hence this
                                                       62
analysis should be taken with a grain of salt.

    Second, all lines exhibit the same cyclical pattern, but, for much of the period, the

amplitudes are quite dierent. The national unemployment rate (yellow dashed line) tends

to have larger increases in recessions and decreases in booms than any of the major-specic

unemployment rates, reecting the fact that the labor market for college graduates is overall

less cyclical. Also, for much of the period, there is an analogous pattern across major-specic

unemployment rates, with the lower          Î² major   groups experiencing higher amplications. This
                          major
suggests that lower   Î²           majors tend to be found in jobs that are more cyclically sensitive.

    Third, these cyclical patterns changed dramatically in the last decade. The size of the

run up and run down of the unemployment rate surrounding both the 2001 recession and the

Great Recession look very similar across groups of majors and more similar to the national

unemployment rate. This suggests that labor demand for jobs that high-return majors tend

to go into, and the market for college graduates as a whole, has become more cyclically

sensitive.

    We now quantify the relationship between the major-specic unemployment rates and

aggregate economic conditions by regressing           Ucmajor   on the divisional value of   Uc , Î² major   and

Î² major âˆ— Uc , plus a cubic time trend.    Column 1 of table 7 reports this regression over the time

  61 These reect unweighted averages of major-specic national unemployment rates in a given year. Division
unemployment rates look similar but noisier.
  62 We have also explored a major-specic employment growth measure to better isolate the labor demand
component from the adaptability of workers in a major. The results described below are similar when using
this measure. However, the link between the change in employment and the level of employment demand may
be more tenuous, which is why we prefer the unemployment rate. We do not use major-specic employment
levels because the link between this measure and the aggregate unemployment rate is highly sensitive to how
we detrend it.

                                                      25
period 1971-2012, where an observation is a major-division-year. The coecient on                        Uc is 0.25
(0.0173), which says that the unemployment rate for college graduates uctuates only about

one fourth as much as that of the whole labor market. The coecient on                        Î² major   is negative

and signicant, meaning that higher-skilled majors are less likely to be unemployed. The

interaction term of -0.026 (0.004) on         Î² major âˆ—Uc indicates that when aggregate unemployment
rises, labor demand conditions deteriorate less for higher-earning majors, and also possibly
                                                                                 63
that higher-earning majors adapt better to demand conditions.

   The fact that demand for high-skilled majors is less sensitive to the business cycle could

help account for the widening earnings advantage of high-skilled majors in recessions com-

pared to booms.        However, given the very small magnitude of the interaction eect on

major-specic unemployment (-0.026), relative to the overall impact of the unemployment
                                                                                                                  64
rate (0.25), one would not expect the measure to explain much of the earnings dierentials.

   Columns 3 and 4 investigate whether these relationships changed in the period surround-

ing the Great Recession. They report estimates of the same regression for 1971-2003 and for

2004-2011, respectively. We also control for a cubic time trend over the 1971-2003 period,

but this makes little dierence (compare columns 2 and 3). The main eect of                        Uc   increases

from 0.200 (0.0175) in the earlier period to 0.508 (0.0277) in the later period, a factor of 2.5.

That is, the labor market for college graduates became much more correlated with aggregate

market conditions. This is reected in the gure, which shows that the run up in major-

specic unemployment in the Great Recession was very similar to that for the national rate.

This could easily explain why the negative eects of entry conditions were much larger in

magnitude for graduates from 2004 onwards.

   The coecient on        Î² major âˆ—Uc declines in magnitude from -0.0344 (0.0039) for 1971-2003 to
-0.0126 (0.0057), indicating the cyclicality of demand for higher-skilled majors has increased

relative to the average major. For 1971-2003, demand for higher-skilled majors was 17.2%

less cyclically sensitive than for the average major. It declined to 2.5% for the recent period.

This may in part explain the reduced advantage for high-skilled majors graduating into the

Great Recession, compared to the earlier period.                 But since estimated dierences in the

cyclicality of   Ucmajor   were relatively small even in the earlier period, the decline is probably

not the whole explanation.




7 Conclusion
In this paper we measure the labor market consequences of graduating from college in times

of higher unemployment and study how those consequences vary with the skill level of one's

  63 We obtain similar results when we use national-level unemployment rates and an observation is a major-
year (not shown).
  64 When we add controls for   Ucmajor   and its interaction with   PE   to the regressions underlying table 5, we
nd almost no change to the coecients governing the dierential eects of entry conditions across          Î² major .

                                                        26
college major.   Most of the analysis pools information on the graduating classes of 1974-

2011. However, we also examine whether labor market conditions matter more for recent

college classes, which include those from the Great Recession. We use both the CPS and a

combined data set that pools information from seven distinct surveys to provide the most

comprehensive analysis of the eects of entry conditions on college graduates to date. Given

that the nature of economic uctuations varies, the long time period we work with brings

substantial added value to this question, as does our analysis across elds of study, which

has received little attention in the literature.

   We nd that early careers are disrupted by poor labor market conditions.        For college

graduates on average, we estimate that earnings decline by roughly 10% in the rst year

out after graduating into a large recession, and by about 1.8% per year on average over the

rst 10 years.   These eects mostly fade out over the rst seven years of a career.     They

are driven by short-term negative eects on the employment rate and especially the full-

time employment rate, as well as somewhat more persistent eects on wage rates. A shift to

lower-paying occupations accounts for a substantial fraction of the initial wage loss, although

the CPS and the combined data dier on the persistence of this occupational downgrading

eect.

   We also nd that the early careers of higher-skilled majors (as measured by the earn-

ings premium) are less sensitive to aggregate conditions at graduation. In other words, the

earnings gap across college majors widens in recessions. A person in a typically high-earning

major increases his or her earnings advantage by almost a third when graduating into a

severe recession, relative to an average major, and this eect remains large for the rst seven

years after college graduation. These dierential eects reect increases in the probability of

employment and full-time employment for higher-skilled majors relative to lower-skilled ma-

jors graduating into a recession, as well as dierential eects on wage rates and occupational

attainment.

   We investigate the extent to which dierences in labor demand cyclicality across college

major can account for the dierential eects of entry conditions.      While we do nd that

the unemployment rates of higher paying majors are less sensitive to the business cycle, the

dierences in sensitivity are too small to account for the dierential impacts on earnings.

It could instead be that since lower-skilled majors spend more of their early experience

years out of full-time employment, they suer more from hysteresis, due for example to skill

depreciation. We had expected lower-skilled majors to be less sensitive to this depreciation,

but evidence suggests that there are in general large penalties for time spent out of work

(Kroft et al. (2013), Bertrand et al. (2010)). Oreopoulos et al. (2012) posited that higher-

skilled majors can more easily recover from early setbacks because of more productive job

search. This seems unlikely in our setting, however, since the largest dierential eects are

concentrated in the years just after graduation.

   Eects on occupation quality and match quality may be able to account for some of the
                                                   27
dierential earnings and wage eects across majors. High-skilled majors graduating into a

recession are relatively more likely to be in occupations that are both higher paying and

more typical for their major, compared to lower-skilled majors.       The occupation quality

dierentials fade out over the rst 10 years of a career, but the match quality eects persist.

This suggests that an initial ability to obtain quality work hours serves high-skilled majors

well, prevents any negative impacts of early time spent out of full-time employment, and

leaves them better set up to be in jobs that are a good t even years later. Though earnings

and wage dierentials due to entry conditions do not persist across college majors, persistent

dierences in the ability to attain a job one likely had in mind when choosing his or her

major could result in persistent dierences in job satisfaction and well-being.

   Overall, our results for the 1974-2011 time span t well with the previous literature.

They are quite consistent with Oreopoulos et al. (2012), who study labor market shocks in

Canada and nd modest earnings eects of graduating in a recession that persist for a few

years and are smaller in magnitude for higher-skilled majors. Our estimates of wage eects

for the average major are smaller in both magnitude and persistence, compared with Kahn's

(2010) analysis of the 1981-82 recession.   Besides studying a broader set of demographic

groups (Kahn restricts her analysis to white males) we also study college graduates from

a much longer range of years.    Concerning educational attainment, our nding that those

graduating into a recession are slightly more likely to obtain an advanced degree is consistent

with Kahn and broadly consistent with the small literature on the cyclicality of graduate

enrollment rates (Bedard and Herman (2008), Johnson (2013)). Again, we provide evidence

for a larger range of graduation years and by college major.

   We nd eects on earnings are substantially more negative for graduates from the Great

Recession. The per unit eect of an increase in the aggregate unemployment rate for grad-

uates from 2004-2011 one year after graduation is between 2 and 3 times the value for

graduates from 1974-2003. A substantial part of this increase is probably explained by the

fact that the unemployment rates of college graduates as whole became much more sensitive

to aggregate economic conditions in the years surrounding the Great Recession.

   We also nd that the eects of economic conditions have become much more evenly

distributed across college major. It looks as though the modern recession is more broad-

based, impacting recent college graduates and higher-skilled majors to a greater extent than

previous recessions. The two most recent recessions may then have leveled the playing eld to

some degree across education groups and within college graduates; that is, college graduates

bore something closer to their fair share, relative to non-college workers, and the same was

true for high-earning majors relative to low-earnings majors. Further work is needed on the

types of shocks that lead to persistent (and dierential) impacts on recent college graduates.

This may yield a better understanding of the nature of recessions and recoveries of the last

two decades.



                                              28
References
 [1] Altonji, Joseph G. (1993). The Demand for and Return to Education When Education

    Outcomes are Uncertain, Journal of Labor Economics, Volume 11, No. 1. 48-83.


 [2] Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir (2012) Heterogeneity in Human

    Capital Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers, Annual

    Review of Economics, Volume 4. 185-223.


 [3] Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer (2014) Trends in Earnings Dier-

    entials Across College Majors and the Changing Task Composition of Jobs, American

    Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Volume 104, No. 5. 387-393.


 [4] Altonji, Joseph G., Anthony A. Smith, and Ivan Vidangos (2013) Modeling Earnings

    Dynamics, Econometrica, 81(1): 1395-1454.


 [5] Arcidiacono, Peter (2004) Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major, Journal

    of Econometrics, Volume 121, No. 1-2. 343-375.


 [6] Baker, George, Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom (1994) The Wage Policy of a

    Firm, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 109, No. 4. 921-955.


 [7] Beaudry, Paul, and John DiNardo (1991) The Eect of Implicit Contracts on the

    Movement of Wages Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data, Journal of

    Political Economy, Volume 99, No. 4. 665-688.


 [8] Bedard, Kelly, and D.A. Herman (2008) Who Goes to Graduate/Professional School?

    The Importance of Economic Fluctuations, Undergraduate Field, and Ability, Eco-

    nomics of Education Review, 27, 197210.


 [9] Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz (2010) Dynamics of the

    Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors, American

    Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Volume 2, No. 3. 228-255.


[10] Bils, Mark, and Kenneth J. McLaughlin (2001) Interindustry Mobility and the Cyclical

    Upgrading of Labor, Journal of Labor Economics, Volume 19, No. 1. 94-135.


[11] Blom, Erica (2012) Labor Market Determinants of College Major, Mimeo, Yale Uni-

    versity.


[12] Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (2001) Dropout and enrollment trends in the post-

    war period: What went wrong in the 1970s? in J. Gruber (Ed.), Risky Behavior Among

    Youths:    An Economic Analysis (pp. 439-482). Chicago:    The University of Chicago

    Press.

                                            29
[13] Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter (2014) Recessions and the Cost of Job Loss,

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, April.


[14] Devereux, Paul (2002) Occupational Upgrading and the Business Cycle, Labour, Vol-

    ume 16, No. 3. 423-452.


[15] Gibbons, Robert, and Michael Waldman (2006) Enriching a Theory of Wage and Pro-

    motion Dynamics Inside Firms, Journal of Labor Economics, Volume 24, No. 1. 203-

    207.


[16] Hershbein, Brad J. (2012) Graduating High School in a Recession: Work, Education,

    and Home Production, The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Volume 12,

    No. 1, Article 3.


[17] Johnson, Matthew T. (2013) The impact of business cycle uctuations on graduate

    school enrollment, Economics of Education Review, Volume 34. 122134.


[18] Kahn, Lisa B. (2010) "The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from

    College in a Bad Economy," Labour Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2. 303-316.


[19] Kinsler, Josh, and Ronni Pavan (2014) The Specicity of General Human Capital:

    Evidence from College Major Choice, Forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics.


[20] Kondo, Ayako (2008)  Dierential Eects of Graduating During Recessions Across Race

    and Gender, Mimeo.


[21] Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew Notowidigdo (2013) Duration Dependence

    and Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment, Quarterly Journal

    of Economics, Volume 128, No. 3. 1123-1167.


[22] Liu, Kai, Kjell G. Salvanes, and Erik O. Sorensen (2012) Good Skills in Bad Times:

    Cyclical Skill Mismatch and the Long-Term Eects of Graduating in a Recession, IZA

    Discussion Paper No. 6820.


[23] Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel (2002) "Estimation and Inference in Two-step

    Econometric Models," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Volume 20, No. 1.

    88-97.


[24] Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012) Short and Long-Term

    Career Eects of Graduating in a Recession. American Economic Journal: Applied

    Economics, Volume 4, No. 1. 1-29.


[25] Oyer, Paul (2006) Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes for

    Economists, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20. 143-160.

                                           30
[26] Oyer, Paul (2008) The Making of an Investment Banker: Macroeconomic Shocks, Ca-

    reer Choice, and Lifetime Income, The Journal of Finance, 63. 2601-2628.


[27] Shimer, Robert (2004) Search Intensity, Mimeo.


[28] Stevens, Ann Hu (1997) Persistent Eects of Job Displacement: The Importance of

    Multiple Job Losses, Journal of Labor Economics, Volume 15, No. 1. 165-188.


[29] Topel, Robert, and Michael P. Ward (1992) Job Mobility and the Careers of Young

    Men, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 107, No. 2. 439-79.


[30] Turner, Sarah E., and William G. Bowen (1999) Choice of Major:      The Changing

    (Unchanging) Gender Gap, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume 52, No. 2.

    289-313.


[31] Wozniak, Abigail (2010) Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor

    Market Opportunities? Journal of Human Resources Volume 45, No. 4. 944-970.




                                           31
                        Average Earnings by Experience, Entry Conditions, and Major
                               College Major Categories: blue = +1.5, purple = 0, green = â€1.5
                            Entry conditions: dashed line = boom, solid = ave, dotted line = bust
           140000


           130000


           120000


           110000


           100000
$ (2006)




           90000


           80000


           70000


           60000


           50000


           40000
                    1        2          3          4         5             6      7          8      9   10
                                                           Potential Experience



                                                             32
                                        Figure 2: Major-specific unemployment rates




                                                                                               10
               6
Major-specific unemp. rate (%)




                                                                                               National unemp. rate, (%)
                          5




                                                                                                                 8
          3       4




                                                                                                     6
  2            1




                                                                                               4
                                 1970           1980            1990    2000          2010
                                                                 Year

                                            Top quartile of majors 33   Middle 50% of majors
                                            Bottom quartile of majors   National unemp rate
                           Table 1: Summary Statistics for Combined Earnings Sample
                with Equal Weighting across Graduation Year-Potential Experience-Division Cells
Variable                                                  n        Mean       St Dev         Min                                                   Max
Male                                               537,458           0.49        0.50            0                                                     1
Black                                              537,390           0.06        0.24            0                                                     1
Hispanic                                           537,390           0.03        0.18            0                                                     1
Potential experience                               537,465           6.86        3.59            1                                                    13
Graduation year                                    537,465       1989.99         9.38       1974                                                   2011
Graduation unemployment rate (division) (%)        537,368           6.27        1.79          2.8                                                  12.5
Year                                               537,465       1996.83         9.62       1977                                                   2012
Annual earnings (2006 $)                           537,465        47,180      33,395          500                                              400,000*
Log annual earnings                                537,465         10.53         0.76        6.22                                                 12.90
Full-time                                          535,407           0.87        0.31            0                                                     1
Employed                                           535,046           0.96        0.17            0                                                     1
Occupation log earnings return                     519,382          -0.06        0.33       -1.60                                                   0.81
In top 5 most common occupations for major         519,382           0.37        0.47            0                                                     1
Î²major                                             537,465          -0.03        0.83       -2.59                                                   1.89
Highest grade completed                            537,454         16.44         0.94           16                                                    20
                                    Summary Statistics for Relevant Samples
Employed                                           673,998           0.89        0.30            0                                                           1
Full-time                                          671,343           0.77        0.40            0                                                           1
Notes: The sample is the combined data set described in the text. The primary sample (top panel) includes nonenrolled workers age 22-35 with potential
experience 1 to 13 with a valid annual earnings observation (greater than $500 in 2006 dollars). The regression samples for employed and full-time (bottom
panel) exclude enrolled workers but have no restriction on earnings, and also include those with potential experience equal to zero.
*Topcoded




                                                                            34
            Table 2: Earnings Premiums for Department of Education Major Categories
Major:                               Î²major     Major:                                                           Î²major
Chemical Engineering                 1.90       Earth and Other Physical Sci                                      0.07
Electrical Engineering               1.48       Engineering Tech                                                  0.04
Finance                              1.42       Journalism                                                       -0.03
Economics                            1.40       History                                                          -0.13
Mechanical Engineering               1.29       Architecture                                                     -0.15
Chemistry                            1.27       Communications                                                   -0.25
All Other Engineering                1.09       Public Health                                                    -0.41
Biological Sciences                  1.08       Protective Services                                              -0.47
Computer and Info Tech               1.03       Letters: Lit, Writing, Other                                     -0.65
Civil Engineering                    1.01       Psychology                                                       -0.66
Accounting                           1.01       Environmental Studies                                            -0.69
Nursing                              0.93       Foreign Language                                                 -0.72
Political Science                    0.77       Leisure Studies and Basic Skills                                 -0.74
Computer Programming                 0.74       Other Social Science                                             -0.79
Mathematics                          0.71       Fitness and Nutrition                                            -0.94
Physics                              0.69       Agriculture and Agr. Science                                     -1.00
Marketing                            0.63       Commercial Art and Design                                        -1.07
International Relations              0.63       Social Work & Human Resource                                     -1.15
Other Med/Health Services            0.62       Family and Consumer Science                                      -1.25
Misc. Business and Med. Suppor       0.49       Secondary Education                                              -1.37
Medical Tech                         0.48       Library Science and Education                                    -1.46
Precision Prod. & Industrial Arts    0.39       Art History and Fine Arts                                        -1.48
Business Mgmt and Admin              0.23       Film and Other Arts                                              -1.71
Multidisciplinary or General Sci     0.13       Music and Speech/Drama                                           -1.79
Public Administration and Law        0.12       Philosophy and Religion                                          -2.32
Area, Ethnic, and Civ. Studies       0.10
Notes: Î²major is the earnings return to the major, based on authors' calculations, given in standard deviations. See the text
for details on how this is calculated. Major categories differ in each data set we use and are crosswalked to these
Department of Education categories by the authors, based on the names and/or descriptions of the majors.




                                                              35
                                                          Table 3: Effect of 4-ppt Rise in Graduation Unemployment Rate
                                                                             Employment:                                                                     Occupation Variables:
                               log(Earnings)                 Pr(Employed)                   Pr(Full time)                  log(Wages)              Earnings Return              Pr(in top 5 occ)
                                       (1)                           (2)                           (3)                           (4)                         (5)                         (6)
                                                                                      Panel A: All Graduation Cohorts, 1974-2011
  Avg. effect for
  potexp 1 to 10                   -0.0135                       -0.0074*                    -0.0154***                      -0.0096                    -0.0036                       -0.0131
         (s.e.)                    (0.0107)                      (0.0041)                      (0.0058)                      (0.0081)                   (0.0055)                     (0.0081)
    At potexp =
            1                    -0.1177***                      -0.0046                     -0.0664***                    -0.0425***                 -0.0264***                      -0.0110
                                   (0.0239)                      (0.0065)                      (0.0119)                      (0.0197)                   (0.0089)                     (0.0136)
            3                    -0.0400***                      -0.0036                     -0.0275***                      -0.0146                    -0.0096                       -0.0138
                                   (0.0141)                      (0.0047)                      (0.0071)                      (0.0111)                   (0.0064)                     (0.0098)
            7                     0.0285**                       -0.0079                         0.0054                        0.0045                     0.0055                      -0.0142
                                   (0.0142)                      (0.0055)                      (0.0081)                      (0.0109)                   (0.0067)                     (0.0101)
           10                        0.0037                    -0.0165***                      -0.0094                       -0.0133                      0.0007                      -0.0099
                                   (0.0126)                      (0.0052)                        (0.004)                     (0.0107)                   (0.0058)                     (0.0098)
                                                                         Panel B: Pre-2004 Graduation Cohorts versus 2004 and After
                               Pre            Post           Pre            Post           Pre            Post           Pre            Post        Pre             Post         Pre            Post
    At potexp =
            1             -0.0757*** -0.2435***            0.0057        -0.0124* -0.0752*** -0.0387*** -0.0343 -0.1051*** -0.0241** -0.0335*** -0.0263                                        0.0118
                            (0.0289)         (0.0246)     (0.0096)         (0.0074)     (0.0170)         (0.0114)     (0.0260)         (0.0182)   (0.0119)         (0.0084)   (0.0183)         (0.0159)
            3               -0.0130          -0.0232       0.0033       -0.0111** -0.0268*** -0.0381*** -0.0120                        -0.0036    -0.0078          0.0009     -0.0222*       0.0240**
                            (0.0164)         (0.0216)     (0.0063)         (0.0049)     (0.0095)         (0.0084)     (0.0143)         (0.0148)   (0.0081)         (0.0101)   (0.0126)         (0.0115)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: The sample is the combined data set described in the text. Observations are major-gradyear-division-potexp cells, weighted by the major's share within division-gradyear-potexp (potexp = years
since graduation). Columns 2 and 3 include those age 22-35, not enrolled, with 0 to 13 years potexp. Columns 1, and 4-6 additionally exclude workers without earnings and those with 0 years potexp.
The graduation unemployment rate is the divisional unemployment rate in the year of college graduation. We also control for survey, major, gender-by-race, and division fixed effects, a cubic time
trend, a quadratic in potexp interacted with gender, and the earnings return to the major interacted with: the graduating unemployment rate, potential experience, and the product of the two. For Panel
B, we also include an indicator for whether the person graduated in or after 2004 and the interactions of the post-2004 indicator with the quadratic in potexp, the graduation unemployment rate (U c),
Uc*potexp, U c*potexp2, the earnings return to the major and with all of the interaction terms involving the earnings return to the major.




                                                                                                     36
                                       Table 4: Effect of 4-ppt Rise in Graduation Unemployment Rate (March CPS, 1976 to 2012)
                                                                              Employment:
                                Log earnings                  Pr(Employed)                    Pr(Full time)                   Log wages                    Occ Earnings              Log hours last year
                                       (1)                            (2)                            (3)                           (4)                            (5)                            (6)
                                                                                       Panel A: All Graduation Cohorts, 1975-2011
  Avg. effect for
  potexp 1 to 10                  -0.0224**                      -0.0062**                      -0.0114**                     -0.0197***                       -0.0071                       -0.0017
         (s.e.)                    (0.0097)                       (0.0032)                       (0.0047)                      (0.0063)                       (0.0049)                       (0.0058)
    At potexp =
            1                     -0.0696***                    -0.0182***                     -0.0442***                     -0.0342***                      -0.0146*                     -0.0358***
                                   (0.0158)                       (0.0052)                       (0.0079)                      (0.0097)                       (0.0088)                       (0.0102)
            3                     -0.0343***                     -0.0087**                     -0.0220***                     -0.0246***                       -0.0068                       -0.0087
                                   (0.0116)                       (0.0034)                       (0.0051)                      (0.0077)                       (0.0056)                       (0.0073)
            7                       -0.0034                        -0.0012                         0.0013                      -0.0142*                        -0.0037                       0.0124*
                                   (0.0120)                       (0.0044)                       (0.0065)                      (0.0079)                       (0.0064)                       (0.0072)
           10                       -0.0149                        -0.0059                         0.0003                      -0.0141*                      -0.0120**                       -0.0007
                                   (0.0124)                       (0.0043)                       (0.0057)                      (0.0081)                       (0.0050)                       (0.0076)
           12                             -0.0805**                                                                                    -0.0769*                       -0.0268*
                                             -0.0382                                                                                     -0.0383                        -0.0141
                                                                            Panel B: Pre-2004 Graduation Cohorts versus 2004 and After
                                Pre           Post            Pre            Post            Pre            Post           Pre            Post            Pre            Post            Pre            Post
    At potexp =
            1              -0.0467** -0.0894*** -0.0170** -0.0321*** -0.0423*** -0.0517*** -0.0291** -0.0563*** -0.0083                                                 -0.0169       -0.0210          -0.0252*
                            (0.0193)         (0.0258)      (0.0065)         (0.0093)      (0.0093)         (0.0144)     (0.0113)         (0.0195)      (0.0112)         (0.0132)      (0.0128)         (0.0135)
            3                -0.0214         -0.0566*       -0.0057      -0.0498*** -0.0183*** -0.0674*** -0.0219*** -0.0672*** -0.0025                              -0.0255**         0.0005          0.0112
                            (0.0132)         (0.0293)      (0.0040)         (0.0088)      (0.0057)         (0.0152)     (0.0083)         (0.0227)      (0.0069)         (0.0125)      (0.0087)         (0.0228)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: The sample is the March CPS from 1976 to 2012. Micro observatations are used. CPS sample weights are normalized so that each division-graduation year-potexp cell gets the same weight (potexp
= years since graduation). Columns 2 and 3 include those age 22-35, not enrolled, with 0 to 13 years potexp. Columns 1, and 4-6 additionally exclude workers without earnings and those with 0 years
potexp. The graduation unemployment rate is the unemployment rate in the division of current residence in the year of college graduation. We also control for survey, major, gender-by-race, and division
fixed effects, a cubic time trend, a quadratic in potexp interacted with gender, the earnings return to the major interacted with: the graduation unemployment rate, potential experience and the product of the
two. For Panel B, we also include an indicator for whether the person graduated in or after 2004 and the interactions of the post-2004 indicator with the quadratic in potexp, the graduation unemployment
rate (Uc), Uc*potexp, and U c*potexp2.




                                                                                                       37
                                                                  Table 5: Effects of 4 ppt rise in Uc interacted with Î²major
                                                                            Employment:                                                                            Occupation Variables:
                                     Log earnings                 Pr(Employed)          Pr(Full time)            Log wages                                  Earnings Return    Pr(in top 5 occ)
                                         (1)                           (2)                    (3)                    (4)                                          (5)                 (6)
                                                                                      Panel A: Coefficients on Î²major in Earnings Regression
       Main effect                     0.1840***                       0.0040*                  0.0506***               0.1536***            0.1304***                                          0.0024
           (s.e.)                       (0.0066)                      (0.0023)                   (0.0045)            (0.0054)                                    (0.0033)                      (0.0069)
       major
     Î²       * potexp                  0.0034***                     0.0012***                  -0.0020***          0.0034***                                     0.0003                      0.0036***
           (s.e.)                       (0.0009)                      (0.0004)                   (0.0006)            (0.0007)                                    (0.0004)                      (0.0009)
                                                                                          Panel B: All Graduation Cohorts, 1974-2011
    Avg. effect for
    potexp 1 to 10                    0.0200***                        0.0011                      0.0147***                      0.0102**                       0.0069**                     0.0163***
        (s.e.)                         (0.0060)                       (0.0023)                      (0.0042)                      (0.0047)                       (0.0031)                      (0.0051)
     At potexp =
          1                           0.0545***                      0.0067*              0.0299***          0.0229***            0.0111**                                                      0.0061
                                       (0.0107)                      (0.0040)              (0.0077)           (0.0084)             (0.0055)                                                    (0.0086)
              3                       0.0392***                       0.0042              0.0231***          0.0173***            0.0092**                                                      0.0106
                                       (0.0082)                      (0.0030)              (0.0059)           (0.0064)             (0.0042)                                                    (0.0067)
              7                        0.0086*                       -0.0007              0.0096***            0.0064             0.0055**                                                    0.0197***
                                       (0.0056)                      (0.0024)              (0.0037)           (0.0059)             (0.0028)                                                    (0.0050)
             10                       -0.0144**                      -0.0045               -0.0005            -0.0026               0.0027                                                    0.0265***
                                       (0.0074)                      (0.0036)              (0.0048)           (0.0061)             (0.0036)                                                    (0.0068)
                                                                           Panel C: Pre-2004 Graduation Cohorts versus 2004 and After
                                    Pre           Post            Pre       Post        Pre       Post     Pre       Post       Pre       Post                                              Pre           Post
      At potexp =
           1                   0.0635*** 0.0316*** 0.0138***                   -0.0075      0.0565*** -0.0201** 0.0233**                   0.0200*       0.0184***        -0.0010         0.0017         0.0165
                                 (0.0139)       (0.0142)       (0.0053)       (0.0067)       (0.0105)        (0.0099)       (0.0109)       (0.0116)       (0.0072)       (0.0078)        (0.0114        (0.0117)
              3                0.0461*** 0.0147                0.0096**        -0.0056 0.0432*** -0.0135** 0.0174**                         0.0031 0.0149*** -0.0038                      0.0072         0.0012
                                (0.0107) (0.0096)              (0.0040)       (0.0041) (0.0081) (0.0061) (0.0084)                          (0.0079) (0.0056) (0.0048)                    (0.0088)       (0.0084)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: The sample is the combined data set described in the text. Observations are major-gradyear-division-potexp cells, weighted by the major's share within division-gradyear-potexp group (potexp = years
since graduation). Sample for columns 1, 4, 5, and 6 includes nonenrolled workers age 22-35 with potential experience 1 to 13 with a valid annual earnings observation (greater than $500 in 2006 dollars). The
regression samples for employed and full-time exclude enrolled workers but have no restriction on earnings, and also include those with potential experience equal to zero. Uc is the divisional unemployment rate
in the year the cohort graduated from college. Î²major is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. In Panel A, we report the coefficients on
Î²major and Î²major*potexp in a regression without major fixed effects. For Panel B, we control for survey, major, gender-by-race, and division fixed effects, a cubic time trend, a quadratic in potexp interacted with
gender, the earnings return to the major interacted with: the graduating unemployment rate, potential experience and the product of the two. For Panel C, we also include an indicator for whether the person
                                                                                                                                                                        2
graduated in or after 2004 and the interactions of the post-2004 indicator with the quadratic in potexp, the graduation unemployment rate (Uc), Uc*potexp, U c*potexp , the earnings return to the major and with
all of the interaction terms involving the earnings return to the major.




                                                                                                        38
                         Table 6: Probability of Attaining an Advanced Degree
                     Sample: ACS College Graduates who Graduated from 1976-2007
                                                                          (1)                      (2)                   (3)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                                           0.0012*                 0.0014**              0.0013**
                                                                       (0.0006)                (0.0006)              (0.0006)
    major
Î²                                                                     -0.0068***
                                                                       (0.0012)
    major
Î²       * Uc                                                          -0.0027***             -0.0020***              -0.0010*
                                                                       (0.0006)                (0.0005)              (0.0005)

Major fixed effects                                                                                 X                     X
Grad year fixed effects                                                    X                        X                     X
Cluster at grad year-division                                              X                        X                     X
    major
Î²           interacted with cubic time trend                                                                              X

Observations                                                          1,428,234               1,428,234             1,428,234
R-squared                                                               0.011                   0.082                 0.082
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: The sample is college graduates in the ACS 2009-2012 who graduated from 1976 to 2007 with at least 5 years of potential
experience. We exclude enrolled people. The dependent variable an indicator for whether the person has an advanced degree. Î²major
is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. U c is the divisional
unemployment rate in the year of college graduation, measured as deviation from the mean divisional unemployment rate over this
period.




                                                                 39
      Table 7: Sensitivity of College Major-Specific Unemployment Rates to the Overall
                                      Unemployment Rate
                                                                 Dependent Variable: Ucmajor
                                                1971-2012          1971-2003         1971-2003          2004-2012
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)

Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                    0.2552***          0.2055***         0.1997***          0.5080***
                                                  (0.0173)          (0.0179)           (0.0175)          (0.0277)
    major
Î²                                               -0.1979*** -0.2151*** -0.2151*** -0.1527***
                                                  (0.0077)          (0.0088)           (0.0088)          (0.0147)
    major
Î²       * Uc                                    -0.0257*** -0.0344*** -0.0344***                        -0.0126**
                                                  (0.0038)          (0.0039)           (0.0039)          (0.0057)

Cubic time trend                                      X                                    X

Observations                                       16,983            12,852             12,852             4,131
R-squared                                           0.454             0.223              0.248             0.561
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is the major-specific unemployment rate, created using occupation-industry-
specific unemployment rates and a major-to-occupation-industry mapping, all using workers aged 26 to 59 in the ACS and
NSCG data sets. These unemployment rates are at the division level. No other controls are included except when we use a
cubic time trend. The unemployment rate on the right hand side is the overall divisional unemployment rate, measured as
deviation from the mean divisional unemployment rate over this period.




                                                          40
                        Appendix Table 1: Data Sources (Combined Earnings Sample)
Data source                          Grad years            Earnings years   Earnings observations
NLSY79                               1979-1989 1980-1993, 1995-2001*                     10,472
NLSY97                               2000-2008                 2003-2009                   3,317
NLS72                                1976-1978                 1977-1986                   7,929
B&B 93/03                                  1993          1994, 1997, 2003              11,120**
B&B 08/09                                  2008                      2009               6,390**
NSCG 1993                            1977-1990                 1990, 1993                58,460
NSCG 2003                            1990-2000                       2003                11,533
ACS 09-12                            1996-2011                 2009-2012                387,585
SIPP                                 1976-2009                 1984-2011                 40,666
Notes: An observation here is a worker-year. Valid earnings observations are defined as observations in which the worker is not
enrolled in school and has at least $500 in annual earnings in 2006 dollars. We restrict to workers aged 22 to 35 with 1 to 13 years of
potential experience, defined as years since graduation.
*Excludes even-numbered years from 1995-2001 due to sample design
**Rounded to nearest 10 for confidentiality reasons.




                                                                  41
                                             Appendix Table 2
            Unweighted Sample Coverage: Graduation Unemployment Rates and Potential Experience
                                    Years since college graduation
Uc                      1-2            3-4              5-7           8-10       11-13           Total
<5%                  15,982        26,645           37,307          32,140      28,771         140,845
5-6%                 16,714        22,676           34,714          30,068      22,751         126,923
6-7%                 13,387        18,438           26,279          24,967      19,213         102,284
7-8%                 11,944        12,674           20,457          19,207      16,201          80,483
8-9%                  6,331          6,555           9,611           7,733       7,507          37,737
>9%                   8,821          9,082          12,131          11,154       7,449          48,637
Total                73,179        96,070          140,499         125,269     101,892         536,909
Notes: An observation here is a worker-year. This table includes only valid earnings observations, defined as a worker aged 22 to 35 with potential
experience 1 to 13 with at least $500 in annual earnings in 2006 dollars. U c is the annual census division unemployment rate. Potential experience is
years since graduation.




                                                                          42
               Appendix Table 3: Log Annual Earnings as a Function of Entry Conditions and Major Characteristics
                                      (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)                                           (7)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)     -0.0294*** -0.0257*** -0.0252*** -0.0189*** -0.0238*** -0.0174***                                                -0.0117**
                                   (0.0060)    (0.0067)      (0.0047)       (0.0072)    (0.0050)     (0.0039)                                      (0.0048)
Post*Uc                                                                   -0.0419*** -0.0342***                                                    -0.0107
                                                                            (0.0092)    (0.0092)                                                   (0.0078)
Uc*potexp                         0.0115*** 0.0102*** 0.0103*** 0.0093*** 0.0103*** 0.0052***                                                     0.0038**
                                   (0.0022)    (0.0023)      (0.0015)      (0.0025)     (0.0017)     (0.0014)                                      (0.0016)
Post*Uc*potexp                                                            0.0290*** 0.0300***                                                       0.0050
                                                                           (0.0060)     (0.0061)                                                   (0.0045)
Uc*potexp2                       -0.0009*** -0.0007*** -0.0008*** -0.0007*** -0.0008*** -0.0004***                                                -0.0003**
                                   (0.0002)    (0.0002)      (0.0001)       (0.0002)    (0.0001)     (0.0001)                                      (0.0001)
Post*Uc*potexp2                                                           -0.0047*** -0.0052***                                                    -0.0021
                                                                            (0.0010)    (0.0010)                                                   (0.0014)
Î²major                                        0.1840***
                                               (0.0066)
Post*Î²major                                                                  0.0068      0.0063
                                                                           (0.0147)     (0.0113)
Î²major*potexp                     0.0030*** 0.0034*** 0.0026*** 0.0031*** 0.0027***
                                   (0.0009)    (0.0009)      (0.0007)       (0.0010)    (0.0008)
Post*Î²major*potexp                                                          -0.0040      -0.0036
                                                                           (0.0030)     (0.0026)
Î²major* Uc                        0.0139***    0.0091**     0.0136*** 0.0165*** 0.0159***
                                   (0.0036)    (0.0038)      (0.0027)       (0.0045)    (0.0035)
Post*Î²major* Uc                                                             -0.0082      -0.0080
                                                                           (0.0060)     (0.0050)
Î²major* Uc*potexp                -0.0019*** -0.0013*** -0.0019*** -0.0022*** -0.0022***
                                   (0.0005)    (0.0005)      (0.0004)       (0.0005)    (0.0005)
Post*Î²major* Uc*potexp                                                      -0.0001      0.0001
                                                                           (0.0019)     (0.0017)

Major fixed effects                             X                                   X              X                 X
Grad year fixed effects                                          X                  X                                X
Cluster at grad year-division                   X                X                                 X                                  X                X

Observations                                 56,635           56,635           56,635           56,635            56,635          209,007          209,007
R-squared                                     0.328            0.312            0.335            0.331             0.335           0.164            0.165
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Columns 1-5 report results from our combined sample. Observations in these regressions are major-gradyear-division-potexp cells. We weight by the
major's share of observations in the cohort-potexp group. Uc is the divisional unemployment rate in the year the cohort graduated from college. Potexp is years
since college graduation. Î²major is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. Survey dummies,
year dummies, a quadratic in potential experience, gender, race, and region controls are also included. The sample is non-enrolled workers from age 22 to 35,
with potential experience 1 to 13, with at least $500 in annual earnings in 2006 dollars. "Post" is defined as graduation years 2004 and later. Columns 6-7 are
based on using individual observations from the March CPS, which does not contain major information. CPS survey weights are adjusted to give equal weight
to each graduation year-division-potential experience cell equally.




                                                                               43
1      Data Appendix
We begin by describing the data sets used in this paper, with the details of variable creation

from each data set. Online appendix table 1 summarizes variable denitions by data set. We

then describe the creation of characteristics of college majors and occupational attainment

variables.

    Some variables are created in the same way in all of the data sets.                In all data sets,

information on race, gender, and age are straightforward to obtain. We code race/ethnicity
                                                                                        1
in three categories: Hispanic, black non-Hispanic, and other non-Hispanic.                  Potential ex-

perience is dened as year minus bachelor's degree graduation year. All earnings and wage

measures are adjusted to 2006 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI). We restrict to

earnings greater than $500 in our main sample and top code annual earnings at $400,000.

We exclude enrolled workers and those in the year of college graduation from the earnings

sample. CPI-adjusted wages must be greater than 0 and are top- and bottom-coded to be

between $5 and $250 per hour. Analysis of wages and the occupation measures is restricted

to those with a valid earnings observation. The sample used to study employment and full-

time employment is restricted to the non-enrolled but includes observations from the year

of graduation and includes people with 0 earnings.

    Our preferred measure of labor market conditions at graduation is the unemployment

rate for the census division level of graduation. The U.S. Census Bureau denes nine divi-

sions: New England, Middle Atlantic, East North Central, West North Central, East South

Central, West South Central, South Atlantic, Mountain, and Pacic. We obtain the annual

unemployment rate for each census division from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area

Unemployment Statistics. We restrict all of our analysis to workers who graduated college

between ages 20 and 24, inclusive. This eliminates about 20% of the available observations in

data sets other than the ACS, mostly from late graduates. We cannot impose this restriction

on the ACS because graduation year is not available. We also restrict to workers age 22 to

35 with 13 or fewer years of potential experience.

    1 Some data sets, including the ACS, have more detailed information on race/ethnicity, but others have
only these three options, which is why we use them. Some data sets do not have a mixed-race option, so
we cannot consistently code mixed-race respondents. We code those who indicate that they are mixed-race
as other non-Hispanic when mixed race is an option.




                                                    44
1.1    Data sets

The National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth
The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) and 1997 (NLSY97) are nation-

aly representative surveys administered by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.                The NLSY79

follows 12,686 youths who were aged 14 to 22 in 1979. Respondents were surveyed each year

from 1979 to 1994 and biennially thereafter; because of our restrictions on age and potential

experience, we use data through 2000. College graduates in this survey graduated between

1979 and the late 1980s. We drop the military subsample of the NLSY79 and use the re-

maining observations. The NLSY97 follows almost 9,000 respondents who were aged 12 to

16 in 1996 and have been surveyed annually from 1997-2010. These cohorts graduated from

college between 2000 and 2009. In our regressions, we include separate survey xed eects

for the NLSY79 and for the NLSY97.

   In both surveys, annual earnings are taken from a direct question about wage and salary
                                       2
earnings in the prior calendar year.       The wage measure is the hourly rate of pay in the current

or most recent job. Employment and enrollment are based on questions about status at the

time of the survey date. Full-time employment is dened as usually working at least 35 hours

per week at the current job and 0 for those working part time or not working. Highest grade

completed is taken from a direct question each year about highest degree completed. We use

occupation in the current or most recent job, which is available at the 1970 3-digit census

categorization over the time period we use. To have consistent coding across data sets, we

convert to 1990 3-digit codes using the mapping made available by Ruggles et al. (2010).

   Because earnings are dened for the year prior to the survey year, we use information

from the previous survey (if there is one available) to make restrictions on the earnings

sample.   However, we still use the current survey weight.             For example, from the 1990

survey we obtain earnings in the previous calendar and the survey weight. We restrict to

observations who report not being enrolled in the 1989 survey. (We also use employment

and hours from the 1989 survey when those are relevant for sample restrictions, for example

when dening    Î² major .)   When there is no previous survey, we use the current survey.                In

earnings regressions we lag potential experience and calendar time variables. For wages and

occupational attainment variables, we restrict the sample to those with non-missing earnings.

  2 For example, the 1990 survey asks for earnings in 1989, and we code these as 1989 annual earnings.




                                                    45
For the NLSY's, this means those with non-missing earnings from the next survey, which

refers to earnings measured over the same time period.

   Year of college graduation is straightforward to create since both surveys contain ques-

tions about educational attainment each year. In the NLSY79, we use the response to the

year of degree question in the rst year after graduation, and then ll in missing values by

going forward. In the NLSY97, we use the BLS-created variable for date of bachelor's degree.

We use the restricted-access geocodes to gain information on state (and census division) of

college degree and current location. If the graduation year is a survey year, we dene state of

graduation as the state of residence at the time of the survey. Respondents who graduated

before 1979 are excluded from our analysis. Less than 10 respondents t this category.

   The NLSY surveys each have their own college major categories; the NLSY79 has hun-

dreds of categories, while the NLSY97 has only about 50. For each survey separately, we

construct a crosswalk from the NLSY major categories to the 51 Department of Education

categories based on the names of the majors.



The National Survey of College Graduates
The National Survey of College Graduates 1993 (NSCG93) and 2003 (NSCG03) are cross-

sectional data sets made up of samples of 148,905 and 100,402 workers, respectively, admin-

istered by the National Science Foundation. The sample frame is those who reported having

a college degree in the previous decennial census (1990 and 2000, respectively). Given our

age restrictions, workers in the NSCG93 sample graduated from college between 1976 and

1990, while the NSCG03 sample graduated between 1986 and 2000.

   We obtain the NSCG93 data from the Inter-University Consortium for Political and

Social Research (ICPSR), which links respondents to the 1990 decennial census. This allows

up to two earnings observations per worker for the NSCG93: 1990 and 1993.                    We obtain

the public-use NSCG03 data from the National Science Foundation website, which does not

allow us to link the data to the 2000 census, leaving labor market data measured only in
                                                                                      3
2003. In both NSCG data sets, we drop observations with imputed earnings.

   In both NSCG samples, annual earnings and wages are the same measure: annual salary

in the current job. Information on hours worked or hourly pay is not available, so we cannot

  3 The imputation ags for the 2003 survey were obtained from the NSF upon request and added to the
public-use data. The imputation ags for the 1993 survey are included with the ICPSR data.




                                                  46
construct a separate wage measure. Employment and full-time employment (a direct question
                                                                          4
on full-time or part-time status) are measured at the survey date.            Enrollment at survey date

is available in the NSCG93 but not in the NSCG03. Though we typically exclude enrolled

workers from the analyses of labor market outcomes, we must include everyone from the

NSCG03 (who meets the other criteria). We therefore treat the NSCG93 and the NSCG03

as separate surveys when coding survey xed eects. Highest degree completed is taken from

a direct question. We convert degree completed to highest grade completed by treating a

master's degree as 18 years, a professional degree as 19 years, and a doctoral degree as 20

years.   Occupation is reported for the principal job during the reference week.               The NSF

uses its own occupation codes for the NSCG surveys, which we map into 1990 census 3-digit
                                   5
codes using our own mapping.

    Year of college graduation is taken from a direct question, as is division of college gradu-

ation in the NSCG93. In the NSCG03, we do not have division of graduation, so instead we

use division of current residence. We do not have state-level information. College major is

also taken from a direct question, and is based on the NSF's own categories, of which there

are about 200. We map these into the Department of Education categories using a mapping

based on the names of the majors.



The Baccalaureate and Beyond
The Baccalaureate and Beyond 1993 (BB93) and 2008 (BB08) are longitudinal surveys ad-

ministered by the Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics. The

BB93 consists of about 11,000 students who graduated from college in 1993. Individuals were

surveyed in 1994, 1997, and 2003. The BB08 is composed of about 19,000 college graduates

from 2008, who were surveyed in 2009.           Because each BB survey covers only one year of

graduates, neither survey on its own provides much variation in economic conditions at the

time of graduation. Instead these surveys provide cross-sectional variation in college major

and division of graduation, and help identify eects of control variables.

    In the BB93, annual earnings and wages are the same measure as in the NSCG: annual

salary in the current job (or job in the reference month, depending on the survey wave). In

   4 The questionnaire denes full-time as working 35 or more hours per week.
   5 The NSF occupation categories tend to be more detailed for science- and engineering-related elds and
less detailed for other elds.




                                                   47
the BB08, we use actual earned income in 2009, annualized to account for the date of the

survey, for both annual earnings and wages. This only counts earnings in the primary job.

Employment, enrollment, and full-time status refer to either the time of the survey or the

reference month, depending on the survey wave. Full-time status is a direct question asking

full-time or part-time status in the primary job. Highest degree completed and occupation

in the primary job at the time of the survey (or in the reference month) are taken from

direct questions. The BB has only about 40 occupation categories, which we map into 1990

occupation codes using names of occupations. We treat the three waves BB93 as one survey

and the BB08 as another when dening our survey xed eects.

   Year of college graduation is straightforward since in each survey all respondents gradu-

ated in the same year. For location of graduation, we utilize a direct question about the state

of the respondent's undergraduate institution. Majors are given in about 100 categories in

the BB93, which we crosswalk to the Department of Education categories using our own

mapping. The BB03 gives majors in CIP codes, which are very similar to the Department

of Education codes, so this crosswalk is simple.



The National Longitudinal Study
The National Longitudinal Study (NLS72) is a panel survey administered by the Department

of Education.   The sample is about 16,000 high school seniors in 1972, with the bulk of

eventual college graduates graduating in 1976.      We exploit two waves of the survey with

post-graduation information (1979 and 1986); most sample members provided information

about 1977 and 1978 in the 1979 wave, while in 1986 a smaller subset of the sample (roughly

40%) was asked for job and pay information about the years between 1979 and 1986, giving

us multiple years of observation. We obtain year of college graduation using the 1976, 1979,

and 1986 follow-up waves and questions regarding intervening years. If no other information

is available, we assign graduation year as the rst year in which a respondent says he or she

has at least four years of college. Because these workers are in a single high school graduation

cohort, the NLS72 provides little variation in economic conditions at the time of graduation.

Thus the same caveats apply here as those described with the BB data sets.

   The NLS72 gives us the starting and ending/current wage in the most recent job. Our

wage measure is the average of the two. We multiply wages by hours worked in the past year

in the most recent job (a direct question) to get the annual earnings measure. Employment




                                               48
and occupation are at the time of the survey.             Occupation is given in 1970 3-digit census

codes, which we map to 1990 codes using the mapping from Ruggles et al. (2010). Highest

grade completed is based on a direct question about years of school completed. We do not

use enrollment information beyond 1976. Thus we must include all observations meeting the

other criteria in our analyses that typically exclude the enrolled. The waves of the NLS72

are treated as one survey from the perspective of our survey xed eects.

    Location of college graduation is determined by using the zip code in the year of presumed

graduation, which we map to the state level. College major information is derived from data

on the respondents' college transcripts. This has about 50 categories, which we map to the

Department of Education codes using our own mapping.



The Survey of Income and Program Participation
The Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) is a series of two-, three-, and

four-year panels covering the period from 1984 to 2011, administered by the U.S. Census
          6
Bureau.       Each worker is surveyed every four months during his or her panel's stay in the

sample and provides monthly data on employment, earnings, hourly wages, enrollment, and

other key variables. Combining all the panels of SIPP together, we have about 60,000 person-

year observations.      Respondents in our restricted age range graduated between 1971 and
                                                                       7
2008, and we have earnings observations from 1984 to 2011.                 From 1984 to 1993 (excluding

1985), eld of bachelor's degree can only be measured with certainty for those with exactly a

bachelor's degree, because the survey only asks for eld of highest degree. In those waves, we

therefore only use respondents with exactly a bachelor's degree, whereas all college graduates

are included from 1996 forward. We treat the two time periods (survey panels 1984-1993,
                                     8
and survey panels 1996-2008 ) as two separate surveys from the perspective of our survey

xed eects.

    We dene annual earnings as the average monthly earnings for non-enrolled months times

   6 The education module which asks for degree and major information is not included in the 1985 panel,
and therefore we do not use it. The 1984 panel does not have enrollment information, so for this panel we
treat all workers as not enrolled.
   7 Because data from the last panel was only available through part of 2012 at the time of this analysis,
we do not use 2012 earnings information.
   8 The last panel began in 2008 and has data through 2011 (as of the time of our analysis); we refer to this
as the 2008 panel.




                                                     49
twelve. Wages are earnings divided by the sum of hours worked across all months where the
                                  9
respondent was not enrolled.          Respondents report earnings and hours separately for up to

two jobs per month, and we include earnings from both jobs in our measures of earnings and

wages. Employment is the fraction of non-enrolled months the worker worked at least one

week, and full-time is dened as the fraction of non-enrolled months the worker worked at

least 35 hours per week. Occupation is the primary occupation in each month.

    The education module in the second wave contains direct questions on year and eld of

degree. We do not have location of degree and instead use the state of residence in the earliest

wave of the panel. Panels 1984-1993 contains one set of 20 major classications, while panels
                                                                         10
1996-2008 contain a dierent set of 18 major classications.                  This is another reason why

we treat the early and later SIPP panels as two separate surveys when dening survey xed

eects. These major categories are listed in online appendix tables 2a and 2b, respectively.

For some variables, we must generate a crosswalk between these classications and the 51

Department of Education categories. We do so based on the names of the majors and report

the crosswalks in online appendix tables 8a and 8b. We cannot link medicine/dentistry and

vocational studies from the early panels and liberal arts/humanities from the later panels

to the 51 Department of Education categories.              These majors are therefore dropped from

analyses where the use of the crosswalks is necessary. When we include major xed eects

in our regressions, we treat the SIPP majors as distinct from the Department of Education

majors, giving us a total of 89 major categories.

    Highest grade completed can be dened from direct questions about highest degree com-

pleted in the second wave of each panel. Workers could still have obtained further schooling

by the later waves of a given panel, but we cannot observe this. Enrolled is dened as the

fraction of months in a given year where the worker was enrolled.



The American Community Survey
The American Community Survey (ACS), administered annually since 2001 by the U.S.

Census Bureau, consists of large repeat cross-sections meant to substitute for the decennial

census.   In 2009, the survey introduced a question on college major.                   We therefore take

   9 An hourly rate of pay measure is available, but only for the minority of workers who are paid hourly.
  10 Because the early panels have eld of highest degree rather than eld of bachelor's degree, the major
categories include things generally related to graduate degrees, such as law and medicine. The categories in
the later panels, which ask for eld of bachelor's degree, are more typical of a bachelor's degree.




                                                      50
advantage of the four survey waves: 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012. which each cover roughly

2 million households. Our age restrictions leave us with respondents who graduated from

college between 1996 and 2011.         We categorize all three ACS waves as one survey for the

purposes of our survey xed eects.

   The earnings measure is total wage and salary income in the past 12 months.             Unfor-

tunately, we do not know when the respondent was interviewed, and thus we do not know

if the earnings refers mostly to the prior year, to the current year, or equally to both. We

therefore follow the ACS's own reporting practices and assign the earnings as being measured

in the survey year, rather than the prior calendar year. To construct wages, we divide annual

earnings by the product of weeks worked in the prior 12 months and usual hours per week.

Employment and enrollment are dened at the survey date. We dene a worker as being

employed full-time if at the survey date he or she reports usually working at least 35 hours

per week. Highest grade completed is based on a question about highest degree completed.

Occupation is available at the 1990 census 3-digit level using the variable created by Ruggles

et al (2010), and reects the most recent job.

   The ACS unfortunately does not contain time or location of college degree. We instead

impute the year of graduation as the year a respondent was likely 22 (the modal age in the

other data sets) in May. For workers born in the rst two quarters of the year, the year of

graduation is birth year plus 22. For workers born in the second half of the year, graduation
                             11
year is birth year plus 23.       We use current state and division of residence as the graduating

state and division. The ACS has its own categories for college major, which we map to the

Department of Education categories based on major names.

   We use a subset of our ACS sample to analyze educational attainment, as described in

section 6. For this analysis, we expand the non-enrolled sample to include older respondents

whose implied graduation date falls between 1976 and 2007 and was at least 5 years before

the survey date.



The Current Population Survey March Supplement                      The Current Population Sur-

vey (CPS) March Supplement, is an annual supplement to the monthly Bureau of Labor

Statistics CPS used to generate data on the employment situation.           The supplement con-

tains information about labor market outcomes at the survey date and over the previous

 11 Results are robust to choice of the quarter cut-o.




                                                     51
calendar year. Construction of thevariables used in the analysis of eects of entry conditions

for college graduates as a whole (Table 4) are fairly standard, so we will not go into details.

      We also use the March CPS from 1971 to 2012 to generate supplemental information

on employment and unemployment across occupations and industries. (Table 6 and Figure

2).    For each 3-digit 1990 census occupation and one-digit industry (12 categories based

on the 1990 census codes:      agriculture, mining and construction, durable manufacturing,

non-durable manufacturing, transportation and utilities, wholesale and retail trade, nance

and real estate, business services, personal services, entertainment, professional services, and

public administration) pairing we create measures of annual employment and unemployment.

We restrict the sample to employed college graduates aged 25 to 59. An occupation-industry-

specic unemployment rate is dened as the number of unemployed workers who were most

recently employed in that occupation-industry, divided by those unemployed workers plus

employment in the occupation-industry.      We then aggregate these unemployment rates to

the major level using a major to occupation-industry mapping, which we describe in the

next section. We use a similar approach to generate a major-specic employment growth

measure (the rst dierence in log employment).



1.2      Major Characteristics

In all data sets but the SIPP, it is straightforward to map majors into 51 categories used

by the Department of Education. We regress log annual earnings on controls (gender, race,

region, potential experience, and year dummies) and major xed eects, separately for the

pooled data and the SIPP, with psychology as the excluded category in each regression.

The major xed eects are the major earnings measure.         This regression is performed on

those aged 36 to 59, which excludes the main estimation sample to avoid any simultaneity

concerns.    We standardize the major xed eects by subtracting each sample mean (the

combined or the SIPP) and dividing by the combined sample standard deviation (so the

units are comparable in the SIPP).

      The occupational concentration of the major is also obtained for the 51 major categories

and then mapped into the SIPP. For this variable, we pool the non-SIPP data and compute

the fraction of people in each major that go into each 1990 census 3-digit occupation. Our

preferred measure is the share of workers from each major that go into the ve most common




                                               52
occupations, but results are similar for the top three and top seven as well. This measure is

obtained using only those age 25 to 36.

   For the major-specic demand measures described in the previous section (using the

March CPS), we require a major to have an occupation-industry mapping. We obtain this

by pooling the ACS and NSCG03 (the NSCG93 does not have information on industry).

Using employed college graduates aged 25 to 59, we nd the share of employment from each

major in each occupation-industry cell, using 3-digit occupation codes and 1-digit industry

codes, both from the 1990 classication.    We then apply this mapping to the occupation-

industry measures from the March CPS to get major-level measures. This mapping is from

the Department of Education major categories to occupation-industry cells. Once we have

obtained the major-specic unemployment rate and employment growth, we map it into

SIPP categories using our crosswalk.



1.3    Occupation variables

We exploit the large samples in the ACS to create two occupation variables.        The rst is

the estimated earnings return to the 3-digit 1990 census occupation averaged over the 4

survey years (2009-2012).   For a sample of non-enrolled, full-time employed workers aged

25-59, earning at least $500 in the past 12 months, we regress log annual earnings on worker

characteristics (the standard controls included in all the previous regressions plus a cubic in

potential experience and year eects) and occupation xed eects. We use these occupation

xed eects as our measure of occupation quality, merging them at the 3-digit census code

level for the occupations reported in the pooled data.     We could have instead estimated

occupation return from our pooled data sets, but we prefer the precision and consistency of

the large ACS samples.    We have also estimated a wage return to occupation (estimating

the regression described above but on log wages  earnings divided by the product of weeks

and usual hours) and obtained extremely similar results. This is not surprising given a 0.98

correlation between the two measures. For the SIPP, this measure is the average earnings

return across all months in the year with a valid occupation observation.

   The second occupation, measure which we use as an indicator of match quality in the

current job, is an indicator for whether the current occupation (reported in the pooled data)

is among the top 5 occupations for a given major, using 1990 census 3-digit occupation codes.




                                              53
We classify the top 5 occupations for each major using the same sample and restrictions as

the occupation earnings return. For the SIPP we dene these internally then take the average

of the top 5 variable across all months in a year.




References
[1] Ruggles, Steven, J. Trend Alexander, Katie Grenadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B.

   Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version

   5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.




                                              54
                                                                                                                           Online Appendix Table 1: Details of Variables of Interest by Data Set
Variable                           NLSY79                        NLSY97                         NLS72                      B&B 93/03                  B&B 08/09                       NSCG93                          NSCG03                       ACS 09-11                    SIPP 84-93                   SIPP 96-08                  March CPS

                                                                                                               Annual salary in current job Earnings in 2009,                                                                   Total wage and salary
                          Earnings in prior calendar   Earnings in prior calendar    Wage in primary job times                                                                                                                                                          Sum of monthly earnings      Sum of monthly earnings     Earnings in prior calendar
Annual earnings                                                                                                or job in reference month annualized to adjust for the Annual salary in current job Annual salary in current job earnings over past 12
                          year                         year                          annual hours in that job                                                                                                                                                           over the year                over the year               year
                                                                                                               (depending on wave)          timing of the interview                                                             months


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Earnings divided by the                                                               Earnings divided by the
                                                                                     Average of starting and       Annual salary in current job                                                                                                                       Annualized earnings         Annualized earnings
                          Hourly rate of pay in        Hourly rate of pay in                                                                    Earnings in current year,                                                                  product of weeks worked in                                                            product of weeks worked in
Rate of pay (wages)                                                                  ending/current wages in       or job in reference month                                   Annual salary in current job Annual salary in current job                              divided by total hours over divided by total hours over
                          current/most recent job      current/most recent job                                                                  annualized                                                                                 past 12 months and usual                                                              past 12 months and usual
                                                                                     primary job                   (depending on wave)                                                                                                                                the year                    the year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           hours worked                                                                          hours worked

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fraction of the year         Fraction of the year
                                                                                                                   Employed at date of survey Employed in reference                                                                                                     employed and not enrolled    employed and not enrolled Employed in reference
Employment                Employed at date of survey Employed at date of survey Employed at date of survey                                                                     Employed at date of survey Employed at date of survey Employed at date of survey
                                                                                                                   or in reference month      month                                                                                                                     (months employed divided     (months employed divided week of survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        by 12)                       by 12)

                                                                                                                                                                           Question asks full-time or        Question asks full-time or
                                                                                                                   Question asks full-time or                                                                                                                           Fraction of the year         Fraction of the year
                          Usually work 35 or more      Usually work 35 or more       Annual hours greater than                                  At least 35 hours per week part-time; questionnaire          part-time; questionnaire      Usually work 35 or more                                                               At least 35 hours worked in
Full-time employment                                                                                               part-time, at time of survey                                                                                                                         working 35 or more hours     working 35 or more hours
                          hours per week               hours per week                1,750 (35*50)                                              in 2009                    defines full-time as 35 or        defines full-time as 35 or    hours per week                                                                        reference week of survey
                                                                                                                   or reference month                                                                                                                                   per week and not enrolled    per week and not enrolled
                                                                                                                                                                           more hours per week               more hours per week

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Primary occupation given     Primary occupation given
                                                                                     Primary job at time of
                                                                                                                   Job at time of survey or in   Primary job at time of        Principal job in survey       Principal job in survey                                    each month; for occupation   each month; for occupation
Occupation                Current/most recent job      Current/most recent job       survey (not necessarily                                                                                                                               Job at time of survey                                                                Job at time of survey
                                                                                                                   reference month               survey                        reference week                reference week                                             measures, we use average     measures, we use average
                                                                                     current)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of the 12                    of the 12


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fraction of the year
                                                                                     No enrollment information Enrolled at time of survey                                                                    Enrolled during reference                                                             Fraction of the year
Enrollment                Enrolled at time of survey   Enrolled at time of survey                                                                Enrolled at time of survey    No enrollment information                                   Enrolled at time of survey   enrolled (no enrollment                                  Enrolled at time of survey
                                                                                     after 1976                or in reference month                                                                         week                                                                                  enrolled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        information in 1984 panel)



                                                                                     Years of schooling                                                                                                                                    Years of schooling                                                                    Highest grade or degree
Highest grade completed   Highest degree completed     Highest degree completed                                    Highest degree completed      Highest degree completed      Highest degree completed      Highest degree completed                                   Highest degree completed     Highest degree completed
                                                                                     completed                                                                                                                                             completed                                                                             completed




                          Use questions on highest   Created variable for year of Use questions on highest                                                                     Direct question about first   Direct question about first   Imputed from year and
Year of graduation                                                                                          All 1993                             All 2008                                                                                                               Direct question              Direct question             Imputed from year of birth
                          degree completed each year bachelor's degree            grade completed each year                                                                    bachelor's degree             bachelor's degree             quarter of birth


                                                                                                                                                                                                             No location of graduation     No location of graduation    No location of graduation    No location of graduation   No location of graduation
                                                                                                                                                                             Direct question about
                          State of residence in year of State of residence in year of Zip code in year of          Direct question about state Direct question about state                                   information; we use           information; we use          information; we use          information; we use         information; we use
Location of graduation                                                                                                                                                       Census division of first
                          graduation                    graduation                    graduation                   of undergraduate institution of undergraduate institution                                 location of current           location of current          location of current          location of current         location of current
                                                                                                                                                                             bachelor's degree
                                                                                                                                                                                                             residence                     residence                    residence                    residence                   residence


                                                                                     Derived from student                                                                    Direct question about first Direct question about first
                          Direct questions; hundreds Direct questions; roughly                                     Direct question; roughly      Direct question; roughly 50                                                         Direct question; hundreds          Only field of highest        Direct question; 18
College major                                                                        transcript data; roughly 50                                                             bachelor's degree; hundreds bachelor's degree; hundreds                                                                                             No information
                          of categories              50 categories                                                 100 categories                categories                                                                          of categories                      degree; 20 categories        categories
                                                                                     categories                                                                              of categories               of categories




                                                                                                                                                                              55
  Online Appendix Table 2a: Characteristics of SIPP
        Major Categories, 1984 to 1993 Waves
                                              major
Major:                                      Î²
Engineering and Computers                    1.37
Mathematics and Statistics                   1.08
Economics                                    0.54
Physical or Earth Sciences                   0.39
Police Science and Law Enforcement           0.23
Business/Management                          0.18
Nursing/Pharmacy/Health                      0.02
Other                                        0.02
Biology                                     -0.17
English and Journalism                      -0.33
Psychology                                  -0.42
Liberal Arts and Humanities                 -0.54
Social Sciences                             -0.55
Home Economics                              -0.56
Vocational and Technical Studies            -0.79
Agriculture or Forestry                     -0.81
Medicine and Dentistry                      -0.99
Law                                         -1.04
Education                                   -1.23
Religion or Theology                        -2.59
Notes: Measure is given in standard deviations. Î² major is the earnings return to
the major, based on authors' calculations, and is estimated in the pooled data.




                                       56
 Online Appendix Table 2b: Characteristics of SIPP
       Major Categories, 1996 to 2008 Waves
                                           major
Major:                                   Î²
Pre-Professional                         1.80
Engineering                              1.11
Computer and Information                 1.01
Mathematics and Statistics               0.61
Health Sciences                          0.51
Business/Management                      0.46
Natural Sciences                         0.39
Other                                    0.08
Liberal Arts and Humanities              -0.10
Foreign Languages                        -0.17
Communications                           -0.31
Psychology                               -0.42
Social Sciences                          -0.44
Art and Architecture                     -0.55
English and Literature                   -0.61
Agriculture or Forestry                  -0.96
Philosophy/Religion/Theology             -0.96
Education                                -1.05
Notes: Measure is given in standard deviations. Î² major is the earnings
return to the major, based on authors' calculations, and is estimated in
the pooled data.




                                    57
                                         Online Appendix Table 3: Employment as a Function of Entry Conditions and Major Characteristics
                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)                                                          (6)                     (7)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                                 -0.0011               -0.0006                 -0.0005                  0.0014                  0.0003              -0.0046***              -0.0042***
                                                            (0.0016)               (0.0021)                (0.0018)                (0.0024)                (0.0020)              (0.0013)                (0.0016)
Post*Uc                                                                                                                            -0.0045                -0.0066**                                       -0.0038
                                                                                                                                   (0.0030)                (0.0033)                                       (0.0028)
Uc*potexp                                                    0.0002                 -0.0001                -0.0001                 -0.0003                 -0.0001                0.0014**               0.0017**
                                                            (0.0007)               (0.0007)                (0.0006)                (0.0008)                (0.0007)               (0.0006)               (0.0007)
Post*Uc*potexp                                                                                                                      0.0000                 -0.0003                                      -0.0076***
                                                                                                                                   (0.0015)                (0.0018)                                      (0.0021)
Uc*potexp2                                                   -0.0001                0.0000                  0.0000                 -0.0000                  0.0000               -0.0001**               -0.0001**
                                                            (0.0001)               (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)               (0.0001)                (0.0001)
Post*Uc*potexp2                                                                                                                     0.0002                  0.0004                                       0.0020***
                                                                                                                                   (0.0003)                (0.0004)                                       (0.0006)
Î²major                                                                             0.0040*
                                                                                   (0.0023)
Post*Î²major                                                                                                                         0.0071                  0.0072
                                                                                                                                   (0.0059)                (0.0053)
Î²major*potexp                                             0.0013***               0.0012***               0.0012***               0.0016***              0.0014***
                                                           (0.0004)                (0.0004)                (0.0003)                (0.0004)               (0.0004)
Post*Î²major*potexp                                                                                                                -0.0023**               -0.0022*
                                                                                                                                   (0.0011)               (0.0012)
Î²major* Uc                                                   0.0015                 0.0018                 0.0017*                0.0033**               0.0034***
                                                            (0.0011)               (0.0011)                (0.0010)               (0.0015)                (0.0013)
Post*Î²major* Uc                                                                                                                   -0.0049**               -0.0053**
                                                                                                                                   (0.0023)                (0.0021)
Î²major* Uc*potexp                                          -0.0003*                -0.0003*                -0.0003*              -0.0005***              -0.0005***
                                                           (0.0002)                (0.0002)                (0.0002)               (0.0002)                (0.0002)
Post*Î²major* Uc*potexp                                                                                                              0.0007                  0.0008
                                                                                                                                   (0.0007)                (0.0007)

Major fixed effects                                             X                                                X                      X                      X
Grad year fixed effects                                                                 X                        X                                             X
Cluster at grad year-division                                   X                       X                                               X                                              X                       X

Observations                                                 61,825                  61,825                 61,825                  61,825                  61,825                 254,636                254,636
R-squared                                                    0.148                   0.148                  0.155                   0.151                   0.156                   0.020                  0.021
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Columns 1-5 report results from our combined sample. Columns 6-7 report results from the March CPS, which does not contain major information. Observations in these regressions are major-gradyear-division-
potexp cells. We weight by the major's share of observations in the cohort-potexp group. Uc is the divisional unemployment rate in the year the cohort graduated from college. Potexp is years since college graduation.
Î²major is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. Survey dummies, year dummies, a quadratic in potential experience, gender, race, and region controls
are also included. The sample is non-enrolled workers from age 22 to 35, with potential experience 1 to 13. Columns 6 and 7 weight each graduation year-potential experience cell equally. "Post" is defined as graduation
years 2004 and later.




                                                                                                            58
                                   Online Appendix Table 4: Full-time Employment as a Function of Entry Conditions and Major Characteristics
                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)                                                                   (7)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                              -0.0166***              -0.0181***              -0.0180***             -0.0188***              -0.0204***              -0.0110***              -0.0106***
                                                           (0.0030)                (0.0038)                (0.0033)               (0.0042)                (0.0038)                (0.0020)                (0.0023)
Post*Uc                                                                                                                            0.0091*                  0.0047                                         -0.0024
                                                                                                                                   (0.0049)                (0.0059)                                        (0.0042)
Uc*potexp                                                  0.0058***              0.0059***               0.0059***               0.0072***               0.0073***               0.0032***               0.0035***
                                                            (0.0012)               (0.0013)                (0.0010)                (0.0015)                (0.0012)                (0.0008)                (0.0009)
Post*Uc*potexp                                                                                                                   -0.0097***              -0.0102***                                        -0.0076*
                                                                                                                                  (0.0026)                (0.0026)                                         (0.0040)
Uc*potexp2                                                -0.0005***              -0.0004***              -0.0004***             -0.0006***              -0.0006***              -0.0002***              -0.0002***
                                                           (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)               (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)                (0.0001)
Post*Uc*potexp2                                                                                                                   0.0019***               0.0015***                                         0.0013
                                                                                                                                   (0.0007)                (0.0005)                                        (0.0010)
Î²major                                                                            0.0506***
                                                                                   (0.0045)
Post*Î²major                                                                                                                         0.0084                  0.0094
                                                                                                                                   (0.0093)                (0.0081)
Î²major*potexp                                             -0.0023***              -0.0020***              -0.0023***             -0.0021***              -0.0020***
                                                           (0.0006)                (0.0006)                (0.0005)               (0.0006)                (0.0006)
Post*Î²major*potexp                                                                                                               -0.0044***               -0.0045**
                                                                                                                                  (0.0017)                 (0.0017)
Î²major* Uc                                                 0.0074***              0.0070***               0.0075***               0.0142***               0.0141***
                                                            (0.0027)               (0.0026)                (0.0019)                (0.0035)                (0.0026)
Post*Î²major* Uc                                                                                                                  -0.0191***              -0.0191***
                                                                                                                                  (0.0043)                (0.0036)
Î²major* Uc*potexp                                          -0.0008**               -0.0007**              -0.0008***             -0.0017***              -0.0017***
                                                            (0.0003)                (0.0003)               (0.0003)               (0.0004)                (0.0003)
Post*Î²major* Uc*potexp                                                                                                             0.0024**                0.0025**
                                                                                                                                   (0.0012)                (0.0011)

Major fixed effects                                              X                                               X                      X                       X
Grad year fixed effects                                                                 X                        X                                              X
Cluster at grad year-division                                    X                      X                                               X                                               X                       X

Observations                                                 61,752                  61,752                  61,752                 61,752                  61,752                 254,636                 254,636
R-squared                                                    0.183                   0.173                   0.186                  0.187                   0.189                   0.041                   0.041
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Columns 1-5 report results from our combined sample. Columns 6-7 report results from the March CPS, which does not contain major information. Observations in these regressions are major-gradyear-division-
potexp cells. We weight by the major's share of observations in the cohort-potexp group. U c is the divisional unemployment rate in the year the cohort graduated from college. Potexp is years since college graduation.
Î²major is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. Survey dummies, year dummies, a quadratic in potential experience, gender, race, and region controls
are also included. The sample is non-enrolled workers from age 22 to 35, with potential experience 1 to 13. Columns 6 and 7 weight each graduation year-potential experience cell equally. "Post" is defined as graduation
years 2004 and later.




                                                                                                            59
                                       Online Appendix Table 5: Log Rate of Pay as a Function of Entry Conditions and Major Characteristics
                                                       (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)                                                                (7)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                               -0.0106**               -0.0136**              -0.0128***               -0.0086               -0.0117***              -0.0086***               -0.0073**
                                                            (0.0049)                (0.0063)               (0.0037)                (0.0065)               (0.0040)                (0.0024)                 (0.0028)
Post*Uc                                                                                                                           -0.0177**                -0.0095                                         -0.0068
                                                                                                                                   (0.0077)                (0.0072)                                        (0.0054)
Uc*potexp                                                  0.0043**                0.0048**               0.0047***                 0.0033                0.0040***                 0.0014                  0.0010
                                                           (0.0018)                (0.0019)                (0.0012)                (0.0021)                (0.0013)                (0.0009)                (0.0010)
Post*Uc*potexp                                                                                                                    0.0145***                0.0098**                                        -0.0036
                                                                                                                                   (0.0036)                (0.0049)                                        (0.0035)
 Uc*potexp2                                               -0.0004***               -0.0003**              -0.0003***               -0.0003*              -0.0003***                -0.0001                 -0.0001
                                                           (0.0001)                 (0.0001)               (0.0001)                (0.0002)               (0.0001)                 (0.0001)                (0.0001)
Post*Uc*potexp2                                                                                                                  -0.0023***               -0.0019**                                         0.0007
                                                                                                                                  (0.0007)                 (0.0008)                                        (0.0011)
Î²major                                                                            0.1536***
                                                                                   (0.0054)
Post*Î²major                                                                                                                        -0.0105                 -0.0101
                                                                                                                                   (0.0108)                (0.0094)
Î²major*potexp                                              0.0031***              0.0034***               0.0029***               0.0028***               0.0026***
                                                            (0.0007)               (0.0007)                (0.0006)                (0.0008)                (0.0007)
Post*Î²major*potexp                                                                                                                 -0.0022                 -0.0021
                                                                                                                                   (0.0022)                (0.0022)
Î²major* Uc                                                 0.0059**                  0.0013               0.0057***                 0.0062                 0.0058**
                                                           (0.0029)                 (0.0031)               (0.0021)                (0.0038)                (0.0027)
Post*Î²major* Uc                                                                                                                    -0.0010                 -0.0008
                                                                                                                                   (0.0048)                (0.0040)
Î²major* Uc*potexp                                           -0.0007*                -0.0002               -0.0007**                -0.0007                -0.0007**
                                                            (0.0004)                (0.0004)               (0.0003)                (0.0004)                (0.0004)
Post*Î²major* Uc*potexp                                                                                                             -0.0015                 -0.0014
                                                                                                                                   (0.0015)                (0.0014)

Major fixed effects                                              X                                               X                      X                       X
Grad year fixed effects                                                                 X                        X                                              X
Cluster at grad year-division                                    X                      X                                               X                                               X                       X

Observations                                                 56,585                  56,585                  56,585                 56,585                  56,585                 208,431                 208,431
R-squared                                                    0.994                   0.994                   0.994                  0.994                   0.994                   0.144                   0.144
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Columns 1-5 report results from our combined sample. Columns 6-7 report results from the March CPS, which does not contain major information. Observations in these regressions are major-gradyear-division-
potexp cells. We weight by the major's share of observations in the cohort-potexp group. U c is the divisional unemployment rate in the year the cohort graduated from college. Potexp is years since college graduation.
Î²major is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. Survey dummies, year dummies, a quadratic in potential experience, gender, race, and region controls
are also included. The sample is non-enrolled workers from age 22 to 35, with potential experience 1 to 13, with at least $500 in annual earnings in 2006 dollars. Columns 6 and 7 weight each graduation year-potential
experience cell equally. "Post" is defined as graduation years 2004 and later.




                                                                                                            60
                                    Online Appendix Table 6: Occupation Earnings as a Function of Entry Conditions and Major Characteristics
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)                                                                 (7)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                              -0.0066***               -0.0058**              -0.0062**               -0.0060**               -0.0065**                â€0.0036*                â€0.0021
                                                           (0.0022)                 (0.0029)               (0.0025)                (0.0030)                (0.0027)                (0.0022)                (0.0028)
Post*Uc                                                                                                                            -0.0024                 -0.0001                                         â€0.0021
                                                                                                                                   (0.0035)                (0.0048)                                        (0.0043)
Uc*potexp                                                  0.0025***               0.0020**               0.0022***               0.0024***               0.0024***                 0.0012                  0.0009
                                                            (0.0008)               (0.0009)                (0.0008)                (0.0009)                (0.0009)                (0.0009)                (0.0010)
Post*Uc*potexp                                                                                                                      0.0031                 0.0053*                                         â€0.0048
                                                                                                                                   (0.0023)                (0.0031)                                        (0.0034)
Uc*potexp2                                                -0.0002***               -0.0001**              -0.0002**              -0.0002***              -0.0002***                â€0.0001*                â€0.0001
                                                           (0.0001)                 (0.0001)               (0.0001)               (0.0001)                (0.0001)                 (0.0001)                (0.0001)
Post*Uc*potexp2                                                                                                                    -0.0004                 -0.0009*                                       0.0015**
                                                                                                                                   (0.0004)                (0.0005)                                       (0.0006)
Î²major                                                                            0.1304***
                                                                                   (0.0033)
Post*Î²major                                                                                                                        -0.0048                 -0.0043
                                                                                                                                   (0.0071)                (0.0060)
Î²major*potexp                                               -0.0002                  0.0003                 -0.0002                -0.0003                 -0.0003
                                                            (0.0004)                (0.0004)                (0.0004)               (0.0005)                (0.0004)
Post*Î²major*potexp                                                                                                                  0.0014                  0.0013
                                                                                                                                   (0.0012)                (0.0013)
Î²major* Uc                                                   0.0024                  0.0002                0.0028**                0.0041*                 0.0046**
                                                            (0.0017)                (0.0017)               (0.0014)                (0.0023)                (0.0018)
Post*Î²major* Uc                                                                                                                   -0.0066**              -0.0071***
                                                                                                                                   (0.0029)               (0.0026)
Î²major* Uc*potexp                                           -0.0002                  0.0000                 -0.0002                -0.0004                 -0.0004*
                                                            (0.0002)                (0.0002)                (0.0002)               (0.0003)                (0.0002)
Post*Î²major* Uc*potexp                                                                                                              0.0012                  0.0012
                                                                                                                                   (0.0008)                (0.0008)

Major fixed effects                                              X                                               X                      X                       X
Grad year fixed effects                                                                 X                        X                                              X
Cluster at grad year-division                                    X                      X                                               X                                               X                      X

Observations                                                 55,670                  55,670                  55,670                 55,670                  55,670                 196,501                 196,501
R-squared                                                    0.307                   0.292                   0.310                  0.307                   0.310                   0.050                   0.050
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Columns 1-5 report results from our combined sample. Columns 6-7 report results from the March CPS, which does not contain major information. Observations in these regressions are major-gradyear-division-
potexp cells. We weight by the major's share of observations in the cohort-potexp group. U c is the divisional unemployment rate in the year the cohort graduated from college. Potexp is years since college graduation.
Î²major is the earnings return to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. Survey dummies, year dummies, a quadratic in potential experience, gender, race, and region controls
are also included. The sample is non-enrolled workers from age 22 to 35, with potential experience 1 to 13. Columns 6 and 7 weight each graduation year-potential experience cell equally. "Post" is defined as graduation
years 2004 and later.




                                                                                                            61
                       Online Appendix Table 7: Match Quality as a Function of Entry Conditions and Major Characteristics
                                                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                                                       (5)
Entry unemployment rate (Uc)                                   -0.0027                  -0.0071                 -0.0016                  -0.0065                 -0.0027
                                                              (0.0034)                 (0.0051)                (0.0037)                 (0.0046)                (0.0040)
Post*Uc                                                                                                                                  0.0095                  0.0036
                                                                                                                                        (0.0059)                (0.0069)
Uc*potexp                                                      -0.0004                  0.0012                  0.0003                   0.0006                  0.0009
                                                              (0.0013)                 (0.0015)                (0.0012)                 (0.0015)                (0.0013)
Post*Uc*potexp                                                                                                                           0.0095                  0.0036
                                                                                                                                        (0.0059)                (0.0069)
                   2
Uc*potexp                                                      0.0000                   -0.0001                 -0.0000                  -0.0000                 -0.0001
                                                              (0.0001)                 (0.0001)                (0.0001)                 (0.0001)                (0.0001)
Post*Uc*potexp2                                                                                                                         -0.0011*                 -0.0009
                                                                                                                                        (0.0006)                (0.0007)
Î²major                                                                                  0.0030
                                                                                       (0.0069)
Post*Î²major                                                                                                                            -0.0378**              -0.0372***
                                                                                                                                        (0.0160)               (0.0100)
Î²major*potexp                                                0.0030***               0.0036***                0.0029***                0.0020**                0.0020***
                                                              (0.0008)                (0.0009)                 (0.0007)                (0.0009)                 (0.0007)
Post*Î²major*potexp                                                                                                                       0.0024                  0.0025
                                                                                                                                        (0.0033)                (0.0023)
    major
Î²           * Uc                                               0.0015                   0.0032                  0.0016                   0.0002                  0.0006
                                                              (0.0028)                 (0.0031)                (0.0021)                 (0.0037)                (0.0028)
Post*Î²major* Uc                                                                                                                          0.0040                  0.0036
                                                                                                                                        (0.0055)                (0.0041)
Î²major* Uc*potexp                                              0.0006                  0.0006*                 0.0006*                  0.0007*                 0.0007*
                                                              (0.0004)                 (0.0004)                (0.0003)                 (0.0004)                (0.0004)
Post*Î²major* Uc*potexp                                                                                                                   -0.0027                -0.0026*
                                                                                                                                        (0.0017)                (0.0014)

Major fixed effects                                                X                                                X                        X                       X
Grad year fixed effects                                                                     X                       X                                                X
Cluster at grad year-division                                      X                        X                                                X
Cluster at grad year-major-division

Observations                                                   55,671                   55,671                  55,671                   55,671                   55,671
R-squared                                                       0.200                    0.050                  0.202                    0.200                    0.202
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: The sample is our combined sample. Observations in these regressions are major-gradyear-division-potexp cells. We weight by the major's share of observations in the
cohort-potexp group. Uc is the divisional unemployment rate in the year the cohort graduated from college. Potexp is years since college graduation. Î²major is the earnings return
to the major, estimated on a sample of workers age 36-59 in our pooled, unweighted data. Survey dummies, year dummies, a quadratic in potential experience, gender, race,
and region controls are also included. The sample is non-enrolled workers from age 22 to 35, with potential experience 1 to 13, with at least $500 in annual earnings in 2006
dollars. "Post" is defined as graduation years 2004 and later.




                                                                                       62
                   Online Appendix Table 8a: Dept of Education to Early SIPP Major Crosswalk
Early SIPP Major               Dept of Education Major                    Ed Share (Men)    Ed Share (Women)
Agriculture/Forestry           Agriculture/Ag Science                          1.00               1.00
Biology                        Biological Sciences                             1.00               1.00
Business/Mgmt                  Finance                                         0.16               0.10
Business/Mgmt                  Marketing                                       0.21               0.25
Business/Mgmt                  Business Mgmt/Admin                             0.14               0.20
Business/Mgmt                  Accounting                                      0.49               0.45
Economics                      Economics                                       1.00               1.00
Education                      Secondary Education                             0.08               0.03
Education                      Other Education and Library Science             0.92               0.97
Engineering/Computers          All Other Engineering                           0.21               0.23
Engineering/Computers          Chemical Engineering                            0.04               0.08
Engineering/Computers          Civil Engineering                               0.07               0.08
Engineering/Computers          Computer Programming                            0.05               0.09
Engineering/Computers          Computer/Info Tech                              0.24               0.28
Engineering/Computers          Electrical Engineering                          0.14               0.10
Engineering/Computers          Engineering Tech                                0.06               0.05
Engineering/Computers          Mechanical Engineering                          0.14               0.08
Engineering/Computers          Precision Production/Industrial Arts            0.04               0.02
English/Journalism             Communications                                  0.49               0.44
English/Journalism             Journalism                                      0.40               0.45
English/Journalism             Letters: Lit, Writing, Other                    0.10               0.10
Home Economics                 Family and Consumer Science                     1.00               1.00
Law                            Public Administration and Law                   1.00               1.00
Liberal Arts/Humanities        Foreign Language                                1.00               1.00
Math/Statistics                Mathematics                                     1.00               1.00
Medicine/Dentistry             --                                               --                  --
Nursing/Pharm/Health           Misc. Business and Med. Support                 0.54               0.24
Nursing/Pharm/Health           Fitness and Nutrition                           0.19               0.10
Nursing/Pharm/Health           Other Med/Health Services                       0.17               0.26
Nursing/Pharm/Health           Medical Tech                                    0.02               0.02
Nursing/Pharm/Health           Public Health                                   0.02               0.02
Nursing/Pharm/Health           Nursing                                         0.07               0.35
Other                          Leisure Studies and Basic Skills                0.11               0.10
Other                          Architecture                                    0.19               0.09
Other                          Commercial Art and Design                       0.15               0.21
Other                          Art History and Fine Arts                       0.21               0.27
Other                          Film and Other Arts                             0.13               0.14
Other                          Music and Speech/Drama                          0.22               0.19
Physical/Earth Science         Multidisciplinary or General Science            0.16               0.29
Physical/Earth Science         Physics                                         0.23               0.09
Physical/Earth Science         Chemistry                                       0.34               0.40
Physical/Earth Science         Earth and Other Physical Sci                    0.27               0.22
Police Science                 Protective Services                             1.00               1.00
Psychology                     Psychology                                      0.85               0.77
Psychology                     Social Work and Human Resources                 0.15               0.23
Religion/Theology              Philosophy and Religion                         1.00               1.00
Social Sciences                Other Social Science                            0.28               0.42
Social Sciences                Area, Ethnic, and Civic Studies                 0.03               0.06
Social Sciences                Political Science                               0.29               0.23
Social Sciences                History                                         0.26               0.16
Social Sciences                International Relations                         0.05               0.07
Social Sciences                Environmental Studies                           0.09               0.06
Vocational Studies             --                                               --                  --
Notes: We construct the Dept of Ed-to-SIPP major crosswalk based on the names of the majors. The shares are calculated using the pooled non-SIPP data,
separately by gender.




                                                                             63
                     Online Appendix Table 8b: Dept of Education to Late SIPP Major Crosswalk
Early SIPP Major               Dept of Education Major                    Ed Share (Men)      Ed Share (Women)
Agriculture/Forestry           Agriculture and Agr. Science                      1                    1
Art/Architecture               Precision Production/ Industrial Arts           0.16                 0.02
Art/Architecture               Architecture                                    0.17                 0.09
Art/Architecture               Commercial Art and Design                       0.14                 0.23
Art/Architecture               Art History and Fine Arts                       0.19                  0.3
Art/Architecture               Film and Other Arts                             0.12                 0.15
Art/Architecture               Music and Speech/Drama                          0.21                 0.21
Business/Mgmt                  Economics                                       0.13                 0.08
Business/Mgmt                  Finance                                         0.14                 0.09
Business/Mgmt                  Marketing                                       0.12                 0.19
Business/Mgmt                  Business Mgmt/Administration                    0.43                 0.42
Business/Mgmt                  Accounting                                      0.18                 0.23
Communications                 Communications                                  0.83                 0.81
Communications                 Journalism                                      0.17                 0.19
Computer/Info Tech             Computer and Info Tech                          0.83                 0.75
Computer/Info Tech             Computer Programming                            0.17                 0.25
Education                      Secondary Education                             0.08                 0.03
Education                      Other Education and Library Science             0.88                 0.87
Education                      Family and Consumer Science                     0.04                  0.1
Engineering                    All Other Engineering                           0.32                 0.38
Engineering                    Mechanical Engineering                          0.21                 0.12
Engineering                    Electrical Engineering                          0.21                 0.16
Engineering                    Civil Engineering                               0.11                 0.13
Engineering                    Chemical Engineering                            0.06                 0.12
Engineering                    Engineernig Tech                                0.09                 0.08
English/Literature             Letters: Lit., Writing, Other                     1                    1
Foreign Language               Foreign Language                                  1                    1
Health Sciences                Misc. Business/Med Support                      0.54                 0.24
Health Sciences                Fitness and Nutrition                           0.19                  0.1
Health Sciences                Other Med/Health Services                       0.17                 0.26
Health Sciences                Medical Tech                                    0.02                 0.02
Health Sciences                Public Health                                   0.02                 0.02
Health Sciences                Nursing                                         0.07                 0.35
Liberal Arts/Humanities        --                                                --                   --
Math/Statistics                Mathematics                                     1.00                 1.00
Nature Sciences                Multidisciplinary/General Science               0.07                 0.08
Nature Sciences                Physics                                         0.09                 0.02
Nature Sciences                Chemistry                                       0.14                 0.11
Nature Sciences                Earth and Other Physical Science                0.11                 0.06
Nature Sciences                Biological Sciences                              0.6                 0.73
Other                          Leisure Studies and Basic Skills                  1                    1
Philogophy/Religion            Philosophy and Religion                           1                    1
Pre-Professional               Public Admin and Law                              1                    1
Psychology                     Psychology                                      0.85                 0.77
Psychology                     Social Work and Human Resources                 0.15                 0.23
Social Sciences                Other Social Sciences                           0.23                 0.36
Social Sciences                Area, Ethnic, and Civic Studies                 0.02                 0.05
Social Sciences                Political Science                               0.24                 0.19
Social Sciences                Protective Serivces                             0.19                 0.14
Social Sciences                History                                         0.21                 0.14
Social Sciences                International Relations                         0.04                 0.06
Social Sciences                Environmental Studies                           0.08                 0.05
Notes: We construct the Dept of Ed-to-SIPP major crosswalk based on the names of the majors. The shares are calculated using the pooled non-SIPP data,
separately by gender.




                                                                              64
