                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            REGULATION AND HOUSING SUPPLY

                                           Joseph Gyourko
                                            Raven Molloy

                                        Working Paper 20536
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20536


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




Will Strange and the other editors provided helpful advice on this chapter. We also are grateful to
Holger Seig for his comments on an earlier version. Naturally, we remain responsible for any errors
or omissions. Gyourko thanks the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center
at Wharton for financial support. The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and
do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20536.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joseph Gyourko and Raven Molloy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Regulation and Housing Supply
Joseph Gyourko and Raven Molloy
NBER Working Paper No. 20536
October 2014
JEL No. H70,R10,R14,R31

                                              ABSTRACT

A wide array of local government regulations influences the amount, location, and shape of residential
development. In this chapter, we review the literature on the causes and effects of this type of regulation.
We begin with a discussion of how researchers measure regulation empirically, which highlights the
variety of methods that are used to constrain development. Many theories have been developed to
explain why regulation arises, including the role of homeowners in the local political process, the influence
of historical density, and the fiscal and exclusionary motives for zoning. As for the effects of regulation,
most studies have found substantial effects on the housing market. In particular, regulation appears to
raise house prices, reduce construction, reduce the elasticity of housing supply, and alter urban form.
Other research has found that regulation influences local labor markets and household sorting across
communities. Finally, we discuss the welfare implications of regulation. Although some specific
rules clearly mitigate negative externalities, the benefits of more general forms of regulation are very
difficult to quantify. On balance, a few recent studies suggest that the overall efficiency losses from
binding constraints on residential development could be quite large.


Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

Raven Molloy
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th and C Streets NW
Washington, DC 20551
raven.s.molloy@frb.gov
I. Introduction

       This chapter discusses the causes and consequences of local regulations that restrict land

use or otherwise limit the supply of housing. Researchers studying housing, urban economics,

and local public finance have devoted much attention to this topic because regulation appears to

be the single most important influence on the supply of homes. In contrast, the homebuilding

sector appears to require a relatively low cost of entry, as various Economic Censuses

consistently report that there are well over 100,000 companies in the single family construction

business. Moreover, residential construction is not an industry dominated by a few large entities

because the vast majority of firms do less than $10 million in business per year. Hence,

economists typically abstract from industrial organization-type considerations when modeling

the housing supply.

        Labor and material costs also do not appear to act as a major constraint on residential

development. Some markets are unionized, while others are not, generating differences in the

level of the labor component of construction costs across locations. More generally, Gyourko

and Saiz (2006) document a large degree of heterogeneity in structure production costs across

local markets, which is correlated with a number of supply shifters including the extent of

construction worker unionization, the level of local wages, local topography as reflected in the

presence of high hills and mountains, and the local regulatory environment as measured by an

index of Internet chatter on construction regulations. Nevertheless, their data are consistent with

the conclusion that supply of structures is competitive in the sense that the production of any

particular part of a house is a constant returns to scale activity that can be conducted at virtually

any volume.




                                                                                                        1
                      The light line in Figure 1 shows further evidence on materials and labor costs by plotting

the evolution of real construction costs from 1980 to 2013. Specifically, it depicts the

construction costs, including all materials and labor costs, involved in putting up the physical

structure associated with a modest quality single-family housing unit that meets all relevant

building code requirements. While there is local market variation around this aggregate time

series, construction costs have been essentially flat in real terms over the past thirty years. This

trajectory is consistent with the idea that any inelasticity of housing does not have at its root an

inelasticity of the supply of the structure component of homes.1

Figure 1: Real Construction Costs and House Prices Over Time
            2.4
            2.2
            2
    Index, 1980 = 1
     1.4 1.6 1.8
            1.2
            1
            .8




                      1980     1985      1990      1995          2000       2005      2010       2015
                                                          year

                                      Real House Price                  Real Construction Cost



    Note. Construction costs are the cost of an Economy Quality home from R.S. Means Company
    deflated by the Consumer Price Index. House prices are the repeat-sales index published by
    CoreLogic deflated by the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding housing
    services. The deflator was calculated by the authors from data published by the Bureau of
    Economic Analysis.

1
 Figure 1 plots index values. In levels, real construction costs for an economy quality home are about $85 per
square foot. Costs are roughly twice that amount for the highest quality home for which the data provider, the R.S.
Means Company, reports consistent information. Hence, the structure for a modest-quality 2,000 square foot home
costs about $175,000 to construct, and about $350,000 for a higher quality version.

                                                                                                                      2
        The land market is a very different story. In theory, the availability of buildable land

might not constrain the supply of housing units if housing could be constructed as densely as

necessary to meet demand. But in most places in the U.S.—and indeed around the world—local

land use policy imposes limits on residential development that restrict the size and type of

housing units that can be built on a given amount of land. These restrictions add extra costs to a

construction project, creating a wedge between the sales price of a house and the cost of buying

the land and building the structure. The difference between the dark and light lines in Figure 1

measures the difference between house prices and the cost of materials and labor, with the dark

line depicting the evolution of real house prices based on CoreLogic’s repeat sales price index.2

Even after the recent collapse of house prices, this index was still about 60 percent higher in the

2000s than it was in the early 1980s. The growing wedge between house prices and construction

costs illustrates that the price of land has been trending upward over time. Although a portion of

the increase in land prices undoubtedly owes to geographic constraints (a topic to which we will

return later), man-made constraints also must play an important role. Otherwise, valuable land

would be built out at a far-higher density than currently exists (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2003).3

        Interest in how local land use regulation might have influenced the elasticity of housing

supply has increased over the past few decades. This attention is at least partly due to a

suspicion that the local residential land use regulatory environment has grown stricter and

become more binding over time, particularly in areas facing strong demand for entry. Gyourko,

Mayer and Sinai (2013) report evidence consistent with the hypothesis that new housing

construction in local markets generally was not constrained prior to the 1970s, as during that

period high house price growth almost always was accompanied by a large amount of residential

2
 The deflator for this series is that of consumption expenditures excluding housing.
3
 Not all man-made constraints are regulatory in nature. For example, Brooks and Lutz (2012) show that in urban
Los Angeles, frictions related to assembling contiguous parcels of land restrict development.

                                                                                                                 3
construction. In later decades, house price increases coincided with much less construction,

pointing to constraints on the housing supply. The idea that supply constraints began to bite after

the 1970s also is consistent with Frieden (1979), who was among the first to argue that what we

now call NIMBYism was one factor behind the rise of environmental impact rules to slow or

stop development.

           Modern-day land use regulation in the United States began with zoning laws in the 1910s

with the intention of separating different types of land use, thereby limiting the negative

externalities associated with certain types of industrial or commercial use (Quigley and

Rosenthal 2005, Fischel 2004). By and large, land use in the United States is controlled by local

governments. The U.S. Constitution did not grant the federal government authority to regulate

land, and the states have generally left this power with local governments.4 The fact that land

use is controlled by local governments has contributed to the heterogeneity of regulations. Over

time the types of regulations have expanded and now include urban growth boundaries,

minimum lot sizes, density restrictions, and height restrictions, among many others.

           In this chapter we review the research on regulation to date and highlight a number of

promising areas for future exploration. We restrict our discussion to rules and laws imposed by

any form of government that restricts the number, location, quality, or shape of residential

development. We do not discuss actions by private organizations such as homeowners

associations, or regulations pertaining to commercial development because those topics would

require a much longer review.

           Despite the growing body of literature on housing supply regulation, there is still much

that we do not understand. As we discuss more fully in the next section, research on this topic

has been hampered by a lack of direct evidence on regulation. The degree of local land use
4
    Some European countries like the U.K. and France do have national planning guidelines.

                                                                                                      4
restrictiveness is challenging to define because constraints can come in so many different forms.

The best information on regulation comes from surveys. Some surveys collect data from a large

number of jurisdictions within a single metropolitan area, while others collect data from a few

jurisdictions in a large number of metropolitan areas. Either way, it is then up to the researcher

to combine the results in order to depict most accurately the strength of regulation. Not

surprisingly, this is a difficult task because the relative importance of different types of

regulations is not well understood. A second major empirical problem is that we do not have

good time series with which to measure changes in regulation. With only cross-sectional

evidence, it is very difficult to disentangle the causes and effects of regulation from local

demographic and socioeconomic characteristics that might be correlated with regulation. A

third challenge is that many of the predicted determinants of regulation are likely to have

independent effects on housing market outcomes even in the absence of regulation. Thus, even

with the benefit of time series data it is challenging to identify the effects of regulation.

        After discussing issues related to the measurement of regulation and reviewing a number

of data collection efforts, we turn to research on the determinants of regulation. Many theories

have modeled the role of homeowners as the primary supporters of these regulations because

they have a clear incentive to block development in order to protect the value of their property.

We also discuss the effect that a limited supply of vacant land, stemming either from geographic

constraints or past development, may have in encouraging regulation. A third important strand

of the literature considers the fiscal and exclusionary motives for zoning.

        We then examine the consequences of regulation, the vast majority of which have

focused on effects in the housing market. The simplest models predict that regulation will

reduce the elasticity of housing supply, resulting in larger house price increases and slower



                                                                                                     5
growth in the quantity of housing as demand increases. Measurement issues notwithstanding,

most papers do find a strong positive relationship between regulation and house prices, and a

strong negative relationship between regulation and construction. Regulation also appears to

reduce the responsiveness of the housing supply to demand shocks, as well as influence the size

of metropolitan areas and the type of structures that are built. There has been much less research

examining the effects of regulation beyond housing markets. A few papers have found that

regulation is associated with households sorting by income or other demographic characteristics,

while others have found that regulation reduces the elasticity of labor supply by altering the

migration patterns of workers.

       The penultimate section reviews work on the welfare consequences of local land use

regulation. Government intervention can have both costs and benefits, so one cannot presume

that regulation in this area is inefficient per se. Some regulations such as building codes banning

asbestos in insulation materials or requiring fire retardant roofing products almost certainly have

benefits that exceed their costs, and consequently they seem favored by most of society. More

general zoning regulations are challenging to evaluate. For example, Hamilton (1978) showed

conceptually that zoning could help local jurisdictions provide efficient levels of public services

and allow homebuilders to sort so that housing consumption was efficient, too. However,

Barseghayan and Coate (2013) recently showed that this conclusion does not hold in a dynamic

context in which existing structures are exempted from any new zoning regulation. In that case,

it is possible for there to be ‘over-zoning’ in which housing consumption is inefficiently high

(although public service provision need not be). Much remains to be done on this important

topic, but recent empirically-oriented research suggests that the overall efficiency losses from

binding constraints on residential development could be quite large (Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks



                                                                                                      6
2005, Turner, Haughwout and van der Klaauw 2013). In the final section of this article, we

discuss some areas where more research would be particularly beneficial.


II.   Data: Old and New

         Data collection and measurement have lagged behind theory and modeling from the

beginning. Perhaps the most important reason is that development can be affected in a myriad of

ways. The heterogeneity of regulations is well illustrated by one of the earliest surveys of land

use regulation, a survey of hundreds of communities in California by Glickfeld and Levine

(1992) that collected information on fourteen different controls and regulations as well as two

catch-all ‘other’ categories. They found that interventions were wide-ranging in nature and

included infrastructure requirements (which are called exactions in some more recent surveys),

height restrictions, caps on the number of housing units built or permitted, population growth

limits, urban boundaries or green zones, restrictions on rezoning for a less intense land use,

restrictions on upzoning to a more intense land use (including requiring voter approval), and

supermajority rules for a zoning board or city council to approve zoning requests.5 Subsequent

researchers have asked about additional regulations such as minimum lot size requirements, as

well as delays in local government decision-making (often called ‘approval lags’).

         There is no agreement among scholars or practitioners upon a single definition of the

degree by which development in a local land market is constrained. Nor is there a consensus that

one particular regulation or subset of constraints is most important. In the absence of a common

understanding, it should not be surprising that empirical work has focused on aggregate measures

of regulation, often indexes of individual rules. If communities use different types of regulation

as substitutes, then measuring only one type could provide a misleading picture of the locations

5
  The typical jurisdiction in the Glickfeld and Levine (1992) survey had at least two of the above interventions. All
types of regulation existed in multiple jurisdictions. See Table 2 of their paper for more detail.

                                                                                                                        7
where regulation is generally stricter. But it is difficult to collect accurate data on the wide

variety of regulations in place, not to mention to compare the stringency of one type of

regulation with another.



II.1. Indirect Measurement

       One way to bypass the difficulty of accurately measuring complex local land use

environments is to impute the presence of binding restrictions using simple economic analysis.

Regardless of whether binding local constraints on housing supply exist, standard neoclassical

theory implies that price equals average cost as long as the market is sufficiently competitive.

Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) argue that a large gap between prices and marginal

constructions costs is a clear signal that a market is tightly regulated. It is worth noting that the

housing supply can be slow to adjust to changes in demand, so prices can deviated from costs in

the short run even in an unregulated market. Thus, the fact that the dramatic rise and fall of

house prices in the late 2000s does not appear to be correlated with observable measures of

regulation, as observed by Davidoff (2013), does not conflict with the idea that persistent

deviations of prices from costs reflects regulation.

       Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) apply their argument to the market for Manhattan

condominiums, where in the absence of regulation, building heights should rise to the point

where the marginal cost of adding an extra floor equals average cost. Regardless of restrictions

on building size, free entry of builders still should keep price equal to average cost. Assuming

that the marginal cost function is increasing, as seems plausible because it is more challenging to

build up, regulation implies that both prices and average costs will be above marginal costs.

Consequently, Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) use the difference between market price and



                                                                                                        8
the marginal cost of building an additional floor to proxy for the extent of housing supply

restrictions.6 They label this gap a ‘regulatory tax’ and conclude that it caused Manhattan

condominium prices in the beginning of the 2000s to be at least 50 percent higher than would the

case under a completely free development policy.

         Glaeser and Gyourko (2003) and Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) perform a similar

analysis for single family housing markets across the nation. While the underlying economic

logic is the same, empirical implementation is more difficult for this sector because one needs to

know the free market price of land in order to determine the marginal cost of supplying an extra

home. Unfortunately, there are relatively few observations on sales of vacant land, especially in

densely-occupied areas.7 Various statistical techniques involving hedonics can be used, but

estimation error of the regulatory tax is likely to be larger in the single-family sector than in a

market dominated by high-rises.8 That caveat aside, Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) report a

wide range of ‘regulatory tax’ estimates for single family markets across the country as of 1999-

2000, ranging from zero in Birmingham, Cincinnati, and Houston to nearly 20% of total house

value in Boston, over 30% in Los Angeles, and upwards of 50% in the San Francisco Bay Area.

         Not only does one not need detailed information on the local regulatory environment with

this approach, it also provides a natural way to summarize the strength of regulations across a

heterogeneous set of laws that affect land use. The downside, of course, is that the evidence is

indirect, so it cannot provide insight into the impact of any specific policy. Moreover, for most


6
  Consulting engineers can provide fairly precise estimates of this cost because additional land is not needed to build
up.
7
  Recently, some researchers have used data on land sales collected by the CoStar group. See, for example, Turner,
Haughwout and van der Klaauw (2014) and Nichols, Oliner and Mulhall (2013).
8
  The recent house price cycle provides a helpful illustration of how incorporating land prices matters for calculating
the regulatory tax. Davidoff (2013) shows that the magnitude of the recent boom and bust in house prices across
metropolitan areas is uncorrelated with the degree of regulation. However, one should not conclude that the
regulatory tax is uncorrelated with regulation because land prices rose and fell sharply in the same areas where the
house price cycle was most pronounced (Nichols, Oliner and Mulhall 2013).

                                                                                                                      9
housing markets it requires an assessment of the marginal price of vacant land, which is not easy

to measure. Given the difficulty in measuring land prices and the dependence of this approach

on certain assumptions, it seems wise to conclude that local regulatory restrictions are binding

and economically important only when the estimated ‘regulatory tax’ is large.9 Even so, the

available research suggests this tax is quite large for many markets, which indicates that it is

worthwhile for researchers to invest in examining specific regulations in different locations

across the nation.



II.2. Building Codes

        Among the first empirical efforts to collect data on housing supply regulation were those

that looked into the role of building codes, which are regulations with the stated purpose of

assuring the safety and sanitation of homes and limiting the negative externalities associated with

low-quality construction. These regulations tend to raise the cost of construction by restricting

the types of materials used or the method of construction, but they do not directly limit the

quantity of housing that can be built on any given amount of land.

        Noam (1983) is an early example of research on this topic, which used data collected by

the City Managers Association for 1,100+ cities and towns to create an index of strictness of the

local building code based on fourteen traits or code provisions.10 We discuss empirical studies of

the impact of regulation in Section 4, but suffice it to say that Noam (1983) reported a

statistically significant correlation between local house prices and building code strictness in a

cross sectional regression of price on code strictness index and other covariates. As noted in the


9
  Housing is heterogeneous in nature, so small differences between prices and costs could reflect measurement error
in either variable. See Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) for a discussion of other relevant assumptions, the most
important being a competitive supply of homebuilders.
10
   See Colwell and Kau (1982) and Oster and Quigley (1977) for other early analysis using data on building codes.

                                                                                                                 10
Introduction, the higher price well may be worth the cost, so no welfare conclusions can be

drawn from this correlation. Moreover, as we will discuss in Section III and IV, building codes

may be more common in high-priced areas so the simple correlation between regulation and

house prices likely overstates the true causal effect.

        While building codes appear to be correlated with housing prices, they likely raise the

price of the housing structure rather than the land that the housing unit occupies. As we showed

above, it appears to be land prices that are the root of high and rising house prices in the United

States. This conclusion is confirmed by other research showing that land prices have been rising

for the nation in aggregate for some time, in contrast to real construction costs (e.g., Davis and

Heathcote 2004, Davis and Palumbo 2008, and Nichols, Oliner and Mulhall 2013). As land has

become a larger share of the total price of a home, it is perhaps not surprising that a growing

amount of effort has turned to measuring local land use restrictions rather than the regulations

that affect the quality of residential structures..



II.3. Land Use Controls

        The first studies of land use regulation generally involved narrowly targeted data

collection efforts to analyze a specific issue. In a study of how growth controls affect house

price growth, Segal and Srinivasn (1985) asked staff members of local and regional planning

agencies across 51 metropolitan areas to estimate the percentage of land removed from

development out of otherwise developable suburban land. Katz and Rosen (1987) were even

more targeted, using information from a mail and phone survey conducted by the Center for Real

Estate and Urban Economics at the University of California-Berkeley on growth management

programs in cities and towns throughout the San Francisco Bay area. A community was deemed



                                                                                                     11
to operate under a growth management program if it had a specific cap on the number of

building permits that could be issued in any given year between 1973 and 1979. A simple OLS

regression of local house prices on a dichotomous indicator for the presence of a growth

management program found that prices were 17 percent to 38 percent higher in communities

with such programs.11       Of course, as we will discuss below this cross-sectional correlation

probably gives a biased estimate of the effect of regulation because communities with growth

management programs are different from other communities in many ways that likely affect

house prices.

          Such an economically large relationship piqued interest in the role of local land use

constraints, and helped stimulate the development of broader indexes of regulatory control.

Among those that followed were Linneman, et. al. (1990), Glickfeld and Levine (1992), Levine

(1999), Evenson and Wheaton (2003), Foster and Summers (2005), Quigley and Rosenthal

(2005), Pendall, Puentes and Martin (2006), Glaeser, Schuetz and Ward (2006), Gyourko,

Summers and Saiz (2008), Glaeser and Ward (2009), and Saiz (2010). Space limitations prevent

us from reviewing each data collection effort in detail. Fortunately, the range of efforts,

including their strengths and weaknesses, can be illustrated by contrasting three recent empirical

efforts: Glaeser, Schuetz and Ward (2006), Gyourko, Summers and Saiz (2008), and Saiz

(2010).

          The first question faced by data collectors in this area is precisely what to measure.

Perhaps the most straightforward way is to place a numerical cap on new quantity—the type of


11
  Other early data collection efforts include a 1984 survey on economic development conducted by the International
City Management Association. This survey was sent to the chief administrative officer of various cities and
contained four questions pertaining to constraints on construction. See Clark and Goetz (1994) for more on this
survey. At the state level, the American Institute of Planners conducted a survey of the types of land use planning
activity undertaken by each of the fifty states. Those results were published in a 1976 book Survey of State Land
Use Planning Activity.

                                                                                                                12
restriction catalogued and studied by Katz and Rosen (1987). But the supply of housing can be

limited in many other ways including minimum lot sizes, height restrictions, setback

requirements, and open space designations. Regulations that affect the cost of construction can

also influence the supply of housing, as indicated by Noam’s (1983) analysis of local building

codes. Even these examples do not come close to capturing the range of efforts devised by

communities to influence housing supply. Creativity on the part of local governments appears to

know virtually no bounds in this instance.

       Heterogeneity in land use restrictions across localities is so extensive that it is almost

impossible to describe the full complexity of the local regulatory environment. One strategy is to

focus on a small set of locations and collect as detailed data as possible on all aspects of the

regulatory environment in those places. Glaeser, Schuetz, and Ward (GSW, hereafter; 2006) do

so for a subset of the Boston metropolitan area. Their detailed analysis of local zoning

provisions allowed them to compute fairly precise estimates of the potential housing supply in all

localities in their sample. However, the enormity of that effort prevents it from being easily

replicated in many other markets.

       Whereas GSW (2006) reflect a “deep but narrow” approach to studying regulation, an

alternative strategy is to go “shallow but wide.” A good example of this latter approach is

Gyourko, Saiz, and Summers (GSS, hereafter; 2008), who estimate indexes of the stringency of

the local land use environment for 2,611 communities across the nation, of which approximately

three-quarters are in 293 distinct metropolitan areas spread across all fifty states. They achieve

this breadth of coverage at the cost of detailed knowledge of the environment.

       GSS (2008) construct their regulatory index based on the answers to three sets of

questions. The first inquired about the general characteristics of the regulatory process: who is



                                                                                                    13
involved in that process (e.g., states, localities, councils, legislatures, courts, etc.) and who can

approve or veto zoning or rezoning requests. A second set of questions pertained to the local

rules: were there binding limits on quantities supplied? minimum lot size requirements?

affordable housing requirements? development exactions of various types? The final set of

survey questions asked about changes in the cost of lot development and in the review time for a

typical project over the previous ten years.12

         The answers to these questions were used to create an aggregate measure of the

stringency of the local land use regime which GSS called the Wharton Residential Land Use

Regulation Index (WRLURI). Specifically, they used factor analysis to create this summary

metric from eleven subindexes which described different aspects of the local regulatory

environment, with the results standardized to have a sample mean of zero and a standard

deviation of one.13 The index is increasing in the restrictiveness of regulation. Table 1

reproduces Table 11 from GSS (2008) which reports average WRLURI values for the 47

metropolitan areas in their sample that had more than ten communities responding to the survey.




12
   GGS (2008) supplemented their survey responses with data from two other sources. One was the state-level
analysis of the nature of legal, legislative and executive actions pertaining to land use policy that was conducted by
Foster and Summers (2005). The other was a measure of community pressure using information on environmental
and open-space ballot initiatives. The interested reader should see GSS (2008) for more on these data.
13
   More specifically, the principal component of each subindex was used to create the community-wide index. The
eleven subindexes include a Local Political Pressure Index, State Political Involvement Index, State Court
Involvement Index, Local Zoning Approval Index, Local Project Approval Index, Local Assembly Index, Supply
Restrictions Index, Density Restrictions Index, Open Space Index, Exactions Index, and Approval Delay Index. The
literature has not reflected on how to aggregate across individual regulations, but it certainly would be beneficial to
consider what an optimal weighting scheme might look like.

                                                                                                                    14
                      Table 1: Average WRLURI Values for Metropolitan Areas with Data on Ten or Local Jurisdictions
                                                           Number of                                                                         Number of
            Metropolitan Area                WRLURI                                         Metropolitan Area                   WRLURI
                                                          Observations                                                                      Observations
1. Providence-Fall River-Warwick, RI-MA         1.79          16                25. Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI                         0.25         21
2. Boston, MA-NH                                1.54          41                26. Akron, OH                                      0.15         11
3. Monmouth-Ocean, NJ                           1.21          15                27. Detroit, MI                                    0.12         46
4. Philadelphia, PA                             1.03          55                28. Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA                 0.10         14
5. Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                 1.01          21                29. Chicago, IL                                   0.06          95
6. San Francisco, CA                            0.90          13                30. Pittsburgh, PA                                 0.06         44
7. Denver, CO                                   0.85          13                31. Atlanta, GA                                    0.04         26
8.. Nassau-Suffolk, NY                          0.80          14                32. Scranton-Wilkes-Barre-Hazelton, PA             0.03         11
9. Bergen-Passaic, NJ                           0.71          21                33. Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT                      -0.10         19
10. Fort Lauderdale, FL                         0.70          16                34. Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI             -0.15         16
11. Phoenix-Mesa, AZ                            0.70          18                35. Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria, OH                   -0.16         31
12. New York, NY                                0.63          19                36. Rochester, NY                                 -0.17         12
13. Riverside-San Bernardino, CA                0.61          20                37. Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL           -0.17         12
14. Newark, NJ                                  0.60          25                38. Houston, TX                                   -0.19         13
15. Springfield, MA                             0.58          13                39. San Antonio, TX                               -0.24         12
16. Harrisburg-Lebanon-Carlise, PA              0.55          15                40. Fort Worth-Arlington, TX                      -0.27         15
17. Oakland, CA                                 0.52          12                41. Dallas, TX                                    -0.35         31
18. Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA                  0.51          32                42. Oklahoma City, OK                             -0.41         12
19. Hartford, CT                                0.50          28                43. Dayton-Springfield, OH                        -0.50         17
20. San Diego, CA                               0.48          11                44. Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN                          -0.56         27
21. Orange County, CA                           0.39          14                45. St. Louis, MO-IL                              -0.72         27
22. Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI                 0.34          48                46. Indianapolis, IN                              -0.76         12
23. Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV                     0.33          12                47. Kansas City, MO-KS                            -0.80         29
24. Portland-Vancouver, OR-WA                   0.29          20



Notes: This table appears as Table 11 in Gyourko, Summers and Saiz (2008). Metropolitan area definitions are based on 1999 boundaries. Consolidated
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (CMSAs) are disaggregated into Primary Metropolitan Statistical Areas wherever relevant.




                                                                                                                                                      15
           The index itself is constructed so as to rank places in terms of the degree of strictness of

the local residential land use environment, but the underlying survey data allow us to describe an

average community, as well as strongly- and weakly-regulated ones. The typical community in

the WRLURI sample can be characterized as follows: (1) two entities (zoning commission, city

council, environmental review board, etc.) must approve any project requiring a zoning change;

thus, multiple points of approval now are required for projects that cannot be done ‘by right’14;

(2) there is a modest minimum lot size requirement, but for the typical community, it is far less

onerous than the one acre minimums seen in highly regulated places; (3) some type of

development exactions program exists;15 and (4) there is about a six month lag between the

submission of a permit for a standard project (where standard is defined by the community filling

out the survey) and the issuance of that permit.

Dividing the WRLURI communities into thirds and labeling the top third ‘highly regulated’ and

the bottom third ‘lightly regulated’ allows us to contrast traits across those two groups. One

noteworthy distinction is that local and state pressure groups are much more likely to be involved

in the regulatory process in the more highly regulated places. Another key distinguishing feature

between highly and lightly regulated communities is that more than 50 percent of the highly-

regulated communities have a one acre minimum lot size rule in at least one neighborhood,

whereas less than a 5 percent of lightly regulated communities have such a rule. Open space

requirements and some type of formal development exactions policy are nearly omnipresent in

the highly regulated localities, but often are not present in the most lightly regulated areas. In

addition, the average delay time between application and approval for a standard project in the




14
     A project can be done ‘by right’ if it meets all published zoning regulations and requires no variances of any kind.
15
     Development exactions are monetary or in-kind payments in return for development rights.

                                                                                                                      16
highly regulated communities is three times longer than in the lighltly regulated communites

(10.2 months versus 3.2 months, respectively).

       Another noteworthy feature of the WRLURI is the strong positive correlation across its

component indexes. Essentially, if a community is rated as highly regulated on one dimension, it

is likely to be highly regulated along other dimensions. This result suggests that surveys

covering only a limited set of types of regulation might provide a reasonably accurate picture of

the general restrictiveness of the locations in the sample, but further research should examine this

conjecture more thoroughly.

       In terms of data detail and market coverage, the contrast of GSS (2008) with GSW (2006)

is stark. Whereas GSS (2008) only know whether a town had a 1-acre minimum lot size

restriction in at least one neighborhood, GSW (2006) know the how every square yard in the

entire municipality is zoned. For example, there are 14 municipalities in the GSW sample with

minimum lot sizes in excess of 70,000 square feet (over 1.6 acres). Those areas constitute more

than 10% of the region’s land area, but hold only 4% of the population. More generally, the

diversity of minimum lot size restrictions in the Boston area is staggering, with the range running

from less than 10,000 square feet to more than 70,000 square feet. The modal minimum lot size

restriction is roughly one acre, providing some indication of how stringent the zoning codes are

in many of the communities in GSW’s sample.

       The detailed knowledge of the local regulatory environment amassed by GSW (2006)

was collected over a two-year period in which the authors worked with a team of researchers at

the Pioneer Institute for Public Policy Research to catalogue the land use regulatory environment

in 187 communities that comprise a subset of the Boston metropolitan area. They conducted a

survey of over 100 questions, interviewed local officials, and provided those individuals the



                                                                                                 17
opportunity to review the results. Such detail is only possible within a given metropolitan area,

and could only be replicated in other regions at high cost.

        The benefits are considerable. The Boston metropolitan area is worthy of detailed

analysis because key summary statistics suggest it is very tightly regulated. In the midst of high

and rising real house prices over time, the number of housing permits has shrunk considerably:

from 172,459 in the 1960s to 141,347 in the 1980s and down to 84,105 in the 1990s (GSW,

2006). GSW (2006) recognize the possibility that the reason for the downward trend in

construction could be that Boston is running out of land, rather than man-made regulation.

However, the authors show that densities outside the urban core are quite low, suggesting that

land is still plentiful in the Boston area.16

        This result leads GSW (2006) to a detailed study of local zoning codes. In doing so, they

provide a rare window into the intricacy of these laws. Their survey includes not just the hard

caps on growth akin to those studied by Katz and Rosen (1987), but the prohibition of

irregularly-shaped lots, extensive wetlands restrictions, septic system regulations, and various

subdivision rules. Not all rules are designed to limit supply, as there are also “cluster provisions”

and inclusionary zoning provisions, which allow developers to build at higher densities in some

places, and age-restricted zoning which typically encourages building for seniors.

        GSW (2006) use historical data on permits in their communities (going back to 1910

using decennial Census data) to investigate which of the myriad of regulations really matter in

terms of constraining residential construction. They conclude that evidence linking minimum lot

size restrictions to new development is especially persuasive. As minimum lot size increased by

a quarter acre, roughly 10 percent fewer houses were permitted over time. This negative

16
  Moreover, if it were land that really was scarce, the price of a quarter acre of extra land would be the same
whether it extends an existing lot or sits under a new home. Glaeser and Gyourko (2003) show this not to be the
case for the Boston area.

                                                                                                                  18
relationship between regulation and permits was found even in communities with lower

minimums. Relatively strict wetlands regulation also appears to constrain new development in

an economically meaningful way. In a follow-up paper (Glaeser and Ward 2009), two of these

authors used these data to examine the causes and consequences of regulation in more detail.

We will discuss those findings below.



II.3. Other Measures

        Beyond investigating building codes or land use regulation, another method of inferring

restrictiveness of supply can be found in Saiz (2010), who incorporates the role of topography to

estimate the elasticity of housing supply for nearly 100 metropolitan areas in the United States.

His approach uses three separate data sources. First, he employs GIS techniques to compute the

area lost to oceans within a 50-kilometer radius of the centroid of a metropolitan area. Second,

he uses satellite data from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) to calculate the amount

of land lost to internal water bodies and wetlands. Third, under the rationale that anything above

a 15 degree slope is extremely challenging and expensive to build on, he uses the USGS Digital

Elevation Model to compute the percentage of land area with a slope in excess of 15 degrees.

Taken together, these three computations provide an estimate of exogenously undevelopable land

in a metropolitan area.

       Saiz (2010) then proceeds to investigate links between geography, regulation and urban

development. As we will discuss below, he finds a strong statistical link between his estimates

of geographical restrictions and the WRLURI index. That is, regulatory restrictiveness tends to

be higher in metropolitan areas which have geographic constraints on land development in terms

of being coastal, having internal water bodies of some type and/or steep elevations. Based on the



                                                                                                    19
geographic constraints and WRLURI, Saiz (2010) estimates the elasticity of housing supply for

each of the metropolitan areas in his sample. These estimates have been used by many other

researchers to analyze the housing supply as well as to provide exogenous variation in house

prices across locations.



II.4. Summary of Measurement Issues and Concluding Comments

       In the past decade or so there have been considerable achievements in the measurement

of local land use regulations. Early studies focused on only a single type of regulation within a

fairly limited geographic area. By contrast, GSW (2006) provide a very detailed picture of the

entire regulatory environment of a single metropolitan area. While it is very costly to amass this

type of information, it would be helpful to replicate their survey in other metropolitan areas as

often as possible. Combining data from such detailed studies of land use regulation would be

even more valuable than examining a single area in isolation.

       More effort has been put into less specific and more general measurement of local land

use regulatory environments across a wider range of communities, as reflected in GSS’s (2008)

survey of more than 1,900 communities in over 290 metropolitan areas. Although this survey

does not contain detailed information on all the different ways local governments can constrain

residential development, the advantage is in allowing researchers to compare regulation across

many more localities and markets.

       Beyond surveys, Saiz (2010) illustrates the possibility of using other data to gain insight

into the elasticity of housing supply. Using the geography and topography of the land, he

documents a connection between geographic constraints and regulatory constraints and provides

estimates of housing supply elasticities for nearly 100 metropolitan areas.



                                                                                                    20
          Because surveys are so expensive in terms of time and money, researchers should be

creative in thinking about other ways to measure regulation using readily-available data. One

possibility is to use public records data, which are now routinely collected and sold by a few data

providers. These datasets, which cover the vast majority of residential property in the United

States, include parcel-by-parcel information on allowed land use. For example, Brooks and Lutz

(2014) use land use codes from public records data to analyze zoning and public transit in Los

Angeles. Another possibility might be to use data from internet chatter, as in Gyourko and Saiz

(2006).

          As will be documented below, measures of local land use restrictiveness have been

widely used in subsequent empirical research into the causes and consequences of regulation.

However, they are limited in the sense that each is a cross section. Because regulation can be

correlated with many other attributes of a location, a single snap shot of the local regulatory

environment is not conducive to establishing causality in empirical work. Thus, it is critical that

researchers collect new data or otherwise come up with ways to measure changes in regulation

over time. For example, Glaeser and Ward (2009) convert the GSW (2006) survey into panel

data based on the year that different types of regulation are adopted. Similarly, Jackson (2014)

converts the Glickfeld and Levine (1992) survey into a panel of regulations in California.17

Besides panel data, another helpful approach would be to examine changes in a particular

regulation using a difference-in-difference strategy. A few examples are Zhou, McMillen and

McDonald (2008), who analyze the effect of an amendment to the Chicago Zoning Ordinance,

Cunningham (2007), who analyzes the adoptions of an Urban Growth Boundary in Seattle,

Kahn, Vaughn and Zasloff (2010), who analyze the creation of a coastal boundary zone in

17
  Although these efforts are clearly a vast improvement over cross-sectional data, they do not account for
regulations that no longer existed at the time of the survey. Thus, if cost were not an issue, repeated surveys would
be a better method of constructing panel data than using the implementation date of existing regulations.

                                                                                                                   21
California, and Thorson (1997) who analyses an increase in minimum lot sizes in McHenry

County, Illinois.



III. Determinants of Regulation

III.1. Joint Determination of Land Values and Zoning

         One of the earliest questions asked in the literature on the determinants of zoning is

whether local governments set zoning laws in order to maximize the value of land in their

jurisdiction. For example, Wallace (1988) models zoning as the outcome of a county council

that maximizes its utility, which is a function of land attributes and land prices. Land prices are

also a function of local characteristics, as well as of the zoning designation chosen. If zoning has

no effect on land values, then one would conclude that these regulations merely coincide with the

land use that would be adopted in unconstrained markets. Wallace refers to this question as

whether “zoning follows the market.” In a sample of parcels for Kings County, WA, she finds

that zoning allocations tend to decrease the price of parcels zoned for large lots, suggesting that

zoning leads to an oversupply of large minimum lot sizes.18 More generally, she finds that land

values would be higher under different zoning designations. Thus, she concludes that in this

sample zoning does not “follow the market.” Her analysis uses observed attributes of land

parcels to correct for the selection of different types of land into different zoning categories.

However, it is difficult to rule out the alternative interpretation that unobserved variables cause

cheaper land to be zoned for larger lots.




18
  Because zoning and land values are jointly determined, she identifies a two-equation model of land values and
zoning using an indicator for whether a parcel is platted as an instrument for land values. The justification for this
specification is that approval of a plat application entails considerable time and monetary costs, raising the price of
land, and that the zoning designation is decided prior to when a parcel is platted.

                                                                                                                      22
       McMillen and McDonald (1991) also estimate a model in which land values affect

zoning decisions, as well as vice versa. In their data from the northwest suburbs of Chicago,

they identify the determinants of zoning from an indicator of whether a parcel was located in

Cook County, because that county was more likely to zone undeveloped land for residential use.

They find that zoning patterns reflect characteristics of the land in that parcels closer to railways

and expressways are more likely to be designated for manufacturing use. They also show that

estimates of the land value equation are biased when one does not account for the endogenous

designation of zoning.

       In a sample of home sales in Sata Clara County, CA, Pogodzinski and Sass (1994)

differentiate between the effects of land use designations and regulations that affect the

characteristics of a lot and its structure. They find that land use designations do not affect house

values, implying that this type of zoning does “follow the market.” By contrast, minimum lot

sizes, minimum side-yard restrictions, and maximum height restrictions do affect house values,

implying that these types of regulations do not “follow the market.”

       To summarize, this early work has generally found that zoning regulations do not simply

mimic the outcome that would result from an unregulated market. However, because their focus

is on the effect of regulation on land values, these papers provide little insight into the factors

that do shape housing supply regulation.



III.2. Homeowners, developers and local politics in a single community

       More recent theories concerning the determinants of regulation have incorporated the

idea that local residents do not all share the same goals, so the regulatory environment will be

shaped by the incentives and influence of actors in the local political process. In a number of



                                                                                                      23
influential articles and books, William Fischel has advanced the idea that homeowners are an

important force behind these types of regulation.19 In The Homevoter Hypothesis (2001), he

contends that homeowners have a strong incentive to work together in order to restrict undesired

development because their home is typically their primary asset, and owners do not have other

means to insure against events that would reduce their property value. Central to Fischel’s

argument is the idea that local amenities and disamenities (such as school quality, dumps, etc.)

are capitalized into house values. In support of this notion, he cites a number of studies finding

that house prices are lower in neighborhoods with disamenities such as a toxic waste dump, more

through traffic, or more localized air pollution, as well as research showing that property tax

rates are capitalized in house prices. Because shocks to housing wealth are difficult to insure or

diversify, homeowners turn to local political action to protect their investment.

        According to Fischel, another reason why homeowners are so opposed to development is

that they tend to work in a different jurisdiction than where they live. When construction is

pushed into a nearby jurisdiction, homeowners can benefit from some positive effects, such as

job creation, without incurring the cost of higher density in their own neighborhood. This logic

can explain both why regions with more fragmented governments are more likely to have stricter

regulation (Fischel 2008) as well as why regulation spread and became stricter over the 20th

Century along with suburbanization (Fischel 2004).

        Drawing on Fischel’s insights, a number of papers have developed more formal

theoretical models of homeowners’ influence on zoning regulation. Ortalo-Magne and Prat

(2014) present a cutting-edge example, in which they use an overlapping-generations economy

to model three decisions simultaneously: the location choice of households (a regulated city

19
  Fischel draws on earlier work discussing the role of homeowners in constraining local development including
Sonstelie and Portney (1978) and Ellickson (1977). In an early book, Fischel proposes that local governments
impose land use regulation in order to maximize the value of owner-occupied housing (Fischel 1985).

                                                                                                                24
versus unregulated countryside), investment in residential real estate, and the collective choice

model of local housing supply regulation.

        Their basic setup is as follows. Households decide whether to live in the countryside,

where they pay a fixed rent and earn income normalized to zero, or in a city where income is a

function of city-wide productivity that varies over time and a fixed idiosyncratic component. In

the city, households choose whether to invest in owner-occupied housing or to rent. There is a

fixed premium between the return to investing in owner-occupied housing and the return to

investing in rental housing, which is meant to reflect a number of factors including the non-

pecuniary benefits of homeownership and its favorable tax treatment, the costs of managing

rental property, and moral hazard in the rental market. Housing wealth is consumed at the end of

an individual’s life. Thus, tenure choice is a tradeoff between the homeownership premium and

the price risk associated with homeownership.20 New construction in the city requires a building

permit, and the number of building permits allowed is decided by city residents through majority

voting. Permits are assigned to developers, who do not vote, and who must pay a fee for every

new permit. Aggregate permit fees paid are split equally among all city residents. These fees

can be interpreted as a rough proxy for the general economic gains that development can bring to

an area.

        Not only do city residents receive a share of the total permit fees raised, but they also

benefit from new construction because the larger housing supply reduces future rents, and all city

residents must pay rent either to themselves or to absentee landlords. However, the reduction in

rents also causes house prices to fall, leading to lower end-of-period consumption. In the model,

construction does not occur if the net benefit accruing to the median voter is negative—i.e., if the


20
  Since households are risk-averse, without the homeownership premium everyone would choose to rent. Housing
not owned by households is owned by risk-neutral firms.

                                                                                                          25
benefit owing to lower future rents and the voter’s share of permit fees is less than the decrease

in final consumption through lower house prices.

       Using this model, Ortalo-Magne and Prat show that a homeownership subsidy makes

homes less affordable. Absent the constraints on new construction, the subsidy would have no

effect on affordability because it would be exactly offset by an increase in house prices.

However, the subsidy causes the median city resident to own more housing, thereby leading to

more opposition to city growth. It is therefore the reduction in permitted new construction that

raises equilibrium house prices and reduces affordability.

       In contrast to the homeownership subsidy, an increase in the permit fee boosts support for

urban growth, leading to an increase in city size. The expansion of the housing supply reduces

rents, making all city residents better off. This result illustrates Fischel’s argument that the more

homeowners internalize the benefit from new construction, the less opposed to development they

will be.

       Theories in the vein of Fischel and Ortalo-Magne and Prat predict that homeowners

should be stronger supporters of housing supply regulation than renters; other examples include

Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005) and Hilber and Robert-Nicoud (2013). A few studies have

found support for this hypothesis in voting patterns. For example, Dubin, Keiwiet and Noussair

(1992) document that precincts with a larger share of homeowners had a larger proportion of

votes cast in favor of growth controls in a 1988 San Diego election. McDonald (1995) also

examines voting patterns—in this case a proposed zoning ordinance in Houston—and finds that

middle-income precincts were more likely to support a proposed zoning ordinance than lower-

income precincts. Although he does not examine homeownership directly, it is likely that

middle-income precincts have higher homeownership rates than lower-income precincts. An



                                                                                                     26
interesting aspect of McDonald’s study is that zoning did not exist in Houston, so the voting

patterns do not reflect any preexisting pattern of regulation.

        If homeowners favor tighter regulation, then policy should be more restrictive in areas

where the political influence of homeowners is stronger. However, evidence for this relationship

is difficult to find. Logan and Zhou (1990) find little correlation between homeownership and a

variety of growth control measures in a national sample of suburban municipalities in 1973.

Similar results have been found for growth control measures in cities around San Jose

(Baldassare and Protash 1982) and for municipalities in California (Brueckner 1998 and

Donovan and Neiman 1995). It is possible that the mere presence of homeowners is not a

particularly accurate measure of the influence that these constituents have on local policy.

Instead, their influence might be better reflected by demographic or socioeconomic

characteristics of the local population that are correlated with their ability to organize or

otherwise participate in local policymaking. Many studies have found positive correlations of

regulation with socio-economic characteristics that are likely to be correlated with the political

influence of homeowners, such as income, education, and the fraction of white-collar or

professional workers.21 However, it should be noted that because all of these studies are cross-

sectional in nature, it is difficult to rule out the possibility that the correlations (or lack thereof)

are driven by omitted variables. Moreover, the model proposed by Ortalo-Magne and Prat

demonstrates that because regulation raises house prices, the degree of regulation could influence

the incentive to be a homeowner, and this reverse causality could further obscure these cross-

sectional relationships.




21
 See Lenon, Chattopadhyay and Heffley (19960, McDonald and McMillen (2004), Evenson and Wheaton (2003),
Donovan and Neiman (1995), and Baldassare and Protash (1982). Glickfeld and Levine (1988) is an exception.

                                                                                                           27
       Relatively few papers have attempted to account for potential endogeneity problems

when examining the role of homeowners in restricting the housing supply. Hilber and Robert-

Nicoud (2013) instrument for homeownership with the fraction of households that are married

couples with no children. The idea is that married couples will have higher and more stable

incomes than single adults or households with children, making them more likely to qualify for a

mortgage. Also, married couples are more likely to be in stable relationships compared to

unmarried couples, implying a lower probability of moving and therefore a longer period over

which to recoup the transaction costs of purchasing a home. The use of this instrument requires

the assumption that the fraction of households that are married couples with no children does not

affect regulation through any channel except the homeownership rate. In a sample of 93

metropolitan areas in 1990, they find that locations with a larger share of married households

with no children had a higher homeownership rate in the same year. Using this instrument, they

find a positive, but insignificant, correlation with the WRLURI index described in the previous

section. Moreover, the estimated effect is not large, as a one standard-deviation increase in a

MSA’s homeownership rate is associated with a one-third standard deviation increase in

regulatory constraints. Of course, one still might be concerned that the fraction of households

that are married and without children is either influenced by housing supply regulation or

correlated with omitted variables that are also correlated with regulation.

       Glaeser and Ward (2009) use a different method to get around the endogeneity of

homeownership and regulation, examining relatively recent patterns of housing supply regulation

as a function of homeownership rates in 1940 or 1970. This method avoids the problem of

reverse causality, but it is less clear that it mitigates concerns about omitted variables, since

historical homeownership rates could also be correlated with many unobserved attributes that



                                                                                                    28
affect regulation. In their sample of townships in the Greater Boston area, the authors find little

correlation of historical homeownership with a number of measures of regulation such as

minimum lot sizes, wetland bylaws, septic rules and cluster zoning. They also find little

correlation of regulation with other 1970 attributes of townships that might be correlated with

homeowner influence, such as educational attainment and the fraction of the population that is

foreign born.

       In summary, there is little empirical evidence that areas with more homeowners adopt

stricter housing supply regulations, a fairly surprising result given the many theories that point to

homeowners as the drivers of regulation. Because much of this evidence is cross-sectional in

nature, more work is needed to address the issues of omitted variables and reverse causality.

Panel data would add a useful dimension, allowing researchers to observe how regulation

changes after homeownership patterns change. As noted above, except in a very few cases panel

data do not yet exist. Hence, it is vital to explore other instruments for homeownership. One

possibility could arise from regulatory changes in mortgage markets that have changed the ease

of getting a mortgage in a way that has had differential effects on homeownership across

locations, but would otherwise be uncorrelated with factors that affect land use policy. There are

multiple conditional clauses in that sentence, so it is by no means certain that such an instrument

would be found to be powerful and valid. However, it is critical for empirical researchers to

think more creatively along these lines if the causal effect of homeownership on regulation is

ever to be uncovered.

       Besides homeowners, developers and/or owners of vacant land may also be important

participants in the local political process. Molotch (1976) coined the phrase “growth machine”

in reference to the idea that landowners in a community will band together in support of policies



                                                                                                   29
that will fuel local economic growth. He argues that the people who end up in local government

tend to be local business leaders and other types that are naturally sympathetic towards local

growth. Thus, local policy can end up favoring policies that promote economic activity, even if

the typical citizen does not. One possible explanation for the lack of cross-sectional correlation

between homeownership and regulation is that areas with higher homeownership rates may also

have stronger alliances favoring pro-growth policies, perhaps because the population is

wealthier. Fischel (2008) argues that developers have more influence in large governments,

causing metropolitan areas with less political fragmentation to have stricter regulation.

       Few formal models have explicitly allowed for the role of developers in shaping housing

supply regulation. Hilber and Robert-Nicoud (2013) and Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005)

show how local planning boards can be influenced by both homeowners and developers. Like

Ortalo-Magne and Prat, these models predict that locations with a larger share of homeowners

with have stricter housing supply regulation. In addition, they illustrate that regulations will be

tighter in jurisdictions where homeowners have a stronger political influence relative to

developers. However, the way in which they model this influence is fairly simple. In Glaeser,

Gyourko and Saks (2005), homeowners use time to influence the local planning board whereas

developers use cash, with the result that regulation will be tighter in areas where the planning

board is more influenced by time. In Hilber and Robert-Nicoud (2013), owners of developed

land (homeowners) and owners of undeveloped land (developers) both use cash to influence the

planning board, and their lobbying contributions are a positive function of the value of their land.

       This topic is yet another case in which theory is ahead of empirics, as we are aware of

little empirical evidence on the influence developers have in shaping housing supply regulation.

One study with indirect evidence on this front is Sole-Olle and Viladecans-Marsal (2012), who



                                                                                                   30
argue that developers should be less successful at influencing local regulations when the

currently elected officials have won the vote by a narrow margin. In that case, the elected

officials will place a higher priority on following voters’ preferences in order to be reelected.

Using data on more than 2000 Spanish municipalities from 2003 to 2007, they report evidence in

support of this hypothesis.



III.3. Supply of buildable land and historical density patterns

       One interesting aspect of the model proposed by Hilber and Rober-Nicoud (2013) is that

the incentives of homeowners and developers to influence the planning process are a function of

the value of land. Thus, anything that raises land values will affect regulation. Specifically, in

their model, jurisdictions have innate differences in amenities and households choose among

jurisdictions. The greater demand to live in an area with more valuable amenities is only partly

offset by congestion costs, leading to a positive correlation between amenities and development

across locations. In equilibrium, locations with more desirable amenities will have a larger share

of developed land, and consequently more land use regulation in order to prevent further

development from raising congestion disamenities even more. Consequently, a restricted supply

of land (higher share of developed land) causes further restrictions on supply in the form of

government regulation.

       In support of the prediction that locations with more developed land will have more

regulation, Hilbert and Robert-Nicoud show that metropolitan areas with a larger fraction of

developed residential land area (measured using the 1992 National Land Cover Data) have a

larger degree of regulation according to the WRLURI. This correlation exists even after

controlling for the homeownership rate, so it does not simply reflect the fact that homeowners



                                                                                                     31
have a greater influence on local policy in areas where they are more numerous. Further, Hilber

and Robert-Nicoud instrument for the share of developed land with two variables reflecting

natural amenities—average January temperature and the presence of a major coastline—and

population density in 1880, which they interpret as reflecting the innate desirability of an area at

a time long before regulations were in place.22 These instruments turn out to be strong predictors

of the share of developed land in 1992, and using them, the predicted share of developed land

has a positive and significant effect on regulation. Thus, they interpret the positive correlation

between regulation and developed land as reflecting the stronger demand to regulate in high

amenity places.23

         As discussed above, Saiz (2010) follows a different empirical strategy using geographic

features of the landscape to measure the supply of buildable land, and hence the restrictiveness of

housing supply regulation. Saiz (2010) finds that metropolitan areas with a larger fraction of

land lost to geographic constraints tend to have stricter housing supply regulations as measured

by the WRLURI. Citing the models discussed above, he then argues that homeowners have a

stronger incentive to protect their housing investment (through regulation) where land values are

high initially, and that geographic constraints lead to important initial differences in land values.

In keeping with this interpretation, Saiz (2010) finds that the relationship between geographic

constraints and regulatory constraints does not hold in areas suffering from weak long-term

22
   More specifically, their argument is that natural amenities are not directly correlated with supply restrictions
because the types of regulations that they examine do not include efforts to protect coasts and because warm
temperatures are unlikely to be significantly related to the type of environmental considerations that typically induce
planning. Saiz (2010) does, in fact, document a strong relationship between geographic constraints, which tend to
be in coastal areas, and regulation. He interprets this relationship as causal. However, this result does not
undermine the validity of amenities as instruments for the share of developable land as long as the reason why
coastal areas have tighter regulation is because they have less developable land.
23
   The economic magnitude of this effect is a matter of opinion. It seems large in that assigning San Francisco’s
attributes to Salt Lake City would move the latter from the 56th most regulated area (out of 93) to the 35th most
regulated. On the other hand, a one standard deviation change in the share of developed land is associated with only
one-third standard deviation stricter regulation, which is about the same magnitude that the authors found for
homeownership, as described above.

                                                                                                                    32
demand (defined as the bottom quartile of urban growth between 1940 and 1970). His proposed

explanation is that geographic constraints are not likely to bind in low-demand places and,

therefore, they are not likely to affect the incentive to regulate.

        In contrast to the results documented by Saiz (2010) and Hilbert and Robert-Nicoud

(2013), a few other papers have found the opposite correlation of historical density patterns with

regulation. In their analysis of townships in the Greater Boston area, Glaeser and Ward (2009)

show that higher housing density in 1940 and 1915 is associated with less restrictive residential

zoning the late 1990s/early 2000s, as measured by minimum lot size requirements. This

relationship is quite strong in that density in 1940 can explain 68 percent of the variation in

current minimum lot sizes. Going back even farther, these authors show that towns with larger

minimum lot sizes had a larger fraction of forested area in 1885. Their interpretation is that

historical patterns of deforestation reflect agricultural productivity. Locations with more

productive land were developed first and had higher land values, resulting in higher density for

many years to come and eventually to regulations that allowed for higher residential density.

        Evenson and Wheaton (2003) also use data from Massachusetts to explore the connection

between land use regulation and past development patterns. They measure actual land use in

1999 from aerial photographs taken of each town by the Massachusetts Office of Geographic and

Environmental Information, and obtain parcel-level information on zoning bylaws and the

amount of land protected from development from the same institution. The data on open land

are combined with minimum lot sizes and floor-to-area ratios to determine the maximum

possible number of new buildings in each town under current zoning regulation. They find that

towns with relatively high housing density in 1999 tend to zone for higher future housing

densities. In addition, towns with a larger fraction of developed land devoted to residential use



                                                                                                    33
tend to zone a larger fraction of open land for residential use. Like Glaeser and Ward (2009),

they find that zoning regulations follow past land use patterns. They also show that for all but a

handful of towns very close to Boston, future residential building is restricted to a lower density

than the current density (i.e. the slope of the regression line of zoned density on current density is

positive but less than one). This result fits Fischel’s ideas that residents of suburban jurisdictions

are more likely to focus on the negative aspects of allowing new construction, while residents of

urban jurisdictions where many businesses are located are more sensitive to the potential benefits

of additional development.

         The contrasting findings of Hilber and Robert-Nicoud and Saiz on the one hand with

those of Glaeser and Ward and Evenson and Wheaton on the other suggest that much more work

is needed to understand the connection between density patterns and regulation. One difference

between these two sets of results is that they use very different data. The first two studies

measure regulation using the WRLURI, which covers many aspects of the regulatory process

including the actors in the development process, statutory limits on residential construction, and

delays in permit approval, whereas the latter two studies focus on minimum lot size zoning.24

Another important difference between these two sets of studies is that the first examines patterns

across metropolitan areas, while the second examines patterns across jurisdictions within a single

state or metropolitan area. As we discuss below, the incentives for regulating new development

could be different in these two settings. In addition to further empirical analysis examining the

relationship between the supply of buildable land and regulation, it would be helpful to consider




24
  It could be that communities set lot sizes in a way that allows new construction to follow the density of existing
buildings, but restrict new development in other ways to compensate.

                                                                                                                       34
other models that might help explain why zoning patterns seem to be correlated with past

development.25



III.4 Regulation in a multi-community setting: sorting and strategic interactions

         Thus far, we have mostly focused on land use decisions in the context of a single

community in isolation.26 But what happens when the population moves freely across a set of

local jurisdictions, each with the ability to set its own land use policy? A number of papers have

investigated the use of zoning to induce sorting of households across jurisdictions. One such

motive that has been discussed frequently in the literature is the “fiscal” motive, which refers to a

desire to limit the fiscal externality that arises when households pay tax proportional to their

income, but share the benefits of public expenditures equally (Hamilton 1978). In that case,

zoning restrictions such as minimum lot sizes allow households to sort themselves into

communities with other households that have similar preferences for the provision of a public

good. Epple, Romer and Filimon (1988) develop a model where uncertainty about the type of

household that will arrive in a metropolitan area can cause homeowners in a community to enact

zoning in order to maximize the net tax contribution of new entrants. Similarly, Calabrese,

Epple and Romano (2007) show how homeowners will choose to impose a lower bound on

housing consumption to induce sorting across communities and consequently more efficient

provision of a local public good.




25
   One step in this direction is Evenson and Wheaton (2002, unpublished working paper), who predict an inverse
correlation between existing residential density and restrictions on future development. The intuition is that for a
given population size, higher existing density implies lower aggregate consumption of land. When existing
residents consume less land, the capital gains from open space creation become smaller relative to the cost of
purchasing that space, so they will set aside less open land for public use.
26
   The primary exception is the discussion of Hilber and Robert-Nicoud (2013), whose model incorporates mobility
across jurisdictions.

                                                                                                                  35
       Rolleston (1987) argues that fiscal considerations will cause communities to compete

with one another to maintain or improve their fiscal advantage relative to other communities in

their region. Therefore, zoning should be more restrictive in an area with a “healthier” fiscal

situation relative to others. In a sample of 360 communities in northeastern New Jersey, she

creates a measure of the “fiscal capacity” of a community based on per capita income, per capita

market value of residential taxable property, farm land and vacant land, and per capita market

value of commercial, industrial and telephone/telegraph property. She finds that relative fiscal

capacity is positively related to the restrictiveness of residential zoning, as measured by an index

of minimum lot sizes for vacant developable residential land.

       Bates and Santerre (1994) also find evidence in favor of fiscal motives for zoning in a

sample of 132 municipalities in Connecticut. Specifically, they find that communities are likely

to zone a lower fraction of land for residential purposes when they have a large non-residential

tax base, which they argue reflects a larger opportunity cost of residential development. They

also find that the fraction of vacant land zoned for residential use is negatively related to past

population growth, which they interpret as a fiscal motivation because rapid population growth

can “impose increasing public service costs on entrenched residents.” On the other hand, they

find little correlation between these two fiscal-motivation variables and minimum lot sizes. They

also find no relationship between the total market value of taxable property, another variable

reflecting the fiscal motive for zoning, and either measure of zoning restrictiveness.

       One problem with interpreting the results found by Rolleston (1987) and Bates and

Santerre (1994) is that the variables used to measure the fiscal capacity of a jurisdiction could

also reflect a number of other factors that influence regulation. Moreover, these measures might

be affected by the amount of regulation in the area. Lutz (forthcoming) mitigates these



                                                                                                     36
identification issues by examining the effect of a state-wide policy that had a differential impact

on the fiscal situation of local governments. Specifically, in an attempt to equalize funding for

education, a reform in New Hampshire began granting payments to towns on the basis of their

property wealth. He shows that towns with a larger grant were more likely to impose growth

management regulations, consistent with the idea that a stronger fiscal situation will cause a

community to use regulation to restrict new entry.27

        Another motivation for zoning that is frequently discussed in the literature is that

households may use zoning to prevent minorities and/or poor households from moving in for

reasons other than fiscal motives. This often is referred to as an “exclusionary” motive for

zoning in the literature.28 Because minorities tend to have lower incomes, minimum lot size

requirements or regulations imposing a floor on the quality of homes can restrict access to

potential minority residents as well as potential low-income residents. In a sample of tracts in

Santa Clara County California, Pogodzinski and Sass (1994) find that minimum lot sizes are

larger in tracts with higher median incomes, which could be due to either a fiscal or exclusionary

motive. On the other hand, it could also be due to the fact that rich households are more adept at

influencing land-use policy.

        Rolleston (1987) looks for evidence of exclusionary motives by comparing community

characteristics to the characteristics of nearby communities. She finds that communities with a

lower percentage minority relative to other communities tend to have more restrictive residential

zoning, consistent with the notion that residents are trying to keep out other races. Bates and

Santerre (1994) find similar evidence for exclusionary zoning in that a smaller fraction of land is

27
   Towns receiving large grants also experienced a surge in building activity, so the growth management results are
also consistent with the possibility that population inflows lead to an increase in regulation.
28
   Lynch and Rasmussen (2004) and Cervero and Duncan (2004) find that property values are negatively associated
with racial diversity in the neighborhood, suggesting that exclusionary motives for zoning could stem from the
desire to preserve one’s property value.

                                                                                                                 37
zoned for residential use when poverty in the nearest central city is higher relative to poverty in

the zoned community. Also, Shertzer, Twinam and Walsh (2014) document that Chicago

neighborhoods with a larger share of black residents in 1922 were more likely to be zoned for

manufacturing use and denser structures in a 1923 comprehensive zoning ordinance. In his

survey of the literature on fiscal and exclusionary zoning, Ihlanfeldt (2004) concludes that most

studies find evidence supportive of the fiscal motive to restrict land use, while evidence on

exclusionary motives is mixed. But he points out that it is difficult to distinguish between

sorting by income, which could be interpreted as an outcome of fiscal considerations, and sorting

by race, which is more likely exclusionary. He calls for more empirical studies to distinguish

more clearly between income and race, something that is undoubtedly needed. Moreover, further

research should attempt to distinguish sorting that arises from the fiscal and exclusionary

motives from other factors that might cause households to sort into communities.

       Once a model of regulation is expanded to consider population flows across jurisdictions,

the land-use policies in one community will affect the decisions in surrounding communities.

Brueckner (1995) illustrates this idea in a model where local planners seek to maximize social

welfare, which includes the utility of residents who pay rent and of absentee landlords who

collect rent. Free mobility of residents across communities means that planners must account for

how a growth control will affect the relative demand to live in their community. He also

assumes that city size is non-negligible relative to the urban system, so that population diverted

by a restriction in one city will increase demand pressure in other cities. In the most general

form of his model, the effect of one city’s land use policy on another’s is ambiguous. But

assuming that individuals have Leontief preferences over housing and all other goods, he shows

that growth controls in a city will be strategic complements for marginal movements away from



                                                                                                  38
a symmetric equilibrium. That is, regulation in one city will become stricter (looser) if it

becomes stricter (looser) in a neighboring city.29

        Helsley and Strange (1995) also model strategic interactions among local communities.

In their work, growth controls raise property values not only because they restrict the housing

supply, but also because residents’ utility is decreasing in the population size of their community.

Consequently, communities have an incentive to exclude potential residents because this reduces

utility in other communities and make residents more willing to pay to live in the restricted

community. Because regulations lead to higher rents, even developers may support the adoption

of strong growth controls. This result is intriguing because it suggests a reason for why the

relationship between homeownership and regulation has been hard to find empirically—namely,

that developers have incentives to support regulation in the same types of communities that

homeowners do. The model of Hilber and Rober-Nicoud (2013) discussed above also allows for

household mobility across a set of jurisdictions, with the result that regulation in one jurisdiction

is weaker when amenities are more desirable (and thus housing supply regulation is stronger) in

other communities.

        Turning to empirical evidence on these inter-jurisdiction strategic interactions, Brueckner

(1998) shows that cities in California are more likely to impose stringent growth controls when a

nearby city has done so. Similarly, Lenon, Chattopadhyay and Heffley (1996) find that

minimum lot sizes in Connecticut townships are larger when lot sizes in neighboring townships

are larger. Because these studies are all based on cross-sectional correlations, it is possible that

their results could reflect similarities in the population or economic environment of jurisdictions

that are in close geographic proximity. This is yet another example of the benefits that will arise


29
  Brueckner (1995) also shows that this strategic complementarity reverses for very large movements away from the
initial equilibrium.

                                                                                                              39
when panel data are available, as one could potentially observe how the adoption of regulations

in a community results in changes in regulations in other communities.

       To summarize the literature on the determinants of housing supply regulation, it seems

that zoning does not simply mirror the land use that would result in an unconstrained market, but

reflects the intention of local governments to alter land use and control the amount and quality of

residential structures in their area. Theories delving into how local politics shape regulation have

focused on the incentives for homeowners to restrict development. Geographic constraints also

appear to influence regulation by altering the price of land, and thus changing the incentives to

restrict development. In addition, because regulation can lead to sorting of households across

communities, research has also examined motives for zoning that relate to preventing certain

types of households from entering a community. Much of the empirical analysis evaluating all

of these theories is based on cross-sectional relationships, raising concern about omitted

variables and reverse causality. The use of panel data on regulation and/or instruments would

allow for a cleaner assessment of all of these theories.



IV. Effects of Regulation

IV. 1. Effects on the price and quantity of housing

       We now turn from the determinants of housing supply regulation to its effects. Much of

the research concerning these effects has focused on the housing market. In simple models with

only one city, regulation leads to higher rents and house prices and less construction because it

reduces the elasticity of housing supply. In particular, regulation increases the marginal cost of

construction, both directly through the fees and time costs, as well as indirectly by requiring

construction to follow certain forms (lot size and setback requirements, for example) that the



                                                                                                    40
builder would not otherwise choose, as well as by creating uncertainty about project approval.

Also, some types of regulation such as growth controls effectively make the marginal cost of

housing infinite by constraining the total number of housing units allowed. Brueckner (2009)

presents a series of simple models to illustrate the predicted effects of various types of

regulation, including urban growth boundaries, floor area ratio restrictions, and cost-increasing

measures such as delays or uncertainty, on the price and quantity of housing. In most cases,

regulation leads to higher land rents, higher house prices, and a smaller housing stock.

         The predicted effects of regulation become less obvious in the context of a system of

cities where households move freely among them. In this case, utility must be equal across cities

so population flows can erode away price differences across locations. In the model developed

by Helsley and Strange (1995), equilibrium land rent in a community will be a function of land

rent in a “passive” community that does not set growth controls, the population of the passive

community, and the disutility caused by population congestion. In the case where local

amenities are not eroded by population, land rents are equal in all communities. Land rents are

still higher in all communities compared with the case of no regulation because growth controls

increase the population in the passive community, thereby raising rents through greater demand

for housing.30 In the case where congestion does reduce utility, rents are higher in communities

with growth controls because households value living in communities with a lower population.

Thus, there are price differences across communities, but they reflect the amenity value of

growth controls, not the lower elasticity of housing supply. Just as in the single-city case,

regulation will reduce the number of housing units in controlled cities.




30
  Pollakowski and Wachter (1990) show that density restrictions in one planning area of Montgomery County, MD
raise house prices in adjacent planning areas, illustrating the idea that mobility arbitrages away price differentials.

                                                                                                                     41
        Numerous papers have examined the empirical relationship between regulation, house

prices and construction. Many of these have used cross-sectional data on communities within a

single metropolitan area so they might underestimate the aggregate effect on house prices.31

Others have compared average degrees of regulation across metropolitan areas, in which case

population flows are less likely to erode away price differentials.32 Although this logic suggests

that the estimated effects of regulation on house prices should be larger in cross-metropolitan

analyses, metropolitan-level measures of regulation are constructed from averages over only

some jurisdictions within the metropolitan area so estimates at the metropolitan level might

suffer from more downward bias due to measurement error than those based on jurisdiction-level

data where regulations are measured more accurately.

        The vast majority of studies have found that locations with more regulation have higher

house prices and less construction. The magnitudes of these estimated effects are difficult to

compare across studies because each one uses different measures of regulation—a few examples

include indicators for the presence of a particular regulation, the number of types of regulation

used in an area, the fraction of vacant land restricted from development, the number of months

needed to complete the permitting process, or indexes of various regulations. Nevertheless, it is

notable that many estimates seem to be quite large. As noted earlier, Katz and Rosen (1987) find

that in the San Francisco Bay area, house prices are at least 17 percent higher in jurisdictions

with at least one formal growth management program. In Malpezzi’s 1996 study of 56

metropolitan areas, increasing the level of regulation from its average by 1 standard deviation is

associated with 22 percent higher house prices and 11 percent lower construction. Also in a

cross section of metropolitan areas, Mayer and Somerville (2000) find that increasing the time to

31
 Examples include Katz and Rosen (1987), Pollakowski and Wachter (1990), and Quigley and Raphael (2005).
32
 Examples include Malpezzi (1996), Mayer and Somerville (2000), Segal and Srinivasan (1985), and Black and
Hoben (1985).

                                                                                                             42
receive a subdivision approval by only 1 month reduces building permits by 10 percent. In their

survey of the literature, Quigley and Rosenthal (2005) provide a list of 40 articles estimating the

effect of regulation on the price and quantity of housing and their results.

       One important issue when using a cross section of locations to infer the effect of

regulation on housing markets is that regulations are not distributed randomly across locations.

The theories discussed in Section III suggest that higher house prices could induce stricter

regulation by giving homeowners a greater incentive to protect their property values. In this

case, high house prices lead to stricter regulation, rather than vice versa. Also, faster growing

areas could implement growth restrictions to reduce congestion or preserve local amenities,

making the negative effect of regulation on construction more difficult to observe in the data.

Because regulations change infrequently and tend to reflect historical land use patterns, it is not

obvious that simply using lagged values of regulation can alleviate concerns about reverse-

causality. Another difficulty with identifying the effects of regulation is that many unobservable

variables, such as the amenity value of a location, could be correlated with housing supply

regulation as well as having independent effects on house prices and quantities.

       As we mentioned above, a few studies have constructed panel datasets in order to

mitigate these endogeneity problems. Glaeser and Ward (2009) use data on the adoption of

regulations that affect new construction—specifically the institution of wetlands bylaws, septic

rules and rules regarding roads and sidewalks in subdivisions—in Massachusetts townships.

Using data on residential building permits from 1980 to 2002, in specifications without town

fixed effects they find that wetlands bylaws and subdivision rules reduce new construction by

about 6 and 15 percent, respectively. These estimates increase to about 10 and 22 percent when

town fixed effects are included, suggesting that these regulations tended to be implemented in



                                                                                                    43
areas with more-than-average construction activity (as hypothesized above). However, the

standard errors of these estimates are fairly large—not only are they likely to be insignificantly

different from one another, but only the estimated effect of subdivision rules in the fixed effects

specification is significantly different from zero.33

         Glaeser and Ward do not present fixed effects specifications with house prices as the

outcome of interest, perhaps because they only have house price data for years after most

regulations were adopted. Because the regulations in their sample are uncorrelated with most

town characteristics except historical density, they argue that these regulations can be treated as

random conditional on density so they present cross-sectional regressions of house prices on

regulation. Controlling for only a small subset of town characteristics, they find a small positive

correlation between an index of regulation (made up of wetlands bylaws, septic rules and

subdivision rules) and house prices. But this correlation disappears when controlling for

additional town characteristics. These results are consistent with the Helsley and Strange (1995)

model, in that price differences are negligible between towns that are close substitutes of one

another.

         Zabel and Dalton (2011) also use time series data from Massachusetts to examine the

effects of housing supply regulation. In their case, they do not observe changes in regulation

directly. However, they infer changes in minimum lot size restrictions by examining changes in

the 25th percentile of observed lot sizes of new construction. They argue that the median lot size

might not reflect minimum lot size restrictions because these restrictions may only affect the

bottom of the lot-size distribution, but that the 25th percentile likely will reflect these regulations.

After assembling data on the 25th percentile of new construction lot sizes in each town, they use

33
  In a fixed effects specification they also find that cluster zoning appears to increase new construction, which they
interpret as suggesting that these rules can encourage construction by directing it to certain areas, but again this
estimate is not significantly different from zero.

                                                                                                                    44
a structural break framework to identify sharp changes in these series that likely reflect

regulatory changes. In the cross section, they find that minimum lot sizes are uncorrelated with

house prices. In specifications with zoning district fixed effects, they find that an increase in

minimum lot size restrictions of 1 acre (1.5 standard deviations) raises house prices by about 9

percent.34

         A third paper that uses panel data on regulation is Jackson (2014), who constructs a panel

of cities in California from 1970 to 1995 based on a survey carried out by Glickfeld and Levine

(1992), which included information on when regulations were first implemented. He finds that

an additional regulation reduces residential permits by 4 to 8 percent, a smaller effect than others

have estimated in a cross-section with the same data.

         Rather than using panel data, Ihlanfeldt (2007) instruments for land use restrictions with

past community characteristics that he argues are correlated with a homeowner’s ability to

influence the local regulatory process. Specifically, his instruments include educational

attainment, the fraction of residents older than 55, race, homeownership and average income. He

shows that these variables are strong predictors of regulation, as measured by the number of

restrictive land management techniques used in a jurisdiction. Although one might be concerned

that these community characteristics might be correlated with other factors that influence house

prices independently of regulation, he shows that this set of instruments passes the standard

overidentification tests. It is curious that these instruments work well in his sample of housing

units in Florida, since Glaeser and Ward (2009) find that they do not work for townships in



34
   They also provide a nice illustration of the idea that migration across communities can erode away price
differentials. In particular, for towns that are estimated to have little zoning power because they have similar
amenities to others (as calculated from fixed effects regressions of house prices on structural characteristics, year
fixed effects, and town fixed effects), minimum lot sizes only boost house prices by a small amount. But when a
community has greater zoning power, the effect of a 1-acre increase in minimum lot size on house prices is in the
range of 15 to 20 percent.

                                                                                                                        45
Massachusetts. In a sample of sales transactions in Florida, he finds that predicted regulation

raises the price of single-family homes substantially.35 He also finds that this effect is smaller in

counties containing more cities, consistent with the idea that in areas where local residents have

more choices over where to reside, population flows will erode differences in house prices across

locations.36

        So far, our discussion has focused on regulations that are designed to restrict the housing

supply or otherwise shape residential development. Impact fees do not quite fit this description

in that they are fees charged to developers under the justification of being used to finance the

public infrastructure that will be required by the new development. Compared with other ways

of financing infrastructure, such fees will reduce the amount of residential development, but the

predicted effects on land values are ambiguous (Brueckner 1997). McFarlane (1999) points out

that the way the fee is structured, for example whether it is on land, on housing, or on the value

of the developed land, matter for these predicted effects. On the empirical side, Skidmore and

Peddle (1998) find that residential development in DuPage County IL fell substantially after the

imposition of an impact fee. By contrast, Burge and Ihlanfeldt (2006a and 2006b) develop a

model to show that impact fees can boost construction by substituting for exclusionary

regulations and decreasing uncertainty about project approval. In a panel of counties in Florida,

they document a positive relationship between construction of most types of suburban single-

35
   He finds a smaller effect of regulation on house prices when regulation is assumed to be exogenous, which is
somewhat puzzling since most theories would suggest that regulation should be stronger in high-priced areas,
biasing the estimated effect using OLS upwards.
36
   In other work, Chakraborty Knaap, Nguyen and Shin (2010) instrument for the density of zoned housing units—
specifically, the number of units allowed in zones that permit 8 units per acre or more—using the percentage of the
population that is White in 1960 and distance to the central city in a sample of suburban jurisdictions in six
metropolitan areas. Other potential instruments, including lagged values of median household income, educational
attainment, government revenue or expenditure per capita, and government fractionalization, had no relationship
with zoned density. They find a small positive relationship between higher allowed densities and the change in
multifamily construction, suggesting that density restrictions impede the development of multifamily housing.
However, their two instruments have t-statistics between 2 and 5, and there are no test results reported for weak
instruments or for exogeneity.

                                                                                                                  46
family homes and impact fees other than for water and sewer systems improvements. These

same fees expand multifamily construction in inner suburban areas, but not in central cities or in

the outer suburbs.

        Although most empirical work has focused on effects of regulation on the levels of house

prices and quantities, a few papers have examined the effect on the elasticity of housing supply

by looking at housing market responses to shocks to housing demand. Saks (2008) proposes

that shocks to local labor demand should shift the demand for housing as well as the demand for

labor. Following Bartik (1991), she calculates shocks to labor demand in a metropolitan area

using its industrial composition and national changes in employment by industry. She finds that

increases in housing demand result in a larger increase in house prices and less construction in

metropolitan areas with tighter housing supply restrictions, as measured by an index of

regulatory variables created from a number of sources. However, to the extent that these

regulations might be correlated with geographic constraints as in Saiz (2010), her results might

reflect the effects of natural constraints on the elasticity of housing supply as well as regulatory

barriers.

        In a sample covering 353 Local Planning Authorities (LPA) in England, Hilber and

Vermeulen (2013), find that a similar labor demand shock leads to larger increases in house

prices in more regulated areas. Their analysis instruments for regulation with historic population

density, the share of votes for the Labour party in 1983, and a national policy reform that caused

some LPAs to change their permit approval process more than others. It also controls for

geographic constraints, as measured by the difference between the highest and lowest altitude in

the LPA. In that sense, it provides a cleaner measure of the effect of regulation than Saks

(2008). They show that the estimated effect of regulation on the elasticity of housing supply is



                                                                                                   47
smaller when treating regulation as exogenous, suggesting that in their sample regulation tends to

be stricter in areas that have a less elastic housing supply for other reasons.

       Instead of using instruments to estimate the elasticity of housing supply, a few papers

have used time series models. Wheaton, Chervachidze and Nechayev (2014) estimate the

elasticity of housing supply for 68 metropolitan areas using a vector error-correction model of

house prices and the housing stock. They find that the long-run elasticity of housing supply is

negatively correlated with the WRLURI. Also in a vector error-correction framework, Harter-

Dreiman (2004) finds that changes in local income are correlated with larger house price

increases in constrained relative to unconstrained metropolitan areas, where constraints are

measured using the Linneman et. al. (1990) survey from the late 1980’s as published in Malpezzi

(1996). And Green, Malpezzi and Mayo (2005) find that the time-series correlation between

construction and changes in house prices, which they interpret as an elasticity of housing supply,

is lower in metropolitan areas where regulation is high, as measured by the same survey from

Linneman et. al. (1990).

       If regulation reduces the elasticity of housing supply, then one would expect house prices

to be more volatile and construction to be less volatile, all else equal. Indeed, Malpezzi and

Wachter (2005) show that metropolitan areas with more regulation (as measured by seven

variables from the Linneman et. al. (1990) survey of the late 1980s) had a higher standard

deviation of house price changes as measured by repeat-sale house price indexes from 1979 to

1996. Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2008) find that house price increases were larger during the

1980s and smaller during the early 1990s in metropolitan areas with tighter geographic

constraints on the housing supply, suggesting that house price bubbles were more pronounced in




                                                                                                  48
areas with an inelastic housing supply. Although they focus on geographic constraints, those

authors note that these geographic constraints are highly correlated with regulation.

       One concern with these studies is that the greater volatility of house prices in more

regulated areas is the result of a greater volatility of shocks, rather than due to a steeper supply

curve. Malpezzi and Wachter control for the standard deviations of annual changes in

employment and annual changes in real income per capita, but these two variables may not pick

up the volatility of other shocks. Paciorek (2013) addresses this concern by estimating and

simulating a dynamic structural model. In his model, changes in house prices relative to

construction costs are a function of investment (i.e. construction) and density. The interaction of

investment and density with the degree of regulation shows how supply constraints alter the

elasticity of house prices with respect to each of these variables. He estimates the parameters of

the model using two shocks to housing demand to identify the elasticity of housing supply—a

Bartik-style predicted employment shock and a predicted migration shock calculated using

annual outmigration from metropolitan areas and average migration flows across pairs of

metropolitan areas. Based on these estimated elasticities, he then simulates the evolution of

prices and construction in response to 100 randomly-drawn demand shocks. He finds that house

price responses to a demand shock are more volatile in areas with more regulation. Conversely,

construction is less volatile in these areas. These differences are sizeable, as going from the 90th

percentile of regulation to the 10th percentile of regulation reduces volatility of prices by 20

percent and increases the volatility of investment by 30 percent.

       One paper that stands at odds with those cited above is Davidoff (2013), who points out

that in the most recent house price cycle, metropolitan areas with relatively little regulatory and

geographic barriers, such as Las Vegas and Miami, experienced among the most pronounced



                                                                                                       49
booms and busts. Notably, most of the metropolitan areas with large house price bubbles,

defined as the difference between house price growth in 2000-2007 and 2007-2010—

experienced very large amounts of construction and small house price increases in the 1980s.

Since regulation evolves slowly over time, it does not seem plausible that big changes in

regulation can account for the differential behavior over these two cycles. Using state fixed

effects to control for differences in demand shocks across locations, he further shows that

regulation and geographic constraints are unrelated to the magnitude of the recent house price

bubble. These results suggest that it was considerable fluctuations in housing demand across

locations, rather than a lower elasticity of housing supply, that can explain variation in housing

market fluctuations in the most recent cycle. In another chapter in this volume, Glaeser

discusses housing bubbles in much greater detail.

       In summary, most models predict that regulation should reduce the elasticity of housing

supply, resulting in a smaller stock of housing, higher house prices, greater volatility of house

prices, and less volatility of new construction. Although many empirical studies do find

evidence of these relationships, they are mainly cross-sectional studies and consequently are

potentially biased by omitted variables and reverse causality. A few studies have use panel data

or community characteristics in order to mitigate these issues, but much more should be done

along these lines.



IV.2. Effects on urban form and homeownership

       Besides its effects on the quantity of housing, housing supply regulation can influence

other aspects of urban form. Mills (2005) develops a model to show that density controls

contribute to urban sprawl by forcing development to extend farther than it would in a



                                                                                                     50
competitive equilibrium. Bertaud and Brueckner (2005) demonstrate a similar result for building

height restrictions.

        Of course, some types of regulation are meant to prevent sprawl by prohibiting

development outside a particular boundary. Portland is one frequently-used example. Quigley

and Swoboda (2007) describe a model where an urban growth boundary raises the density of

development within the permitted area, while reducing the size of the urban area relative to the

unregulated case. Other types of regulations such as maximum lot sizes or minimum density

restrictions, limits on the number of building permits, or impact fees can also reduce sprawl

(Pasha 1992, Song and Zenou 2006, Geshkov and DeSalvo 2012).

        In a sample of 182 urbanized areas in 2000, Geshkov and DeSalvo (2012) find that urban

areas are larger when county regulations include minimum lot sizes and maximum floor-area

ratios (i.e. height restriction), while urban areas are smaller when regulations include maximum

lot size, a maximum number of building permits, minimum density, or impact fees. They find

little correlation between the presence of an urban growth boundary and the size of the urban

area, which they speculate could be either because these boundaries are not binding or because

they do not completely surround the urban area, allowing development to push out in some

directions. Another issue is that urban growth boundaries are likely to be used in areas with fast

population growth where residents are worried about preserving local amenities, so places that

use urban boundaries may be larger on average than areas that do not.

        Another aspect of urban form than can be influenced by land use policy is the fraction of

single-family versus multifamily units. As above, not all types of regulation will have the same

effect. Minimum lot sizes or height restrictions are likely to reduce the share of multifamily

housing, while urban growth boundaries might increase the share of multifamily housing by



                                                                                                   51
concentrating development in a smaller geographic area (Pendall 2000, Nelson, Dawkins and

Sanchez 2004). Hilber, Rouwendal and Vermeulen (2014) develop a formal model to show how

regulations can affect the supply of different types of housing, even though all households prefer

single-family floor space to multifamily floor space. In their model, as long as the amount of

land available for redevelopment in the central city is large enough, an unexpected increase in

household income will raise the amount of multifamily construction by more than single-family

construction, because it will lead to more construction in areas where land is relatively

expensive. However, in the presence of regulations such as minimum lot sizes or restrictions

against multifamily housing, the construction response to an income shock could be shifted

towards areas where it is more profitable to construct single-family housing.

       Several studies have documented a positive correlation between regulations that restrict

housing-unit density and the share of single-family versus multifamily construction (Pendall

2000, Shlay and Rossi 1981). Quigley and Raphael (2005) find a positive correlation between the

number of land-use regulations in a municipality—including regulations that restrict the density

and height of nonresidential buildings, regulations that require “adequate” preexisting service

levels for residential and commercial development, and regulations that require voter approval or

supermajority city council votes in order to increase density—and new single-family

construction, while they find no correlation between these same regulations and new multifamily

construction. Hilber, Rouwendal and Vermeulen (2014) assess the effect of regulation on the

types of housing demanded using income shocks similar to the Bartik-style employment shares

to proxy for housing demand. They find that income shocks are typically associated with an

increase in the share of newly-constructed multifamily housing, especially in the central city of

the metropolitan area. By contrast, in metropolitan areas where housing supply regulation is



                                                                                                    52
stronger than average, there is no relationship between income shocks and the type of newly-

constructed housing. They conclude that regulation does indeed alter the type of housing unit

constructed.

         Another potential housing-related effect of regulation is on homeownership. There are

several channels through which this might occur. The first is through the relative cost of owning

versus renting. In models where house prices are the discounted sum of expected future rents, as

in Ortalo-Magne and Prat (2014), restrictions on the supply of housing will raise prices in

proportion to the increase in rents, leaving homeownership unchanged. But regulation could

change other components of the user cost of housing. For example, Fischel’s Homevoter

hypothesis suggests regulation could reduce the risk of a drop in home values associated with

undesirable new construction, and a decrease in the risk premium associated with investing in

housing would boost homeownership if homeowners are more risk-averse than landlords.

Moreover, to the extent that managing single-family rental property is more costly than

managing multifamily rental property, one might expect regulations that restrict the supply of

multifamily housing to raise the homeownership rate.37

         Only a few papers have examined the effect of regulation on homeownership empirically.

As we have discussed at length above, one should expect homeownership to lead to tighter

regulation, so any empirical analysis must confront the possibility of reverse-causality. In their

sample of Census tracts in Chicago, Shlay and Rossi (1981) find that tracts with more regulation

experienced larger increases in the number of owner-occupied housing units and larger decreases

in the number of renter-occupied units between 1960 and 1970, suggesting an increase in

37
  Although Ortalo-Magne and Prat do not examine the effect of regulation on investment in owner-occupied
housing, a decline in the risk of a decrease in house prices could be modeled as a decline in the variance of shocks to
rent, while an increase in the cost of managing rental housing could be modeled as an increase in the
homeownership premium.


                                                                                                                    53
homeownership. Their use of changes in the housing stock ameliorates concerns about reverse

causality, but one still could worry that regulation reflects past construction patterns, which

could in turn reflect demand for owner-occupied housing. In a cross section of metropolitan

areas, Malpezzi (1996) finds little correlation of regulation with the homeownership rate.

However, he also finds that regulation raises house prices by more than it raises rents. Based on

the correlations of prices and rents with the homeownership rate, he concludes that regulation

reduces homeownership.

   In summary, the predicted effects of regulation on urban form depend somewhat on the type

of regulation being considered. It seems that minimum lot sizes and height restrictions

contribute to sprawl, while maximum lot sizes, limits on construction, minimum density

requirements and impact fees reduce sprawl (Geshkov and DeSalvo 2012). Meanwhile, density

restrictions also increase the share of single-family housing (Pendall 2000, Shlay and Rossi

1981). But as we have now said repeatedly, this research is based on cross-sectional evidence

and we could learn more from panel data and other ways to control for omitted variables that

might be correlated with both regulation and urban form. Turning to homeownership, we are

aware of little research on the effect of regulation on homeownership—either theoretical or

empirical—and this topic also would be useful to explore in future work.



IV. 3. Effects beyond housing markets

       By altering the distribution of house prices across locations, housing supply regulation

can influence the location choices of different types of households, and hence affect the typical

characteristics of households residing in any given community. Perhaps the most obvious

household characteristic to consider is income, because richer households will be more able to



                                                                                                    54
bear the higher housing costs caused by regulation (Downs 1973, Ellickson 1977, Neiman 1980,

Gyourko and Voith 2002, Gyourko, Mayer and Sinai 2013). Of course, empirically it is difficult

to identify the effect of regulation on household income separately from the increased likelihood

that higher-income households vote to enact stricter regulation.

        One way to get at the effect of regulation on income sorting is to look at changes in

neighborhood income after a regulation is enacted. For example, Kahn, Vaughn and Zasloff

(2010) show that after the creation of a coastal boundary zone to regulate construction near the

California coastline, household income rose faster in Census tracts inside the zone than outside

the zone, even after controlling for distance to the coastline and a number of other tract

characteristics. Levine (1999) finds that, controlling for 1980 income, cities that enacted more

growth control measures between 1979 and 1988 had higher incomes in 1990.38

        Gyourko, Mayer and Sinai (2013) identify income sorting across metropolitan areas using

a national demand shock that is calculated from changes in the aggregate number of high-income

households. They show that a positive national demand shock results in a larger share of high-

income residents in “superstar” metropolitan areas, which they define as areas where the sum of

house price and housing unit growth over the previous twenty-years is above the median across

metropolitan areas. Because highly-regulated metropolitan areas tend to have above average

price growth, many of the “superstar” areas in their sample tend to be highly-regulated. Thus, the

aggregate shock results in more high-income households in highly regulated areas.

        Because income is correlated with many other household characteristics, one might

imagine that housing supply regulation affects the geographic distribution of other household

characteristics. One such characteristic that has received much attention is race. As mentioned

38
  Shlay and Rossi (1981) find that conditional on 1960 income, suburban tracts in Chicago with a lower fraction of
residential area zoned for high-density development had higher incomes in 1970. The correlation between
regulation and income is much smaller for tracts in the central city.

                                                                                                                55
above, some have argued that racial segregation may be a factor motivating the adoption of

zoning regulations (Rolleston 1987, Nelson Dawkins and Sanchez 2004). Indeed, a number of

studies have found that more regulated communities experience slower growth in minority

populations (Levine 1999 and Quigley, Raphael and Rosenthal 2004, Pendall 2000) or a drop in

the share of minority populations (Donovan and Neiman 1995). These results have been used to

argue for the presence of the exclusionary motive for zoning, but caution is in order regarding

this interpretation. The fact that zoning results in sorting does not necessarily mean that sorting

was the intended consequence of the regulation. On the other hand, cases where patterns of

regulation are consistent with an exclusionary motive certainly should be examined in further

detail. Whether or not the effect is intended, the correlation of regulation with subsequent

increases in racial segregation is an outcome of interest to policy makers. Nelson, Dawkins and

Sanchez (2004) find that metropolitan areas with urban containment boundaries experienced

smaller increases in racial segregation over the 1990s. They take this result as evidence that

these types of regulation are less exclusionary than other types of land use policy because they

frequently require the adoption of policies that promote affordable housing within the urban

zone.

        Ganong and Shoag (2013) develop a model to show that housing supply regulation will

lead to sorting by skills as long as low-skilled workers spend a disproportionate share of income

on land. Moreover, the model predicts that housing supply constraints will cause income

differentials across locations to persist by limiting migration from low-wage to high-wage areas.

Based on this model, they posit that an increase in regulation in some states has led to more skill

sorting across states, while reducing income convergence across states. To measure changes

over time in regulation at the state level, they count the number of state appellate court cases that



                                                                                                   56
mention “land use” in each state and year, and then create an index based on the cumulative

number of land use-related court cases since 1940. Consistent with their theory, they find that

20-year population growth rates are only negatively associated with initial income levels in states

with low levels of regulation. In addition, high initial income levels only lead to migration-

related declines in human capital in states with low levels of regulation.

         The effects of housing supply regulation can extend beyond the sorting of households

across locations. Because most people work in the same metropolitan area where they live,

housing supply regulation can affect the supply of labor, and hence the functioning of local labor

markets. In particular, a less elastic supply of housing may imply a less elastic supply of labor.

In support of this conjecture, Saks (2008) shows that a Bartik-style labor demand shock results in

lower employment growth and higher wages in metropolitan areas with tighter housing supply

regulation. Similarly, Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) find that regulation reduced the

response of the local population to a local productivity shock. One would expect that this result

would show up as a diminished response of migration to labor demand shocks. However, Zabel

(2012) finds that migration flows into and out of metropolitan areas in response to a demand

shock are larger in areas with a lower elasticity of housing supply or a higher average initial

price level. These results are not directly comparable to Saks’s because Zabel measures the

elasticity of housing supply with Saiz (2010)’s estimates, which are based on geographic

constraints, rather than an observed measure of housing supply regulation. Nevertheless,

because regulation is correlated with geographic constraints and with the level of house prices, it

is puzzling that migration flows do not seem to respond more to demand shocks in more elastic

areas.




                                                                                                  57
       In summary, regulation can lead to household sorting by income, race, and other

characteristics. Whether intended or not, it is important for policymakers to consider these

effects because the makeup of the community can affect many other outcomes including the

demand for local public services and the size of the local tax base. Regulation can also affect

local labor markets by constraining the response of the labor supply to changes in labor demand.

Since the migration of workers is the primary means through which local labor markets respond

to local changes in demand (Blanchard and Katz 1992), the constraints imposed by regulation

could have a meaningful influence on the economic health of local communities.



V. Welfare Implications of Regulation

       Thus far, we have said nothing about the welfare implications of regulation. This topic is

not straightforward because any model-based assessment of welfare relies on assumptions about

what aspects of regulation and the local environment enter agents’ utility functions and how they

are valued. In Ortalo-Magne and Prat (2014), regulation reduces welfare because its only

function is to reduce the number of housing units; it does not create any local amenities that

would compensate for its negative effects. City residents do benefit from higher house prices

when they sell their house and move away, but at the expense of higher rents until then.

       In Helsley and Strange (1995), population density enters with a negative sign in

residents’ utility functions, so regulations do convey some benefit. Even so, they find that

regulation reduces welfare on net because the negative effect on house prices outweighs the

positive effect of lower density. The reason is that migration from the regulated to the

unregulated community raises house prices and population density in the unregulated




                                                                                                  58
community, reducing utility. Since free migration flows imply equality of utility across

locations, it must be the case that residents in the regulated community are worse off as well.39

        But this result would not hold if the unregulated community was large enough to absorb

the extra population without an increase in density or house prices. In models where the

regulated community is small, the amenity created by population controls is fully capitalized in

land rents, raising the utility of homeowners and landlords and reducing the utility of owners of

undeveloped land, with the net effect on aggregate welfare being ambiguous (Brueckner 1990,

Engle, Navarro and Carson 1992).

        Empirical efforts to gauge the efficiency of land use controls include Glaeser, Gyourko

and Saks (2005), who ask whether there are sufficient counterbalancing spillovers to justify the

very high ‘regulatory tax’ that they estimate in their study of the Manhattan condominium

market. In the context of Manhattan, it cannot credibly be argued that adding another person

would spoil the bucolic nature of the area. However, there are clear external costs associated

with building up. For example, views of existing residents are blocked, there is more congestion

of the city infrastructure, and new residents could create a fiscal burden on current citizens. The

authors estimate the value of a view from the price differential of apartments on different floors

of the same building, and congestion externalities from regressing rents on average income and

population size in a sample of 193 cities. Both yield relatively small cost estimates compared to

the magnitude of the regulatory tax. Furthermore, they argue that incoming Manhattan residents

would likely represent a positive fiscal transfer to the city because high house prices imply that

new residents would likely be richer than the average existing residents, and at the same time

these migrants are likely to have fewer children than the average current resident. Thus, Glaeser,


39
  In particular, house prices in the regulated community are even higher than in the unregulated community, more-
than offsetting the benefit of the smaller population.

                                                                                                               59
Gyourko and Saks (2005) conclude that land use controls make the housing supply inefficiently

tight in Manhattan.

       A more recent and ambitious estimate of the welfare consequences of supply constraints

is provided by Turner, Haughwout and van der Klaauw (2014). They bring much more data to

bear on the question by combining property-level data on land sales from a major industry data

provider (CoStar) with the WRLURI regulatory constraint measure and the 2006 National Land

Use and Land Cover database. Ultimately, they are able to create a national data set, yet see fine

geographic detail.

       Conceptually, the authors show that the causal impact of regulation on land value is

comprised of three effects: (a) an “own-lot effect” which reflects the cost of regulatory

constraints on how land is used; (b) an “external effect” which reflects the value of regulation for

owners of nearby land; and (c) a “supply effect” which reflects the effect of regulation on the

supply of developable land. Their empirical strategy to identify each impact relies on

discontinuities at the border between municipalities. Essentially, they compare sales prices of

vacant land across municipal borders where the restrictiveness of regulation changes. The key

identifying assumption is that mean differences in unobserved traits of land on each side of the

relevant border are not correlated with differences in regulation across the same border. Turner,

Haughwout and van der Klaauw (2014) argue that the exogenous nature of many borders and

their ability to control for a wide variety of covariates helps ensure that assumption is not

violated.

       The authors report a statistically and economically large and negative “own-lot’ effect.

Land values are about one-third lower if local regulation as reflected in the WRLURI measure is




                                                                                                   60
one standard deviation higher.40 The authors cannot reject that the ‘external’ component is zero,

and the standard errors are small enough that they can conclude with high confidence that it

could not be positive enough to counterbalance the ‘own-lot’ impact. They aslo find a modest

reduction in the supply of developable land if the local regulatory environment is one standard

deviation higher. In total, a one standard deviation increase in the index of regulation reduces

land prices by 36 percent, so Turner, Haughout and van der Klaauw (2014) also conclude that

welfare would be improved by relaxing land use regulation.

         The study by Turner, Haughwout and van der Klaauw (2014) represents a major advance

in our knowledge of and insight into the welfare consequences of local land use controls.

However, their analysis is not the final word on the subject, as the authors clearly recognize.

Their reliance on discontinuities at borders is a great strength in terms of econometric execution,

but the estimated effects need not generalize to farther away land parcels, and much development

occurs away from borders of already built up suburbs. Moreover, their analysis could

underestimate the “external” benefit of regulation because it is based on comparing land prices

within a few hundred meters, and the benefits of, say, reduced traffic and more open space might

accrue to a much larger area.

         With respect to this latter point, Cheshire and Sheppard (2002) analyze the welfare

effects of regulation in a manner that allows them to include the more geographically-dispersed

benefits. In a sample of homes for sale in Reading, England, they estimate a hedonic regression

and expenditure share equation to determine the value that households place on limitations on



40
   The finding of a negative “own-lot” effect suggests that regulation prevents landowners from putting their land to
its optimal use. However, not all constraints on the form of land development need make landowners worse off.
Libecap and Lueck (2011) conclude that the Rectangular System of land demarcation raises land values substantially
relative to the Metes and Bounds system, even though it constrains the shape of parcels. They argue that even
though the Rectangular System is more constraining, it creates more secure and exchangeable property rights by
reducing enforcement costs, trading costs, and coordination costs of infrastructure investment.

                                                                                                                  61
industrial land use and the provision of open space, two key amenities generated by the local

planning system in the area that they study. Although they estimate fairly substantial gross

benefits from these amenities, in a calibration exercise they find that net welfare would be

improved by relaxing land use regulation because the resulting reduction in house prices would

outweigh the loss of amenities.41 In particular, a modest relaxation would lead to an average

increase in utility of 2 percent of household income, while a significant relaxation would result in

an average increase of roughly 4 percent of income.

         In summary, most models and empirical estimates suggest that regulation reduces

aggregate welfare, on net. And the estimated effects are often economically large. Yet more

remains to be done, particularly on measuring the benefits that regulation may impart to local

residents. In addition, further research into precisely who benefits and who loses from

regulation, as well as the welfare consequences of different types of regulation, would be

incredibly useful.


VI. Conclusion

         Despite the rapidly growing body of research on the regulation of the housing supply,

much is still unknown about its causes and effects. One reason for our imperfect understanding

is that most empirical work is based on cross-sectional data. Since regulation is likely correlated

with many unobserved characteristics of the local geography, population, and economic

environment, it is difficult to estimate causal effects from a cross-section alone. Throughout this

chapter, we have pointed out examples where panel data would allow for much cleaner analysis

of both the causes and effects of regulation. However, panel data would be extremely costly to


41
  In a sample of homes in Florida, Ihlanfeldt (2009) also finds that land use planning increases the desirability of a
community, in that a balanced-budget expansion in expenditures on comprehensive land use planning raises house
prices.

                                                                                                                     62
collect because surveys must be very detailed in order to capture the wide variety of regulations

that exist in different locations. In addition to more surveys, researchers should explore other

readily-available data that might shed light on the degree of regulation. It would also be fruitful

to think of creative instruments for regulation and the potential determinants of regulation, which

would allow for better causal estimation without the use of panel data.

        Another unsatisfying aspect of current data on housing supply regulation is that the vast

majority of data are from the United States. One notable exception is Hilber and Vermeulen

(2013), who use data for Local Planning Areas in England on the refusal rate of major residential

projects and the fraction of major residential projects that are delayed over 13 weeks. Another is

Sole-Olle and Viladecans-Marsal (2012) who use data on the amount of new land zoned for

development by local municipal governments in Spain.42 Also, Fu and Somerville (2001)

analyze height restrictions in Shanghai. The chapter in this volume by Brueckner and Lall

discusses the role of regulation in restricting the supply of affordable housing in developing

countries. The lack of international evidence on regulation is particularly unfortunate because

the US appears to be on one end of the spectrum in regards to the elasticity of housing supply.

Caldera and Johansson (2013) estimate this elasticity for each of 21 OECD countries using a

two-equation error correction model, and find that the U.S. has the most elastic supply. It also

has the lowest average time required to obtain a building permit among these 21 countries. In

general, they find that more elastic countries tend to have shorter periods of time required to

obtain a permit.43

42
   Cheshire and Hilber (2008) use the indirect method proposed by Glaeser and Gyourko (2003) to examine supply
restrictions for office space in 14 British and 8 continental European locations.
43
   A number of other studies have estimated the elasticity of housing supply for a smaller set of countries and
compared them to qualitative assessments of the regulatory environment for residential construction. These studies
include Vermeulen and Rouwendal (2007) for the Netherlands, Malzezzi and Maclennan (2001)for the UK and US,
Mapezzi and Sa-aadu (1996) for Africa, Bertaud and Malpezzi (2001) for Malaysia, Green Malpezzi and Vandell
(1994) for Korea, and Whitehead, Chiu, Tsenkova and Turner (2009) for the UK, Bulgaria, and China.

                                                                                                                63
       Due to the difficulty of measuring regulation, theory on this topic tends to be much more

advanced than empirical work. Yet there are still some gaps on the theoretical side as well. One

such area is on the effects of developers and other pro-development participants in the local

political process. Whereas a number of researchers have proposed models to explain the role of

homeowners in the formation of regulation, much less attention has been devoted to the opposing

forces. Another area that seems worthy of further theoretical work is the effect of regulation on

homeownership. Many policymakers denounce housing supply regulation as an impediment to

homeownership because it raises house prices. Yet simple theories of regulation would predict

proportional increases in house prices and rents, leaving the incentives for homeownership

unchanged. In fact, regulation might promote homeownership if it reduces the likelihood of

nearby development that would negatively affect local house prices. We are not aware of any

formal models on this topic, and such theory would be helpful in informing policy discussions.

       In this article we have also highlighted a number of empirical puzzles that warrant further

exploration. One is the lack of correlation between regulation and homeownership given the

many models that predict homeowners to be strong supporters of regulation. Another dissonance

in the literature is the correlation of regulation with past land use. When comparing locations

within a single metropolitan area it seems that municipalities that were historically more densely

built are less regulated today, at least in regards to allowed future density. But in a cross section

of metropolitan areas locations with greater historical density are more regulated. A third is the

fact that the most recent house price cycle was not larger in amplitude in markets with more

regulation.

       The vast majority of papers on the effects of regulation have focused on implications for

the housing market, and in this chapter we have discussed effects on house prices, construction,



                                                                                                   64
the elasticity of housing supply, the volatility of house prices and construction, and urban form.

We have also discussed effects beyond the housing market that include sorting of households by

income and demographic characteristics, and effects on local labor markets. Yet regulation

could potentially affect many other aspects of the economy as well. A few ideas that seem worth

exploring include the effect of regulation on labor productivity and output given that restrictions

on the housing supply affect the number and skill distribution of available workers, the effect of

regulation on renovation expenditures as it might encourage households to remain in their

current home rather than trading up to a newly-built home, and effects of regulation on access to

credit by raising house prices and thereby boosting the wealth of homeowners.

         We close with a few words about the welfare consequences of regulation. It is not

obvious that regulation should reduce welfare, even if it raises housing costs, because many

forms of regulation are designed to generate local amenities or mitigate negative externalities.

However, most theoretical and empirical research has found that the costs of regulation outweigh

the benefits by a substantial margin. Given this result, it might be somewhat puzzling that land

use regulations are so ubiquitous. One possibility is that agents who do benefit from regulation

have more influence in the local political process, leading to a result that benefits a few at the

expense of the majority. Another possibility is that local policy makers and their constituents

have an inflated view of the benefits or underestimate the costs. A third possibility is that

researchers have been unable to measure the benefits of regulation adequately. Clearly, more

research would be helpful to investigate the welfare effects of regulation, especially the

distributional consequences and the interaction of these effects with the local political process.44

With regulatory constraints on the housing supply continuing to proliferate and become stricter


44
 Cheshire and Sheppard (2002) examine distributional effects, and find that regulation has a positive net cost for
most of the households in their sample. But their sample is small and consists only of homeowners.

                                                                                                                     65
over time, further research on all of the causes and consequences of these regulations is only

becoming more important for improving our understanding of housing markets, local public

finance, and the distribution of households and economic activity across space.




                                                                                                 66
References

Baldassare, Mark and William Protash (1982). “Growth Controls, Population Growth, and
       Community Satisfaction”, American Sociological Review, Vol. 47, no. 3: 339-346.

Barseghyan, Levon and Stephen Coate (2013). “Property Taxation, Zoning, and Efficiency: A
      Dynamic Analysis”, Cornell University, Revised September 2013.

Bartik, Timothy (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
        W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI.

Bates, Laurie J. and Rexford E. Santerre (1994). “The Determinants of Restrictive Residential
       Zoning: Some Empirical Findings”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 34, no. 2: 253-263.

Bertaud, Alain and Stephen Malpezzi (2001). “Measuring the Costs and Benefits of Urban Land
       Use Regulation: A Simple Model with an Application to Malaysia”, Journal of Housing
       Economics, Vol. 10: 393-418.

Bertaud, Alain and Jan K. Brueckner (2005) “Analyzing Building-Height Restrictions: Predicted
       Impacts and Welfare Costs,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 25: 109-125.

Black, J. Thomas and James E. Hoben (1985) “Land Price Inflation and Affordable Housing.”
       Urban Geography 6: 27-47.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity 1992: 1-61.

Brooks, Leah and Byron Lutz (2012). “From Today’s City to Tomorrow’s City: An Empirical
      Investigation of Urban Land Assembly”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
      Revised November 2012.

Brueckner, Jan K. (1990). “Growth Controls and Land Values in an Open City”, Land
      Economics, Vol. 66 no. 3: 237-248.

_______________ (1995). “Strategic Control of Growth in a System of Cities”, Journal of
      Public Economics, Vol. 57: 393-416.

_______________ (1997). “Infrastructure Financing and Urban Development: The Economics of
      Impact Fees”, AEA Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 66: 383-407.

_______________ (1998). “Testing for Strategic Interaction Among Local Governments: The
      Case of Growth Controls”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 44: 438-467.



                                                                                            67
_______________ (2009). “Government Land Use Interventions: An Economic Analysis,” in
      Uran Land Markets: Improving Land Management for Successful Urbanization, Somik
      V. Lall, Mila Freire, Belinda Yuen, Robin Rajack and Jean-Jacques Helluin eds. New
      York: Springer.

Burge, Gregory and Keith Ihlanfeldt (2006a). “Impact Fees and Single-Family Home
       Construction”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 60: 284-306.

Burge, Gregory and Keith Ihlanfeldt (2006b). “The Effects of Impact Fees on Multifamily
       Housing Construction”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 46, no. 1: 5-23.

Calabrese, Stephen, Dennis Epple and Richard Romano (2007). “On the Political Economy of
       Zoning”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 91: 25-49.

Caldera, Aida and Asa Johansson (2013). “The Price Responsiveness of Housing Supply in
       OECD Countries”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 22: 231-249.

Cervero, Robert and Michael Duncan (2004). “Neighbourhood Composition and Residential
       Land Prices: Does Exclusion Raise or Lower Value?”, Urban Studies, Vol. 41 no. 2
       (February): 299-315.

Chakraborty, Arnab, Gerrit-Jan Knapp, Doan Nguyen and Jung Ho Shin (2010). “The Effects of
      High-density Zoning on Multifamily Housing Construction in the Suburbs of Six U.S.
      Metropolitan Areas”, Urban Studies, Vol. 47, no. 2: 437-451.

Cheshire, Paul and Stephen Sheppard (2002). “The Welfare Economics of Land Use Planning”,
       Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 52: 242-269.

Clark, Terry Nichols and Edward G. Goetz (1994). “The Antigrowth Machine” in Urban
        Innovation: Creative Strategies for Turbulent Times, Terry Nichols Clark, Ed. Thousand
        Oaks: SAGE Publications.

Colwell, Peter and James Kau. (1982). “The Economics of Building Codes and Standards” in
      Resolving the Housing Crisis, M. Bruce Johnson (ed.). San Francisco: Pacific Institute
      for Public Policy Research.

Courant, Paul. (1976). “On the Effects of Fiscal Zoning on Land and Housing Values”, Journal
      of Urban Economics, no. 3: 88-94.

Cunningham, Christopher. (2007). “Growth Controls, Real Options and Land Development”,
      Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 89, no. 2: 343-58.




                                                                                            68
Davidoff, Thomas (2013). “Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s”, Real Estate
      Economics, Vol. 41, no. 4: 793-813.

Davis, Morris and Jonathon Heathcote. (2004). “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land in
       the United States”, Discussion Paper No. 2004-37, Board of Governors of the Federal
       Reserve System, Finance and Economics.

Davis, Morris A. and Michael G. Palumbo (2008). “The Price of Residential Land in Large US
       Cities”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 63: 352-384.

Donovan, Todd and Max Neiman (1995). “Local Growth Control Policy and Changes in
      Community Characteristics”, Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 76, no. 4: 780-793.

Downs, Anthony (1973) Opening Up the Suburbs: An Urban Strategy for America new Haven:
      Yale University Press.

Dubin, Jeffrey A., D. Roderick Kiewiet and Charles Noussair (1992) “Voting on Growth Control
       Measures: Preferences and Strategies” Economics and Politics 4: 191-213.

Ellickson, Robert (1977). “Suburban Growth Controls: An Economic and Legal Analysis”, Yale
       Law Journal, Vol. 86 (January): 385-511.

Engle, Robert, Peter Navarro and Richard Carson (1992). “On the Theory of Growth Controls,”
       Journal of Urban Economics 32: 269-283.

Epple, Dennis, Thomas Romer and Radu Filimon (1988). “Community Development with
       Endogenous Land Use Controls”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 35: 133-162.

Evenson, Bengte and William C. Wheaton (2002). “Why Local Governments Impose Land-Use
      Regulations.” Mimeo.

Evenson, Bengte, William C. Wheaton (2003). “Local Variation in Land Use Regulations [with
      Comments]”, Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs: 2013, pp. 221-260.

Fischel, William A. (1985). The Economics of Zoning Laws: A Property Rights Approach to
       American Land Use Controls. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

_______________ (1992). “Property Taxation and the Tiebout Model: Evidence from the
      Benefit View of Zoning and Voting”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 30, no. 1:
      171-177.

_______________ (2001). The Homevoter Hypothesis, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
      Press.



                                                                                             69
_______________ (2004). “An Economic History of Zoning and a Cure for its Exclusionary
      Effects”, Urban Studies, Vol. 41, no. 2 (February): 317-340.

________________ (2008). “Political Structure and Exclusionary Zoning: Are Small Suburbs
      the Big Problem?” Fiscal Decentralization and Land Policies, Gregory K. Ingram and
      Yu-Hung Hong, eds. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

Foster, David and Anita A. Summers (2005). “Current State Legislative and Judicial Profiles on
        Land-Use Regulations in the U.S.” Wharton Real Estate Center Working Paper No. 512.
        Philadelphia: The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Frieden, Bernard. (1979). “A New Regulation Comes to Suburbia”, Public Interest, No. 55
       (Spring): 15-27.

Fu, Yuming and C. Tsuriel Somerville (2001). “Site Density Restrictions: Measurement and
      Empirical Analysis”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 49: 404-423.

Ganong, Peter and Daniel Shoag (2013). “Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
      Declined?”, HKS Working Paper No. RWP12-028. Available at SSRN:
      http://ssrn.com/abstract=2081216.

Geshkov, Marin V. and Joseph S. DeSalvo (2012). “The Effect of Land-use Controls on the
      Spatial Size of U.S. Urbanized Areas”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 52, no. 4: 648-
      675.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko (2003). “The Impact of Building Restrictions on
       Housing Affordability”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, June 2013: 21-39.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Albert Saiz (2008). “Housing Supply and Housing
       Bubbles”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 64: 198-217.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks. (2005). “Why is Manhattan So
       Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in Housing Prices”, Journal of Law and Economics,
       Vol. 48 no. 2 (October): 331-369.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks (2006). “Urban Growth and Housing
       Supply”, Journal of Economic Geography, Vol. 6: 71-89.

Glaeser, Edward, Jenny Schuetz and Bryce Ward. (2006). “Regulation the Rise of Housing
       Prices in Greater Boston”, Pioneer Institute for Public Policy Research Policy Brief PB-
       2006-1.




                                                                                              70
Glaeser, Edward and Bryce Ward. (2009). “The Causes and Consequences of Land Use
       Regulation: Evidence from Greater Boston”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 65, no.
       3: 265-278.

Glickfeld, Madelyn and Ned Levine (1992) Regional Growth—Local Reaction: the Enactment
       and Effects of Local Growth Controla dn Management Measures in California.
       Cambridge MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

Green, Richard K., Stephen Malpezzi and Stephen K. Mayo (2005). “Metropolitan-Specific
       Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Supply of Housing, and Their Sources”, AEA Papers
       and Proceedings, Vol. 95 no. 2 (May): 334-339.

Green, Richard K., Steven Malpezzi and Kerry Vandell (1994). “Urban Regulations and the
       Price of Land and Housing in Korea”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 3: 330-356.

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai (2013). “Superstar Cities”. American
      Economic Journal-Economic Policy, Vol. 5, no. 4: 167-199

Gyourko, Joseph and Albert Saiz (2006). “Construction Costs and the Supply of Housing
      Structure”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 46, no. 6 (October): 627-660.

Gyourko, Joseph, Albert Saiz and Anita A. Summers (2008). “A New Measure of the Local
      Regulatory Environment for Housing Markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use
      Regulatory Index”, Urban Studies, Vol. 45, no. 3: 693-721.

Gyourko, Joseph and Richard Voith (2002). “Capitalization of Federal Taxes, the Relative Price
      of Housing, and Urban Form: Density and Sorting Effects” Regional Science and Urban
      Economics 32: 673-690.

Hamilton, Bruce (1978). “Zoning and the Exercise of Monopoly Power”, Journal of Urban
      Economics, no. 5: 116-30.

Harter-Dreiman, Michelle (2004). “Drawing Inferences About Housing Supply Elasticity from
       House Price Responses to Income Shocks”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 55: 316-
       337.

Helsley, Robert W. and William C. Strange (1995). “Strategic Growth Controls”, Regional
       Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 25: 435-460.

Hilber, Christian A.L. and Frederic Robert-Nicoud (2013). “On the Origins of Land Use
        Regulations: Theory and Evidence from US Metro Areas”, Journal of Urban Economics,
        Vol. 75: 29-43.


                                                                                             71
Hilber, Christian A.L., Rouwendal, Jan and Vermeulen, Wouter (2008). “Local Economic
        Conditions and the Nature of New Housing Supply”, Paper presented to the European
        Real Estate Society Conference, Krakow. Preliminary draft of second version, November
        14th, 2008.

Hilber, Christian A.L. and Wouter Vermeulen (2013). “The Impact of Supply Constraints on
        House Prices in England”, Version: July 24, 2013.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith R. (2004). “Introduction: Exclusionary Land-use Regulations”, Urban Studies,
        Vol. 41, no. 2: 255-259.

________________ (2007). “The Effect of Land Use Regulation on Housing and Land Prices”,
      Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 61: 420-435.

________________. (2009). “Does Comprehensive Land-Use Planning Improve Cities?”, Land
      Economics, Vol. 85 no. 1: 74-86.

Jackson, Kristoffer (Kip) (2014). “Do Land Use Regulations Stifle Residential Development?
       Evidence from California Cities”, Journal of Urban Economics, Manuscript Number:
       YJUEC-D-14-00018.

Kahn, Matthew E., Ryan Vaughn and Jonathan Zasloff (2010). “The Housing Market Effects of
      Discrete Land Use Regulations: Evidence from the California Coastal Boundary Zone”,
      Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 19: 269-279.

Katz, Lawrence and Kenneth Rosen (1987). “The Interjurisdictional Effects of Growth Controls
       on Housing Prices”, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 30, (April): 149-160.

Lenon, MaryJane, Sajal K. Chattopadhyay and Dennis R. Heffley (1996). “Zoning and Fiscal
       Interdependencies”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 12: 221-234.

Levine, Ned. (1999). “The Effects of Local Growth Controls on Regional Housing Production
       and Population Redistribution in California”, Urban Studies, Vol. 36, no. 12: 2047-2068.

Libecap, Gay D. and Dean Lueck (2011). “The Demarcation of Land and the Role of
       Coordination Property Insitutions”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119 no. 3: 426-
       467.

Linneman, Peter, Anita A. Summers, Nancy Brooks and Henry Buist. (1990). “The State of
      Local Growth Management”. Wharton Real Estate Center Working Paper No. 81. The
      Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Logan, John R., and Min Zhou (1990) “The Adoption of Growth Controls in Suburban
       Communities,” Social Science Quarterly 71: 118-129.

                                                                                                72
Lutz, Byron (forthcoming). “Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the Connection Between Property
       Taxes and Residential Capital Investment”, American Economic Journal: Economic
       Policy. Revised January 13, 2014.

Lynch, Allen K. and David W. Rasmussen (2004). “Proximity, Neighbourhood and the Efficacy
       of Exclusion”, Urban Studies, Vol. 41 no. 2 (February): 285-298.

Malpezzi, Stephen (1996) “Housing Prices, Externalities, and Regulation in U.S. Metropolitan
      Areas” Journal of Housing Research 7: 209-241.

Malpezzi, Stephen and Duncan Maclennan (2001). “The Long-Run Price Elasticity of Supply of
      New Residential Construction in the United States and the United Kingdom”, Journal of
      Housing Economics, Vol. 10: 278-306.

Malpezzi, Stephen and J. Sa-Aadu (1996). “What Have African Housing Policies Wrought?”,
      Real Estate Economics, Vol. 24 no.2: 133-160.

Malpezzi, Stephen and Susan M. Wachter (2005). “The Role of Speculation in Real Estate
      Cycles”, Journal of Real Estate Literature, Vol. 13, No. 2: 143-164.

Mayer, Christopher J. and C. Tsuriel Somerville (2000). “Land Use Regulation and New
       Construction”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 30: 639-662.

McDonald, John F. (1995). “Houston Remains Unzoned”, Land Economics, Vol. 71, no. 1: 137-
     140.
McDonald , John F. and Daniel P. McMillen (2004). “Determinants of Suburban Development
     Controls: A Fischel Expedition,” Urban Studies 41: 341-361.

McFarlane, Alistair (1999). “Taxes, Fees, and Urban Development”, Journal of Urban
      Economics, Vol. 46: 416-436.

McMillen, Daniel P. and John F. McDonald (1991). “Urban Land Value Function With
      Endogenous Zoning”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 29: 14-27.

Mills, Edwin S. (2005). “Why Do We Have Urban Density Controls?”, Real Estate Economics,
        Vol. 33, no. 3: 571-585.

Molotch, Harvey (1976). “The City as a Growth Machine: Toward a Political Economy of
      Place”, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 82, no. 2: 309-332.



                                                                                               73
Neiman, Max (1980). “Zoning Policy, Income Clustering and Suburban Change”, Social Science
      Quarterly, Vol. 61: 666-675.

Nelson, Arthur C., Casey J. Dawkins and Thomas W. Sanchez (2004). “Urban Containment and
       Residential Segregation: A Preliminary Investigation”, Urban Studies, Vol. 41, no. 2:
       423-439.

Nichols, Joseph B., Stephen D. Oliner and Michael R. Mulhall (2013). “Swings in Commercial
       and Residential Land Prices in the United States”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 72:
       57-76.

Noam, Eli M. (1983). “The Interaction of Building Codes and Housing Prices”, AREUEA
      Journal, Vol. 10: 394-404.

Ortalo-Magne, Francois and Andrea Prat (2014). “On the Political Economy of Urban Growth:
       Homeownership versus Affordability”, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
       Vol. 6, no. 1: 154-181.

Oster, Sharon and John Quigley (1977). “Regulatory Barriers of the Diffusion of Innovation:
        Some Evidence from Building Codes”, Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 8: 361-xxx.

Paciorek, Andrew (2013). “Supply Constraints and Housing Market Dynamics”, Journal of
       Urban Economics, Vol. 77: 11-29.

Pasha, Hafiz A. (1992) “Comparative Statics Analysis of Density Controls” Journal of Urban
       Economics 32: 284-298.

Pendall, Rolf (2000). “Local Land Use Regulation and the Chain of Exclusion”, APA Journal,
       Vol. 66, no.2 (Spring): 125-142.

Pendall, Rolf, Robert Puentes and Jonathan Martin. (2006). “From Traditional to Reformed: A
       Review of Land Use Regulations in the Nation’s 50 Largest Metropolitan Areas”.
       Metropolitan Policy Program, The Brookings Institution.

Pogodzinski, J.M. and Tim R. Sass (1994). “The Theory and Estimation of Endogenous Zoning”,
      Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 24: 601-630.

Pollakowski, Henry O. and Susan M. Wachter (1990). “The Effects of Land-Use Constraints on
       Housing Prices”, Land Economics, Vol. 66 no. 3 (August): 315-324.

Quigley, John M. and Steven Raphael (2005). “Regulation and the High Cost of Housing in
       California”, AEA Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 95, no. 2 (May): 323-328.



                                                                                              74
Quigley, John M., Steven Raphael and Larry A. Rosenthal (2004). “Local Land-use Controls and
       Demographic Outcomes in a Booming Economy”, Urban Studies, Vol. 41, no. 2: 389-
       421.
Quigley, John and Larry Rosenthal. (2005). “The Effects of Land Regulation on the Price of
       Housing: What Do We Know? What Can We Learn?”, Cityscape, Vol. 81, no. 1: 69-
       137.

Quigley, John M. and Aaron M. Swoboda 2007) “The Urban Impacts of the Endangered Species
       Act: A General Equilibrium Approach” Journal of Urban Economics 61: 299-318.

Rolleston, Barbara Sherman (1987). “Determinants of Restrictive Suburban Zoning: An
       Empirical Analysis”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 21: 1-21.

Rubinfeld, Daniel (1978). “Suburban Employment and Zoning: A General Equilibrium
      Analysis”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 18: 33-44.

Saiz, Albert (2010). “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 125, no. 3: 1253-1296.

Saks, Raven E. (2008). “Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on Metropolitan
       Area Employment Growth”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 62: 187-195.

Segal, David and Philip Srinivasan (1985). “The Impact of Suburban Growth Restrictions on
       U.S. Housing Price Inflation, 1975-1978”, Urban Geography, Vol. 6 no. 1: 14-26.

Shertzer, Allison, Tate Twinam and Randall P. Walsh (2014). “Race, Ethnicity, and
       Discriminatory Zoning”, NBER Working Paper Series. Working Paper 20108 (May),
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w20108.

Shlay, Anne B. and Peter H. Rossi (1981) “Keeping Up the Neighborhood: Estimating Net
       Effects of Zoning.” American Sociological Review 46: 703-719.

Skidmore, Mark and Michael Peddle (1998). “Do Development Impact Fees Reduce the Rate of
      Residential Development?”, Growth and Change, Vol. 29 (Fall): 383-400.

Solé-Ollé, Albert and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal (2012). “Lobbying, Political Competition, and
       Local Land Supply: Recent Evidence from Spain”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
       96: 10-19.

Song, Yan and Yves Zenou (2006) “Property Tax and Urban Sprawl: Theory and Implications
       for US Cities” Journal of Urban Economics 60: 519-34.

Sonstelie, Jon C. and Paul R. Portney. 1978. “Profit Maximizing Communities and the Theory of
       Local Public Expenditures.” Journal of Urban Economics 5: 263-277.

                                                                                             75
Turner, Matthew A., Andrew Haughwout, Wilbert van der Klaauw (2013). “Land Use
       Regulation and Welfare”, Econometrica, Revised November 2013.

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010). “Why Has House Price Dispersion
      Gone Up?”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 77: 1567-1606.

Vermeulen, Wouter and Jan Rouwendal (2007). “Housing Supply and Land Use Regulation in
      the Netherlands”, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, Version: July 2007, accessed at:
      http://ssrn.com/abstract=1003955.

Wallace, Nancy E. (1988). “The Market Effects of Zoning Undeveloped Land: Does Zoning
      Follow the Market?”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 23: 307-326.

Wheaton, William C., Serguie Chervachidze and Gleb Nechayev (2014). “Error Correction
      Models of MSA Housing ‘Supply’ Elasticities: Implications for Price Recovery”, 3rd
      Draft: March 9, 2014.

Whitehead, Christine, Rebecca L.H. Chiu, Sasha Tsenkova and Bengt Turner. 2009. “Land Use
      Regulation: Transferring Lessons from Developed Economies.” In Urban Land Markets:
      Improving Land Management for Successful Urbanization, Somik V. Lall, Mila Freire,
      Belinda Yuen, Robin Rajack and Jean-Jacques Helluin, eds. Dordrecht : Springer.

Zabel, Jeffery (2012). “Migration, Housing Market, and Labor Market Responses to
        Employment Shocks”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 72: 267-284.

Zabel, Jeffery and Maurice Dalton (2011). “The Impact of Minimum Lot Size Regulations on
        House Prices in Eastern Massachusetts”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol.
        41: 571-583.




                                                                                             76
