NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STARVING (OR FATTENING) THE GOLDEN GOOSE?:
GENERIC ENTRY AND THE INCENTIVES FOR
EARLY-STAGE PHARMACEUTICAL INNOVATION
Lee Branstetter
Chirantan Chatterjee
Matthew J. Higgins
Working Paper 20532
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20532
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
We thank Tamer Abdelgawad, Iain Cockburn, Darren Filson, Carolin Haeussler, Bart Hamilton, Dietmar
Harhoff, Sherry Knowles, Margaret Kyle, Jeff Macher, Joseph Mahoney, Alex Oettl, Ivan Png, Jerry
Thursby, and Brian Wright as well as seminar participants at the University of Illinois, University of
Passau, University of California Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon University, Ludwig Maxmilians University
Munich, National University of Singapore, India Statistical Institute (Delhi), Georgia Institute of Technology
and conference participants at the USPTO Conference on Patents, Entrepreneurship and Innovation
(Washington, DC) and the Asia Pacific Innovation Conference (APIC), for valuable comments and
discussions. Programming and research assistance by Jeremy Watson, Winston Yang and Suvojyoty
Sahais is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank IMS Health Incorporated for their generous support
and access to their data. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and
expressed herein are not necessarily those of IMS Health Incorporated or any of its affiliated or subsidiary
entities. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed in this
article are based in part on data obtained under license from the following IMS Health Incorporated
or affiliate information service(s): IMS Midas™, IMS Lifecycle™, IMS National Disease and Therapeutic
Index™, IMS National Prescription Audit™, IMS Health Incorporated or its affiliates. Higgins acknowledges
funding from The Imlay Professorship. Chatterjee acknowledges IIM Bangalore for supporting his
extended research visit to Georgia Tech. Higgins and Branstetter acknowledge funding from NSF
SCISIP Grants #1064122 and #1360057. Authors are listed alphabetically and the usual disclaimers
apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lee Branstetter, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Matthew J. Higgins. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Starving (or Fattening) the Golden Goose?: Generic Entry and the Incentives for Early-Stage
Pharmaceutical Innovation
Lee Branstetter, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Matthew J. Higgins
NBER Working Paper No. 20532
September 2014
JEL No. D2,L5,L51,L65,M2
ABSTRACT
Over the last decade, generic penetration in the U.S. pharmaceutical market has increased substantially,
providing significant gains in consumer surplus. What impact has this rise in generic penetration had
on the rate and direction of early stage pharmaceutical innovation? We explore this question using
novel data sources and an empirical framework that models the flow of early-stage pharmaceutical
innovations as a function of generic penetration, scientific opportunity, firm innovative capability,
and additional controls. While the aggregate level of early-stage drug development activity has increased,
our estimates suggest a sizable, robust, negative relationship between generic penetration and earlystage pharmaceutical research activity within therapeutic markets. A 10% increase in generic penetration
is associated with a 7.9% decline in all early-stage innovations in the same therapeutic market. When
we restrict our sample to first-in-class pharmaceutical innovations, we find that a 10% increase in
generic penetration is associated with a 4.6% decline in early-stage innovations in the same market.
Our estimated effects appear to vary across therapeutic classes in sensible ways, reflecting the differing
degrees of substitution between generics and branded drugs in treating different diseases. Finally, we
are able to document that with increasing generic penetration, firms in our sample are shifting their
R&D activity to more biologic-based (large-molecule) products rather than chemical-based (smallmolecule) products. We conclude by discussing the potential implications of our results for long-run
welfare, policy, and innovation.
Lee Branstetter
Heinz College and
Department of Social and Decision Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and the Peterson Institute for
International Economics
and also NBER
branstet@andrew.cmu.edu
Chirantan Chatterjee
Department of Corporate Strategy & Policy
Indian Institute of Management Bangalore
chirantan.chatterjee@IIMB.ERNET.IN

Matthew J. Higgins
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
matt.higgins@scheller.gatech.edu

1

Introduction
In his provocative paper, “The Health of Nations,” Yale University economist William Nordhaus

(1999) argues that the advances in human welfare generated by better medical science over the past half
century have been equal in value to the consumption increases from all other sources put together. Victor
Fuchs (1982) has suggested that most of the real improvement in human health generated over this period
stems from modern medicine’s expanding arsenal of pharmaceutical products. While documenting these
claims in a way that meets modern evidentiary standards is challenging, the work of scholars such as
Frank Lichtenberg (2001, 2004, 2007) has provided evidence suggesting that the gains from
pharmaceutical innovation have been very large. In the long run, global investments in pharmaceutical
research have proven to be very good ones.
These benefits have come with significant costs; pharmaceutical innovation is risky and
expensive. These costs are passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices for branded
pharmaceuticals. In recent years, prescription drug spending in the U.S. has exceeded $300 billion, an
increase of $135 billion since 2001. Consumption of prescription drugs now accounts for approximately
12 percent of total health care spending (GAO, 2012). However, over this time period, generic products
have accounted for an increasing share of prescription drug expenditures, saving consumers an estimated
$1 trillion (GAO, 2012). Current regulation attempts to strike a balance between access to lower cost
generics on the one hand and adequate incentives to promote pharmaceutical innovation on the other.
While the rise in generic penetration has brought substantial benefits to consumers (Branstetter et al.,
2013), some have argued that the regulatory "balance" has shifted so far in the direction of access to
inexpensive drugs that it has undermined the incentives for new drug development (Higgins and Graham,
2009; Knowles, 2010). Such a shift could have strong implications, even for drug companies outside the
United States, because the global industry relies disproportionately on the U.S. market as a source of its
profits. Has the increase in generic entry affected pharmaceutical innovation? Our study attempts to
address this question and quantify, for the first time, the impact of generic entry on early-stage drug
development.
We start by constructing a novel and unique dataset that allows us to analyze this issue at the
level of narrowly defined therapeutic areas. Instead of relying on patents as measures of innovation, we
focus on early-stage drug development. While patenting is certainly important in the pharmaceutical
industry, it can occur anytime throughout the drug development process, and it often occurs long before
the actual therapeutic value of a compound has been demonstrated. Our outcome variable, on the other
hand, allows us to measure what is actually happening in the early stages of the clinical development
3

process. We also utilize comprehensive data on branded and generic drug sales across all therapeutic
categories in the U.S. market1, obtained at the firm-product-year level, such that we can measure the
differential exposure of individual firms to generic competition across these different therapeutic markets.
Finally, we seek to control for changes in scientific opportunity by building a comprehensive database of
citation-weighted scientific journal articles in the medical sciences and mapping them to our
pharmaceutical product market categories.
Using these data, we find that the aggregate level of new drug development has not declined as
generic penetration in the U.S. market has risen; the total number of new compounds (including both
small and large molecules) in early stage development has risen over our sample period (Figure 1).
However, rising generic competition has had a statistically and economically significant impact on how
pharmaceutical product development is undertaken and where those efforts are focused. We show this by
using an empirical framework that models the flow of early-stage pharmaceutical innovations as a
function of generic entry and penetration, as well as scientific opportunity and challenges, firm innovative
capability and a vector of additional controls. Using this framework, we document a negative and
significant relationship between generic entry (penetration) and early-stage innovation at the ATC 2-digit
therapeutic category level. The elasticity from our specification implies that a 10% increase in generic
penetration in a particular market will lower early-stage innovations, in that same market, by 7.9%.
The interpretation that an increase in generic penetration within a market lowers early-stage
innovation is strengthened by a series of alternative specifications and robustness checks. First, we limit
our sample to a set of therapeutic categories where substitution between generics and branded products is
limited for clinical reasons, and we find that our measured effect attenuates to the point of insignificance,
as expected. Second, we show that our estimated effect is strongly negative for early-stage innovation,
where it is possible to redirect R&D in response to market shifts, but much weaker for late-stage
innovation, where firms have stronger incentives to deploy products that have survived the clinical trials
process, even if generic competition is limiting the addressable market. Third, we show that our baseline
effect is robust to inclusion of (therapeutic market * year) interaction terms that effectively remove all the
unobserved market-specific effects that change in a common way across firms.
Finally, we consider the possibility that, within therapeutic markets, a shift is occurring out of
chemical-based (small molecule) products and into biologic-based (large molecule) products. The
regulatory mechanisms that have accelerated generic entry in chemical-based drugs do not extend to
biologics. Additionally, the pathways by which biologic-based generics (known in the industry as
We use the phrases therapeutic area, therapeutic market, therapeutic category and product markets
interchangeably in this paper. In our empirical work, they correspond to 2-digit categories within the World Health
Organization's Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system.

1

4

‘biosimilars’) could enter the U.S. market have yet to be finalized.2 Exploiting this regulatory difference
between chemical-and biologic-based innovations, we find a positive relationship between generic entry
and a shift towards biologic-based products within therapeutic categories. As conjectured by Golec et al.
(2010), this movement suggests that the nature of innovation taking place in the pharmaceutical industry
is changing.
Is this shift in the direction and nature of drug development socially beneficial or socially
harmful? At this stage in the research process, it is not yet possible to produce a definitive answer to this
question. On the one hand, one could argue that current regulation is ‘pushing’ innovation toward
therapeutic markets for which significant numbers of viable generics do not exist. In other words, R&D
efforts and expenditures could be flowing to therapeutic areas that are relatively underserved, thereby
generating welfare gains. On the other hand, our evidence of a significant movement in the data from
development of chemical-based to biologic-based products may have important implications for the
future, especially since biologics tend to be more expensive, on average, than chemical-based products.
Until current regulatory challenges are resolved, these higher prices may persist for long periods of time.
As the regulatory playing field tilts sharply in the direction of biologics, and firms respond rationally to
the incentives they confront, we cannot rule out the possibility that recent efforts to balance access with
incentives for innovation will give us cheaper drugs today, but more expensive drugs tomorrow.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a discussion of the U.S. regulatory
environment in which pharmaceutical firms operate and a brief description of the rise in generic
penetration. Section 3 reviews important features of the drug development process and discusses prior
work on the potential impact of rising generic penetration on pharmaceutical innovation. Our empirical
specification and data are outlined in Section 4. Results are presented in Section 5,and we conclude in
Section 6.
2

The U.S. Regulatory Environment and the Rise of Generic Penetration
The current regulatory environment faced by pharmaceutical companies in the U.S. can be traced

to the passage of the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act in 1984, informally known
as “Hatch-Waxman” Act. One of the hallmarks of this legislation is the balance it tries to strike between
access by consumers to inexpensive generic drugs, on the one hand, and the protection of adequate
incentives for new drug development on the other. Hatch-Waxman allows expedited Food and Drug
2

The FDA released non-binding draft guidance in May 2014 with an open comment period until August 2014.
During our current sample period there was no pathway for biosimilars to enter the market. However, even when
biosimilars are finally able to enter the U.S. market, large-molecule drugs will have a much longer period of
guaranteed monopoly than small-molecule drugs. This difference could affect the economic incentives for
developing these different types of drugs.

5

Administration (FDA) approval for generic entry while extending the life of pharmaceutical patents in
order to compensate innovators who lost time on their “patent clocks” waiting for FDA approval
(Grabowski, 2007).
When a pharmaceutical company submits a New Drug Application (NDA) to the FDA for
approval, the law requires the company to identify all relevant patented technologies necessary to create
the drug; these patents are subsequently listed in the FDA Orange Book.3 Upon approval of a drug, the
FDA will extend the life of the patents protecting the drug, in order to partly compensate the
pharmaceutical firm for time lost on the "patent clock" during the FDA-mandated approval process
(Grabowski, 2007).4 In addition, the FDA will also grant each new approved product regulatory
protection lasting for five years (“data exclusivity”) that runs concurrently with patent protection.5
During this data exclusivity period, regardless of the status of the underlying patent(s), no generic entry
may occur. At the conclusion of data exclusivity branded products are protected only by their patents; this
period running from the cessation of data exclusivity to the expiration of the patent(s) is commonly
referred to as “market exclusivity.” Figure 2 illustrates these overlapping periods of protection for
branded drugs
Prior to the passage of Hatch-Waxman, generic manufacturers seeking to sell their products in the
U.S. market had to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of their products by putting them through clinical
trials. While the outcome of these trials lacked the uncertainty involved in the trials of an innovative new
drug, the time and expense involved were a significant disincentive for generics manufacturers to put
products on the market, since they could not charge a premium price to offset the costs of clinical trials.
Before Hatch-Waxman, it is estimated that more than 150 products existed without any patent protection
and without any generic entry (Mossinghoff, 1999). While Hatch-Waxman did not lessen the burden of
the clinical trials process for branded pharmaceutical companies seeking approval for new drugs, it
essentially eliminated the requirement for separate clinical trials for generic manufacturers. All generic
manufacturers had to do was demonstrate “bioequivalence” with branded products by showing that the
active ingredient in their product diffused into the human bloodstream in a manner similar to the original
product.

3

For biologic-based or "large molecule drugs" the initial application is a Biologics License Application. However, a
similar requirement to disclose patents exists, and this disclosure also becomes a matter of public record.
4
There are limits to this. Pharmaceutical firms cannot receive a patent extension of more than five years, nor are
they entitled to patent extensions that give them effective patent life (post approval) of greater than 14 years.
5
There are exceptions to the general rule of 5 years of data exclusivity. Drugs targeting small patient populations
(known in the industry as "orphan drugs") receive 7 years of data exclusivity. Reformulations of existing drugs
receive only 3 years of data exclusivity. New drugs that treat pediatric illnesses receive an additional 6 months of
data exclusivity.

6

Hatch-Waxman provides four pathways (or “Paragraphs”) a generic firm may follow in order to
gain entry into a market (Figure 3). The process starts with the filing of an Abbreviated New Drug
Application (ANDA) by a generic manufacturer with one of the four Paragraph certifications. A
Paragraph I certification is one for which the originator firm has not filed patent information for its
branded product. Paragraph II certification is used when the branded product’s patent has already expired
(i.e., market exclusivity has already ended), and Paragraph III certification is invoked when the generic
manufacturer notes that the patent on the branded product will expire on a certain date and that it seeks to
enter only after patent expiry. The fourth certification, Paragraph IV, is used when the generic
manufacturer claims that it does not infringe on a branded product’s patents or the generic firm argues
that the patents protecting the branded product are invalid.
A Paragraph IV certification can be filed with the FDA after the conclusion of data exclusivity
anytime during the market exclusivity window.6 If it is successful, a Paragraph IV challenge can
significantly decrease the effective patent life of branded products, bringing generics to the market earlier
than otherwise would be the case (Higgins and Graham, 2009; Grabowski and Kyle, 2007). It is important
to emphasize, however, that the multiple avenues provided by Hatch-Waxman for generic entry
(currently) apply only to chemical-based or small molecule drugs. Throughout our sample period, there
was no legal mechanism (in the U.S. market) through which the manufacturer of a "biosimilar" (the
industry term for the generic version of a branded biologic-based drug) could demonstrate that its
substance was equivalent to the original drug.
With no way to establish bioequivalence, any generic version of a biologic-based drug would
have to undergo separate clinical trials to receive FDA approval -- a barrier to entry so daunting that no
biosimilar has yet been introduced in the U.S. market. This historical absence of an entry pathway for
biosimilars reflects, in part, the nascent state of the biotech industry when Hatch-Waxman was passed, as
well as the real scientific challenges of determining bioequivalence for biologic-based drugs, which are
far more complicated than chemistry-based drugs and interact with human biophysical systems in ways
that are not always perfectly understood. Under the Obama Administration, new legislation provided the
legal basis for biosimilar entry, but that legislation guarantees biologic-based drugs 12 years of data
exclusivity - a period of legal monopoly 2.4 times longer than that afforded to chemistry-based drugs.
Furthermore, the enabling regulations that would permit biosimilar entry have yet to be finalized by the
FDA. Europe already permits biosimilars, but generally requires limited clinical trials to confirm
bioequivalence prior to approval. The high cost of these trials - even when they are limited in time and

6

Generic manufacturers may file a Paragraph IV certification up to one year prior to the end of data exclusivity but
the FDA may not act on it until the conclusion of data exclusivity.

7

scope relative to those required of innovator dugs -- will likely constrain generic entry in the biotech side
of the pharmaceutical market for the foreseeable future.
While a starkly different statutory treatment of chemical-based and biologic-based drugs has been
established in U.S. law since the passage of Hatch-Waxman, the practical impact of these very different
regulatory regimes has significantly strengthened in recent years. Generic penetration at the end of the
1980s and in the early 1990s was constrained by a FDA scandal that temporarily slowed down the
processing of new generic drug applications, and by an unusually productive era of new drug
introductions by the branded drug companies that extended into the mid-1990s.7 Since then, however,
generic penetration has intensified sharply. This has been partly driven by the rising incidence of
Paragraph IV challenges. For example, by the end of the 2000s, ANDA applications with Paragraph IV
certifications accounted for more than 40% of all generic filings (Higgins and Graham, 2009; Berndt et
al., 2007).
3

Pharmaceutical Innovation and Generic Entry
We began our paper with the claim advanced by Nordhaus (1999) that the advances in human

welfare generated by better medical science over the past half century equal in value the consumption
increases from all other sources put together. Nordhaus’s claim is backed up by evidence documenting the
extensive gains in longevity and other dimensions of human health over the period; multiplying these
gains by even conservative estimates of the value of a “statistical life” result in very large numbers (e.g.,
Murphy and Topel, 2006). The work of Lichtenberg (2001, 2004, 2007) and others has lent credence to
Victor Fuchs' (1982) assertion that the most important driver of this improvement has been
pharmaceutical innovation. Efforts to infer the welfare impact of pharmaceutical innovation using modern
models of demand for differentiated products, such as Ellickson et al. (2001), Cleanthous (2002), and
Dunn (2012), have also yielded large estimates. Coincident advances in nutrition, pollution abatement,
diagnostic techniques, and the gradual decline of unhealthy behaviors like tobacco smoking make it
difficult to determine exactly what fraction of the observed improvement in health outcomes is
attributable to new drugs, but few would contest the unique importance and impact of pharmaceutical
innovation. This implies that public policies affecting the rate and direction of pharmaceutical innovation
also take on special importance.
7

The FDA scandal was widely covered in the media at the time -- see, for example, New York Times (1989).
Cockburn (2006) discusses shifts in the measured research productivity of the pharmaceutical industry. A large
cohort of new and successful branded products entered in the marketplace in the 1980s and 1990s, limiting the
market importance of generic competition. As this wave of products lost patent protection -- or was challenged
under Paragraph IV -- and was not fully replaced by newly introduced branded products, the financial pressure
generated by generic competition increased.

8

3.1

Pharmaceutical innovation: costs and controversies
Pharmaceutical innovation is not just important -- it also difficult, time-consuming, risky, and

expensive. A comprehensive accounting of costs has to include expenditures on drug candidates that fail
at some point in the process. Recent estimates by DiMasi and Grabowski (2012) suggest that these costs
have risen as high as one billion dollars per approved drug, though these cost estimates have been
subjected to considerable criticism and controversy. Previous studies have described the various stages of
the drug development process, including DiMasi, Hansen, and Grabowski (1991, 2003), DiMasi and
Grabowski (2012), and Mossinghoff (1999). This process is typically divided into the following phases:
pre-discovery, drug discovery, preclinical development, and clinical trials.
In the pre-discovery phase, drug companies study the basic scientific research of other firms and
public science institutions and conduct their own, as they seek to understand the fundamental biochemical
mechanisms that underlie diseases and the kind of chemicals or proteins that might work to disrupt or
reverse those mechanisms, curing the patient. Drug discovery begins when drug companies start
identifying and testing specific compounds. In the early stages, it is common for companies to evaluate
thousands of compounds, using chemical tests and other means, before focusing on a few hundred
compounds in the pre-clinical stage. The preclinical stage involves more in-depth, focused,
comprehensive testing of this smaller number of compounds, including tests of drugs in animals. The time
that it takes a compound to move through the drug discovery and preclinical phases is generally 3-6 years.
When drug companies have identified compounds they wish to subject to clinical trials in human
subjects, they submit an Investigational New Drug (IND) application to the FDA; this is legally required
in order to move drug samples across state lines for the purposes of clinical testing. Firms must then move
through three separate phases of clinical trials, each involving a larger number of human subjects. In
Phase 1, a small group is tested to determine a safe dosage level and identify side effects. In Phase 2, the
treatment is administered to a larger group, to determine effectiveness and also further evaluate its safety.
In Phase 3, the treatment is administered to a still larger group and compared to commonly used
treatments. When Phase 3 is successfully completed, the drug company submits a New Drug Application
(NDA) to the FDA, including clinical trials results. The FDA evaluates this information before approving
the drug. Once it is approved and sales begin, drug companies continue to do Phase 4 trials to acquire
additional information on risks, benefits, and optimal use. DiMasi and Grabowski (2012) contend that
only one drug obtains FDA approval for every 5 compounds that enter Phase 1, and it can take 6-7 years
for a compound to move through all 3 phases. The total development cycle from discovery through
approval can take, on average, nearly 12 years, and the distribution of approved drugs is characterized by
9

highly skewed returns. Pharmaceutical firms rely disproportionately on a small number of very successful
products to maintain their financial viability.
Starting in the mid-1990s, however, the number of drug approvals fell sharply, even as industry
R&D expenditures continued to increase. This led to an intense debate about the industry's research
"productivity crisis" (Cockburn, 2006 and Scherer, 2010). The relatively low level of new product
approvals persisted throughout our sample period and beyond. Experts disagree as to the causes or future
persistence of this productivity slowdown. Nevertheless, it has created a rising level of concern (and
financial stress) within the industry. Accelerating generic competition has been narrowing the profits of
branded firms faster than successful new drug development has expanded them.
3.2

The rise of generic penetration and implications for pharmaceutical innovation
A number of recent studies have studied the intensification of generic competition in recent years

and the impact of this shift on branded drug companies. We lack the space here to offer a comprehensive
review of all the work in this domain, and, instead, cite selectively the work that is most relevant to our
own analysis. Caves et al. (1991) offered an influential look at the early impact of Hatch-Waxman. More
recent work includes Reiffen and Ward (2005), Saha et al. (2006), Grabowski (2007), Grabowski and
Kyle (2007), and Berndt and Aitken (2010). Efforts to calculate the welfare impact of generic entry
include Bokhari and Fournier (2013) and Branstetter et al. (2013). The latter study shows that the rising
incidence of Paragraph-IV challenges has brought substantial gains to consumers. Hemphill and Sampat
(2011, 2012) also focus on Paragraph-IV challenges, analyzing, among other things, which incumbent
firms' patents tend to be challenged.
The possibility that rising generic penetration could undermine the incentives to undertake new
drug development has been recognized in prior work. For example, Hughes et al. (2002) show in a
theoretical model that providing greater access to a current stock of branded prescription drugs yields
large benefits to existing customers. However, this access comes at a cost in terms of lost consumer
benefits from reductions in the flow of future drugs. Other papers have also discussed this possibility,
including Grabowski and Kyle (2007), Higgins and Graham (2009), Knowles (2010), and Panattoni
(2011). This research stream has provided (mostly indirect or anecdotal) evidence suggesting that an
intensification of generic competition has undermined incentives for R&D. However, to the best of our
knowledge, no published study has yet provided direct econometric evidence demonstrating that generic

10

entry has caused a change in the rate or direction of new drug development.8 The extent to which this
occurs in practice remains an open question.
4

Empirical Models and Data
Previous research in this area has struggled with data limitations. We are fortunate to have access

to a range of unique and comprehensive data sets that provide us with a useful degree of leverage over
some of the econometric and measurement challenges we confront. Since we seek to measure the impact
of rising generic penetration on drug development effort, it is especially important to have high-quality
measures of pharmaceutical innovation and of exposure to generic competition. Our data allow us to track
both variables by firm, by therapeutic category, and by year. The paragraphs below describe our data and
our empirical approach.
4.1

Measuring and modeling pharmaceutical innovation
The regulatory structure imposed on the pharmaceutical industry makes early-stage product

development relatively easy to track. Before obtaining approval to market a new drug, pharmaceutical
firms must bring each prospective new product through a series of clinical trials, each one more
comprehensive than the previous one. Because the introduction of new drugs is so important for the
financial health of drug companies, the progress of new candidate drugs through the development
“pipeline” is closely monitored, and commercial databases contain rich data on these candidates. We draw
our measures of drug innovation from one such commercial database, Pharmaprojects. Not only is there
nearly universal coverage of all candidate drugs being tested for eventual sale in the U.S. market, but we
also know the chemical composition of the drug, the prospective disease targets, the therapeutic market in
which it is likely to be sold, and the development history (some drugs are initially developed to fight one
disease but then are discovered to have positive effects against others). The database also records
information on product development suspensions and discontinuations as well as product withdrawals
from the market after introduction. The richness of the data allows us, in principle, to examine the
relationship between rising generic penetration and the emergence of new compounds through various
stages of the drug development process across firms, therapeutic categories, and time.
However, attempts to assess this relationship confront a major challenge. At the same time that
generic entry has been rising, the pharmaceutical industry has encountered a widely publicized
“productivity crisis” (Cockburn, 2006). Although there has been no measured slowdown in aggregate
early stage drug development, new drug approvals peaked in the mid-1990s and were stagnant or falling
8

In related work, Budish, Roin, and Williams (2013) provide evidence that variation in effective patent life distorts
incentives for investment in cancer drugs. This study does not consider the impact of rising generic competition

11

through the rest of our sample period. While this opinion is by no means universally held, there are some
inside and outside the industry who suggest that this decline reflects an emerging exhaustion of research
opportunities. In this view, the easy-to-discover drugs have already been introduced; and, the diseases that
are now the focus of research effort are extremely complex and difficult to treat. To the extent that there
really is a decline in research productivity, this could lead firms to ratchet back their drug development
efforts, even in the absence of a growing generic threat to profitability. Our empirical challenge will be to
assess the impact of increased generic entry on new pharmaceutical innovation while controlling, as best
we can, for contemporaneous changes in research opportunities and other factors that might influence
drug development.
We propose to do this using a regression specification that models innovation as a function of
scientific opportunity and challenges, firm innovative capability, downstream co-specialized assets,
expected market size, and generic entry, with a vector of additional controls:

(1)
where Iijt, measures early-stage innovations by firm i in ATC 2-digit market j in time t. We define "early
stage innovations" as the count of individual compounds in "preclinical development" or in Phase 1
clinical trials. If firms are responding to changes in the intensity of generic competition, changes in
perceived scientific opportunity or changes in expected market opportunity, we would expect a
measurable impact to show up at this stage. In contrast, drugs that have already moved on to Phase 2 or
Phase 3 trials are likely to continue through the development process to the end, even if the firm plans to
curtail or eliminate future research in that area in response to rising competition or diminished
technological opportunity.9 Because the outcome variable is a count variable, the statistical model
employed in our regression should be one designed to handle count data. As such, we use fixed effects
Poisson and negative binomial estimators (Hausmanet al., 1984; Woolridge, 1999). Given that not all
firms innovate in each therapeutic category in each year, it is possible that the data may contain zeros.
Our count data models have the advantage of dealing with this outcome in a natural way.
The specification, as written, includes fixed effects for year (αt), firm (αi), and therapeutic (ATC)
category (αj). There are 13 years, 178 firms, and 126 ATC 2-digit categories in our data, and we run into
convergence challenges when we seek to estimate our Poisson and negative binomial count data models

9

We present empirical results later in the paper that are consistent with this view.

12

using the full set of year and ATC 2-digit dummies. In the results we will report below based on count
data models, we get around this convergence challenge by estimating ATC 1-digit dummy variables and,
in some specifications, we also include a paired fixed effect, interacting therapeutic market dummies with
year dummies, (αj*αt). As a robustness check, we also run linear versions of our models with the full set
of 2-digit ATC fixed effects as well as interaction terms of 2-digit ATC fixed effects and year dummies.
These more robust specifications yield results consistent with those reported in the main text -- our
measures of generic penetration are negative and statistically (and economically) significant.
We depend on the Pharmaprojects classification of drug candidates into the various ATC
categories. Unfortunately, this data is most consistently reported only at the 2-digit level. Other key
variables are available at a greater level of disaggregation (i.e., ATC 4-digit), but because we are seeking
to relate these to innovative effort, we can disaggregate no further than the level of our innovation data.
The regressions that are described below are therefore run at the level of firm-ATC 2 digit-year. Firms are
included in our sample if they have at least one approved product and at least one early-stage innovation.
This limitation excludes some smaller, research-intensive firms. We argue below that the bias introduced
by this sample selection, to the extent that it exists, likely weakens our estimated results relative to what
holds in reality.
4.2

Measuring generic penetration (Gijt-1 and Gjt-1Mijt-1)
Hatch-Waxman laid out the modes by which generic manufacturers can enter chemical-based

therapeutic markets. This entry leads to rapid deterioration in the sales of branded products (Saha et al.,
2006). However, the incidence of rising generic impact is quite uneven across therapeutic categories and
time. Firms also differ in terms of their exposure to this competition. Fortunately, we are able to employ
disaggregated data from the IMS MIDAS™ database. This database tracks the sales of nearly every
pharmaceutical product sold in the U.S. by firm, product, and quarter, and the data are mapped to ATC
categories at the 4-digit level. Our data is limited to the years 1998-2010, and this data restriction
determines the time dimension of our study.
Fortunately, this window covers a period of intensifying generic competition. Within this period,
we are able to determine the extent of generic penetration that firm i faces in therapeutic area j in time t-1.
We define our first measure of generic penetration, Gijt-1, as the sum of generic sales in therapeutic area j
at time t-1 divided by the sum of generic and firm i branded sales in therapeutic area j at time t-1. As a
robustness check, we define a second measure of generic penetration, Gjt-1Mijt-1, as the ratio of generic
sales to total sales in therapeutic area j in time t-1 multiplied by the ratio of branded sales by firm i in
13

therapeutic area j in year t-1 divided by total branded sales of firm i in year t-1. We thus measure changes
in the intensity of generic competition across therapeutic areas, and weight them by their relative
importance in the branded sales portfolios of individual firms. A negative coefficient on either measure
implies that as generic penetration in a therapeutic market increases, the flow of innovations decreases.
4.3

Measuring scientific opportunity (Ojt-1)
In order to identify the effect of changes in generic competition on innovation, we must also

effectively control for underlying scientific opportunities within each therapeutic market j at time t-1.
Prior research has demonstrated the link between academic research and industrial R&D (e.g., Mansfield,
1995; Gittelman and Kogut, 2003); these linkages are particularly strong in pharmaceuticals. Similar to
Furman et al. (2006), we construct a bibliographic measure that captures publicly available academic
research in the life sciences.
We start by merging data from IMS MIDAS™, our comprehensive database of pharmaceutical
products, with the IMS NDTI™ database, which captures physician prescription behavior. This latter
database identifies the diseases for which physicians are actually prescribing the drugs in MIDAS™.10
IMS MIDAS™ is categorized by ATC codes and the IMS NDTI™ database is categorized by
International Statistical Classification of Disease (ICD-9) diagnostic codes. Merging these two databases
enabled us to generate a concordance between ICD-9 diagnostic codes and ATC product codes (at the 4digit level). Next, we extracted the top 10 ICD-9 diagnostic codes for each ATC 4-digit category. These
ICD-9 codes have unified keywords associated with them that were used as search terms in the National
Library of Medicine’s PUBMED database. This search yielded journal articles published between 1950
and 2010 relating to our various keywords that we were then able to map back to disaggregate ATC 4digit categories. Ultimately, we identified a unique sample of 6.5 million journal articles. However, some
journal articles were mapped to multiple ATC 4-digit categories, thereby yielding 20.9 million raw article
counts. Next, we used the unique PMID identifiers for these articles to gather their forward citations from
the year of publication to the end of 2010 in the SCOPUS Sciverse database. Our sample of 20.9 million
articles generated over 345 million forward citations. Finally, since our unit of observation in a
therapeutic market is at the ATC 2-digit level, we aggregate our annual, citation-weighted counts of
journal articles up from the ATC 4-digit level to the ATC 2-digit level, take natural logs, and lag the stock
by one year to create our control variable, Ojt-1.

10

Because the IMS NDTI™ database is based on surveys of practicing physicians, it captures "off-label" prescribing
behavior -- that is, the prescribing of medicines for diseases for which they are not officially approved by the FDA
as treatments.

14

4.4

Expected future market size (Vjt+2)
Innovative effort is likely to be driven, in part, by perceived market opportunities as well as

scientific opportunity (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004). In other words, firms will develop more drug
candidates in disease categories where the potential addressable market is larger. As a way of controlling
for this, we average total sales from IMS MIDAS™ in therapeutic area j over year t, year t+1, and year
t+2, measured in inflation-adjusted dollars, and insert this as a control, effectively presuming rational and
accurate expectations on the part of companies developing new drugs. We do not assign any causal
interpretation to the estimated coefficient on Vjt+2. We incorporate this measure solely as a way of
controlling for the association in our data between perceived market size and R&D investment. As it turns
out, the sign and significance of the coefficients on our measures of generic penetration are not sensitive
to the inclusion or exclusion of this variable, but, for completeness, we will report specifications in which
this measure is included.
4.5

Scientific challenges (Zijt-1)
In contrast to scientific opportunities that may potentially “pull” firms towards a specific

therapeutic market, we control for scientific challenges that may “push” firms away from a specific
therapeutic market. Utilizing data from Pharmaprojects we identify all suspended, discontinued and
withdrawn products across the entire research pipeline from pre-clinical candidates to approved products.
Development can be ended and products pulled for a multitude of reasons many of which, at their most
fundamental level, are due to some type of scientific challenge. For example, Merck pulled Vioxx® from
the market due to negative side-effects, while the Alzheimer disease drug candidate semagacestat was
discontinued by Eli Lilly in Phase III clinical trials after disappointing results. The failure of one or more
leading products within a broader drug development program could indicate the presence of common or
related flaws in the products that are still under development. This, in turn, could lead the firm to scale
back, terminate, or redirect research and development efforts in response. Seeking to control for this, we
define our proxy for the scientific challenges faced by the firm, Zijt-1, as the number of products
suspended, discontinued or withdrawn by firm i, in therapeutic market j at time t-1.
4.6

Firm capabilities (Dijt-1 and Pijt-1), marketing assets (SAijt), and firm size (Sit)
Clearly, pharmaceutical companies differ in the drug development capabilities they have built

over time. A given firm is more likely to introduce a new compound in a therapeutic category in which it
already has substantial research expertise. In order to control for this persistence of firm-level capabilities
15

we use data from Pharmaprojects to create a three-year moving average of past drug introductions, Dijt-1,
by firm i in the same therapeutic market j. This three-year moving average is lagged one period, (t-1). In
addition to controlling for past products, we also control for late-stage innovations within the product
pipeline. Again, using data from Pharmaprojects we define Pijt-1 as the number of compounds under
development by firm i that are in Phase 2 or Phase 3 clinical trials in therapeutic market j at time t-1.
Prior research has also documented the connection between downstream co-specialized assets and
a strong commitment to research efforts within a particular therapeutic class (Teece, 1986; Chan et al.,
2007). The presence of these assets can create a ‘lock-in’ effect, influencing the allocation of research
effort across therapeutic categories. Similar to Ceccagnoli et al. (2010), we control for the distribution of
a firm’s downstream co-specialized assets across therapeutic categories by including a ratio of promotions
to product sales, SAijt, for firm i within therapeutic category j at time t. Promotions and product sales are
collected from IMS MIDAS™ and the promotions activity includes detailing, journal advertising and
direct-mail. Detailing is the direct promotion of products by pharmaceutical representatives to physicians.
Finally, firm size can impact innovation rates. As such, we control for firm size with pharmaceutical sales
by firm i in year t, Sit. Sales data was gathered from IMS MIDAS™ and natural logs were taken.
4.7

An empirical specification for measuring the shift into biotech drugs
Current regulation suggests an alternative approach to estimating the impact of generics on

innovation. Chemistry-based pharmaceutical products become susceptible to Paragraph III generic entry
after patent expiration (i.e., end of market exclusivity). They also become susceptible to early generic
entry via Paragraph IV challenges only five years after approval (i.e., end of data exclusivity, Figure 2).
The same legal frameworks do not (yet) provide a pathway for biosimilar entry after biologic patent
expiration, nor is there the equivalent of a Paragraph IV challenge to biologic-based drugs. Furthermore,
biologic-based products are now explicitly guaranteed 12 years of data exclusivity, so even if and when
Paragraph IV-type challenges of biologic drugs become feasible, they will occur much later in the product
life cycle. Clearly, this difference in regulation creates an incentive for pharmaceutical companies to
favor biologic-based (“large molecule”) therapies over chemical-based (“small molecule”) therapies, even
if the latter may be more effective in a purely therapeutic sense. This suggests an alternative specification:

CI ijt  BIijt  i   t   j  1Gijt1  2O jt1  3 Zijt1   4 (CDijt1  BDijt1 ) 

5 (CPijt1  BPijt1 )  6 (CSA ijt BSAijt )  7 Sit  ijt

(2)

Here, the dependent variable measures the difference between chemistry-based innovations and
biologic-based innovations. Likewise, our controls for firm-specific development capability and market
16

presence are redefined to reflect relative capability in chemistry-based versus biologic-based
development. Given these controls, we would not expect generic penetration (Gijt-1) to have an impact on
the choice of technology – unless firms’ research choices are being affected by the prospect of generic
competition.
4.7

Difference in early-stage innovation (CIijt – BIijt)
If current regulation is in fact causing biologic-based innovation to be preferred to chemical-

based innovation, then we need to modify our innovation measure in order to capture this change. Using
the Origin of Material field within Pharmaprojects we are able to sort early-stage innovation (Iijt) into
either biologic-based (BIijt) or chemical-based (CIijt) innovation. In operationalizing Equation (2), the
dependent variable is the difference between these two types of innovation, CIijt – BIijt. A negative
coefficient on a right-hand side (RHS) variable (such as Gijt-1) would imply that as that variable increased
the difference (CIijt – BIijt) would decline. In other words, BIijt is greater than CIijt or the flow of biologicbased innovations exceeds the flow of chemical-based innovations.11
It is possible for firm i to have more biologic-based innovations than chemical-based innovations
in therapeutic market j at time t. In this case, our difference variable (CIijt – BIijt) will become negative,
preventing us from using count data models. We therefore create a new variable, cat(CIijt – BIijt), that
equals 1, 2 and 3 if (CIijt – BIijt) is negative, zero or positive, respectively. This reclassification allows us
to use an ordered logit specification (Hausman et al., 1992). Again, a negative coefficient on an
independent variable would imply that as that variable increased, the dependent variable, cat(CIijt – BIijt),
will decline. In this case the difference, (CIijt – BIijt), will become negative and the interpretation is the
same as above.
For our specification in Equation 2 we can use the Origin of Material field within Pharmaprojects
to decompose our measure of late-stage innovations, Pijt-1, past drug introductions, Dijt-1, and our measure
of scientific challenges, Zijt-1, faced by firm i in therapeutic market j, into their chemical-based (CPijt-1,
CDijt-1 and CZijt-1, respectively) and biologics-based (BPijt-1, BDijt-1 and BZijt-1, respectively) components.
We can also decompose our ratio of promotions to product sales, SAijt, for firm i within therapeutic
market j at time t, into its chemical-based (CSAijt) and biologic-based (BSAijt) components. Empirically, in
Table 6 we create the variables diff(Pijt-1), diff(Zijt-1), diff(Dijt-1), and diff(SAijt) defined as the difference

11

As a robustness check for this specification we also employ a SUR model (Table 7). Results are consistent
between our various specifications and will be discussed more fully in Section 5. We thank Ivan Png for this
suggestion.

17

between the chemical- and biologic-based components: (CPijt-1 – BPijt-1), (CZijt-1 – BZijt-1), (CDijt-1 – BDijt-1)
and (CSAijt – BSAijt), respectively.
5

Empirical Results

5.1

Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics for our variables are presented in Table 1. Our dependent variable, Iijt,

captures early-stage innovation and varies between 0 and 36 for firm i, in therapeutic market j, at time t.
While our firms had, on average, 0.78 early-stage innovations within a therapeutic market at time t, it
should be remembered that not every firm has an early-stage innovation in every therapeutic market in
each year. If we focus solely on therapeutic categories with activity, then the average increases to 2.12
early-stage innovations. Firms in the top quartile of firm size had, on average, 3.07 innovations within
therapeutic market j at time t, as compared to 1.45 innovations for the smallest quartile firms. ATC N,
focusing on the nervous system, had the largest number of innovations, while ATC P, which focuses on
anti-parasitic products, had the lowest number of innovations. The relative contribution to total
innovations of each broad (ATC 1-digit) therapeutic category over our sample period is displayed in
Figure 4.
Inspection of the raw data shows that, in the aggregate, there has been no decline in early-stage
innovation over our sample period, even as the level of generic penetration has risen and the number of
approved drugs has fallen (Figure 1). This suggests that generics have had limited impact on the overall
aggregate rate of early-stage innovation. However, we find strong evidence that generics have had a
statistically and economically significant impact on where development activity is concentrated and how
it is undertaken.
Our baseline measure of generic penetration, Gijt-1, has a mean value of 54% and a median value
of just over 80%. Over our sample period, measured generic penetration increased significantly. Our
measure of technological opportunity, Ojt-1, measured by the logarithm of the stock of citation weighted
articles in year t-1 for therapeutic market j, varied between 0 and 17.9, with an average of 8.09. This
translates into an average value of approximately 4.35 million citations for each therapeutic market j in
each year. Over our sample period the greatest technological opportunity existed in ATC categories N5
(psycholeptics) and N6 (psychoanaleptics). Our measure of technological challenges, Zijt-1, had an average
value of 0.05. The number of challenges varied between 0.26 and 6 with the greatest technical challenges
experienced in ATC T2, which includes various recombinant-based products, such as interferon.

18

On average, our firms had a lagged three-year moving average of 0.24 recently introduced
products (Dijt-1) and 0.09 drug candidates in the latest stages of product development (Pijt-1) in therapeutic
market j at time t-1. Our control for downstream co-specialized assets, SAijt, the ratio of promotions to
sales for firm i in therapeutic market j at time t, averaged 45%. This suggests firms are making significant
downstream investments in therapeutic areas in which they operate (and plan to operate).
5.2

Impact of generic entry on the flow of innovation
Do changes in generic penetration have an effect on the flow of early-stage drug innovation? We

estimate Equation 1 with a fixed effects Poisson specification (Table 2). We also present results using a
fixed-effects negative binomial specification (Table 3). The dependent variable in all specifications is Iijt ,
or the count of firm i innovations in therapeutic market j at time t. Model 1 in both tables (Table 2 and
Table 3) presents a baseline regression with our market size measure and firm-level control variables,
including our measures of new product introductions, late stage product development, advertising, sales,
and firm, year, and therapeutic market fixed effects (estimated at the ATC 1-digit level). Model 2 in each
table adds controls for scientific opportunity (Ojt-1) and scientific challenges (Zijt-1). Finally, in Models 3,
4, and 5, we include our baseline measure of generic penetration along with differing sets of fixed effects.
Model 3 includes just firm and year fixed effects; Model 4 adds therapeutic area fixed effects, while
Model 5 includes an interaction between the year and therapeutic market fixed effects. This interaction,
we argue, controls for unobserved changes in a particular therapeutic market in a specific year. Model 6
replaces our baseline measure of generic penetration, Gijt-1, with our alternative measure, Gjt-1Mijt-1. The
results presented in this table are obtained using clustered standard errors at the firm level. When we
cluster our standard errors at the therapeutic area level (ATC), we obtain results qualitatively similar to
those shown here.12
Across all specifications and models we find negative and statistically significant coefficient
estimates for our measures of generic penetration. This negative relationship suggests that, at the firm
level, increases in generic penetration are related to decreases in the flow of early stage innovation in that
therapeutic area. Taking the coefficient from our complete negative binomial specification (Model 5,
Table 3) as our baseline estimate, we calculate an elasticity equal to -0.79. In other words, a 10% increase
in generic penetration experienced by a firm in a particular market is related to a 7.9% decrease in earlystage innovation by that firm in that market. To our knowledge this is the first empirical evidence that
documents the effect of generic penetration in the U.S. market on early-stage pharmaceutical innovation.
12

We replicate Tables 2 and 3 with clustered standard errors at the therapeutic area level in Appendix Tables A1 and
A2.

19

If fewer candidates are entering a given therapeutic pipeline within a given firm, then fewer drugs will
eventually come out.
Generic penetration into a market is clearly harmful for branded producers. From a social welfare
perspective, however, the interpretation is more nuanced. If the presence of viable generics in a market
rises, our results indicate that innovation will decrease in that market.13 However, the stability of earlystage drug development effort at the aggregate level, suggests that much of the decline in innovation
within markets facing a high degree of generic competition is offset by increased innovative effort
elsewhere. Indeed Pammolli et al. (2011) argues that one of the reasons R&D productivity has declined
has been a shift into areas with unmet therapeutic needs, which also have higher risks of failure. Our
results are consistent with the view that drug development is shifting out of therapeutic areas facing more
intense generic competition and into domains facing less generic competition. Furthermore, our results
provide one possible explanation for why this shift is occurring. In essence, Hatch-Waxman, by providing
mechanisms of entry for generics, creates conditions under which the pharmaceutical industry redirects
R&D efforts to markets less served by generics.
If R&D efforts are shifting across therapeutic areas, this can have significant future
consequences, with a net impact on social welfare that is difficult to calculate. On the one hand, if the
therapeutic category that is seeing research expenditures leave has a different success probability than the
therapeutic category to which expenditures are flowing, this could have consequences for the net flow of
innovation (either increasing or decreasing). On the other hand, new product development in a domain
with few (or no) existing effective therapies may have greater social value than similar development in an
area with a broad range of existing effective therapies, even if the R&D success probabilities are lower in
the domain with few therapies. In this paper, we do not take a strong stand on the ultimate welfare
consequences of this shift. Instead, we seek to document its existence and magnitude. The welfare
consequences of the shift remain the focus of ongoing research.

In theory, generics should be perfect substitutes for branded drugs since they are bioequivalent. Cleanthous (2002)
shows that the data do not support this relationship and suggests this is the result of ‘spurious product
differentiation’, which he defines as arising “…when consumers perceive physically identical products to differ in
quality.” Recent evidence, however, may suggest that consumer perceptions have merit and while drugs may be
bioequivalent, they may indeed differ in quality. Several articles appeared in the April 17, 2007 edition of the
prestigious journal Neurology discussing the high incidence of break-through seizures with generic anti-epileptics.
Insurance companies such as Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia allow pediatric customers to stay on branded antiepileptic medications even though generics are available. Differences across generics for the same brand have also
been reported. We are not suggesting all generics have problems but it appears in some instances where the
therapeutic window is very narrow these perceptions may have some merit.
13

20

Turning to our controls for scientific opportunity (Ojt-1) and scientific challenges (Zijt-1), we find
that both positively and significantly influence the flow of early-stage innovation. Using a similar
approach in the creation of their scientific opportunity variable, Furman et al. (2005) find a positive
relationship with pharmaceutical patenting. Our results take this one step further and document a
relationship with actual early-stage drug development. Much of the basic science research that is captured
in our variable takes place in academic settings; as such this finding is broadly consistent with past work
documenting the role of academic research in industrial innovation (e.g., Mansfield, 1995; Cohen et al.,
2002).
Interestingly, while our findings are consistent with our a priori beliefs with respect to scientific
opportunity, the same cannot be said with respect to scientific challenges. Our initial beliefs were that
scientific opportunity might serve as a mechanism to ‘pull’ innovative effort into a particular area, while
challenges might serve as a mechanism to ‘push’ innovation away from it. That would imply a negative
coefficient on our challenges variable -- but the coefficient is positive and significant at conventional
levels. One interpretation of this positive coefficient is that that failures can serve as a learning
mechanism for future endeavors (Chiou et al., 2012). Statin drugs, which today are one of the largest
selling therapeutic areas, had a difficult beginning in 1978, with the unsuccessful launch of Mevacor®.
Over time, however, the industry worked through these difficulties as new technologies led to the five
types of statin-molecules currently sold in U.S. A different, but related interpretation of the positive
coefficient is simply that firms with a significant research commitment to a particular therapeutic category
are more likely to have a few failures along the way, and the positive coefficient on our proxy for
scientific challenges simply picks up that effect.
The sign of the coefficient on our expected market opportunity variable, Vjt+2, is not uniform
across all specifications, but tends to be negative and statistically significant in the more complete
specifications. Does this result imply that firms systematically invest less in product development in the
more lucrative markets? We do not believe so. While we stress that this variable is included solely as a
control, and we do not place any strong causal interpretation on the estimated coefficient, we believe that
the negative coefficient is consistent with the fact that larger product markets, in terms of total sales, are
also more crowded product markets, in terms of the number and range of existing therapies. Rather than
increase drug development in a market that is already well served by a range of existing products, firms
may elect to direct their efforts to less developed markets.
We control for firms’ research capabilities by using their past innovative output in a particular
therapeutic market, as measured by the lagged count of products in late-stage product development, Pijt-1,
21

and the lagged count of new product introductions, Dijt-1. As expected, both are positively and
significantly related to the flow of early-stage innovations. To some extent, these variables may pick up
part of the positive impact of market size on investment in new products - new product introductions and
late stage development may both be more likely in larger markets - and the impact of these variables,
which vary over firms as well as across markets and time, may help explain the negative coefficient on
Vjt+2. Across the two baseline specifications (Model 5, Table 2 and Table 3), our measure for firm size, Sit,
is mostly positive and significant. This result should not be interpreted as necessarily indicating a positive
relationship between firm size and ‘innovation,’ as our dependent variable is a simple count of early-stage
pipeline products; we make no distinction between internally generated and externally acquired
products.14 Finally, our measure of marketing intensity or downstream co-specialized assets, SAijt, is
statistically indistinguishable from zero.
5.3

The (nonexistent) impact of generic competition on innovation in markets with limited

substitution between branded and generic products
Most prescription health plans in the U.S. allow for the use of branded products until generics
become available. In most cases patients will be given the generic by retail pharmacies unless the
prescription is written “Dispense as Written” or if the patient explicitly asks for a branded drug (in which
case there is usually a much higher co-payment). More recently, however, insurance firms have begun to
actively engage in “cross-molecular” substitution. For example, let’s assume there are three branded
products in a particular market, Drug A, Drug B and Drug C, sold by three different pharmaceutical firms.
Each branded product has a different chemical composition (i.e., a different molecule), and uses a
different biochemical pathway to address the underlying illness. Then, a generic for Drug B enters the
market. To save money, insurance companies can encourage patients taking Drug A or Drug C to switch
to Generic B. While insurance firms cannot force patients to move (they request patients take a letter from
the insurance company to their doctor) they can entice them with lower (or no) copayments for Generic B.
Since physicians, not patients or insurance companies, write prescriptions, these financial
incentives will only shift drug consumption to the generic products if physicians also consent to the
change. However, in many therapeutic markets, practicing physicians have long regarded different drugs,
based on different molecules and utilizing different biochemical pathways to attack the disease, as equally
effective therapies for the underlying illness. In such cases, physicians will often consent to the insurance
companies preferred change, especially if it saves their patients money. We refer to this possibility of
14

See Cohen (2010) for an extensive discussion of the literature analyzing the relationship between firm size and
innovation.

22

substitution across drugs and molecules within a therapeutic category in response to emerging price
differentials as that category's degree of cross-molecular substitution (Branstetter et al., 2013). Where
cross-molecular substitution is high, the implications for branded products can be quite profound. In such
markets, the emergence of a generic equivalent to any branded product can affect the revenue streams of
all branded products, leading to wide-ranging declines in revenues and profits.
The extent of these impacts will vary across therapeutic categories, depending on the degree of
cross-molecular substitution within that category. For example, based on conversations with practicing
physicians, we would expect higher substitution in therapeutic areas such as anti-infectives, hypertension
and allergies and lower substitution in markets such as depression and epilepsy. In general, the
complexity and sensitivity of the human brain and the complicated nature of neurological disorders work
to strictly limit the degree of cross-molecular substitution in drugs that treat neurological and psychiatric
disorders. They even limit the degree to which practitioners are willing to use allegedly "bioequivalent"
generic versions of the branded drug. When practitioners find a good match between a drug treatment and
a patient in these domains, they are often reluctant to switch to a cheaper generic. For example, multiple
articles in the April 17, 2007 edition of the prestigious journal Neurology discussed the high incidence of
break-through seizures associated with transition to the use of generic anti-epileptics. These concerns and
the associated costs of break through seizures led some insurance companies, such as BlueCross Blue
Shield of Georgia, to allow pediatric customers to stay on branded anti-epileptic medications even though
a generic was available (Branstetter et al., 2013).
Economic intuition suggests that if a class of branded drugs was less susceptible to crossmolecular substitution and generic competition, then we might expect to see a muted innovation response
to rising generic competition in that particular market. Focusing on the markets that include antiepileptics, anti-depressants, and anti-psychotics, we indeed see this in our results (Table 4). Increases in
generic penetration, whether measured by Gijt-1 or Gjt-1Mijt-1, do not appear to have any statistically
significant effect on early-stage innovation in these therapeutic areas. This suggests that there are markets
for which direct substitution to a generic may be problematic, cross-molecular substitution is low, and as
a result the effect on early-stage innovation is less of a concern.15
5.4
The impact of generic penetration on "novel" drug development, the impact on late-stage product
development, and robustness to the (ATC2*year) fixed effects
15

As a robustness check, through consultations with practicing physicians we identified markets that they deemed
‘high CMS’, namely the anti-infective markets J01-J04. When we replicate the findings in Table 4 for these high
CMS markets the coefficients on both Gijt-1 and Gjt-1Mijt-1 are negative and significant at the 1% level. This is what
we would expect to see in high CMS markets.

23

Our baseline measure of innovation, Iijt, which is the count of products in early-stage
development, does not discriminate between pharmaceutical products that are the first in their class and
those that come much later in the history of a therapeutic area. This reflects, in part, the difficulty of
drawing a clear or meaningful line between "truly innovative" drugs and "me-too" drugs. The history of
the industry provides several examples in which the first products in a class had significant shortcomings
or side effects -- and the real breakthroughs in terms of therapeutic efficacy came several product
introductions later.16 Even when new products are "merely" recombinations or reformulations of existing
active ingredients, the new products can often provide significant therapeutic benefits to certain categories
of patients.
Despite these realities, critics of the pharmaceutical industry have accused branded firms of
responding to generic entry or the threat of generic entry by coming up with branded "innovations" that
are not true innovations, but merely minor modifications of earlier branded products. If the negative
impact of rising generic entry on new product introductions, identified in our regressions, were limited to
incremental innovations with little or no therapeutic value, that would have different policy implications
from an effect that extended to the most novel compounds and drugs.
The Pharmaprojects database includes a variable that grades each product under development in
terms of its novelty -- the most novel compounds are ones that are first in their class. We do not accept the
proposition that all compounds without this "novel" designation have limited therapeutic value. For the
reasons discussed above, we believe the Pharmaprojects designation excludes a large number of socially
useful new product introductions. Nevertheless, the designation allows us to introduce a useful robustness
check that may address the concerns of those who are convinced that only pharmaceutical product
introductions that satisfy a strict definition of novelty are socially useful. In Models 1 and 2 in Table 5,
we present the results of regressions in which we replace our comprehensive count of drugs in early-stage
development with a count of only "novel" drugs in early-stage development, as defined by
Pharmaprojects. In fixed effects negative binomial regressions, the coefficients on both measures of
generic penetration are negative and statistically significant, indicating that rising generic penetration is
associated with a statistically significant decline in the rate of introduction of "novel" products. The
elasticity from Model 1 implies that a 10% increase in generic penetration in a particular market will
lower early-stage novel innovations, in that same market, by 4.6%. Put another way, our results are not
driven by a crowding out of purely incremental inventions or reformulations.

16

See Arcidiacono et al. (2013).

24

We carefully defined innovation as early-stage product development - counts of compounds in
preclinical development or Phase 1 clinical trials. This choice was informed by conversations with
industry practitioners. As compounds move through the costly, expensive, and risky clinical trials
process, they require ever-higher levels of investment by the firm. A drug that has survived Phase 2 and
Phase 3 clinical trials is likely to be introduced, even if generic penetration is rising sharply in a way that
might lead to a throttling back of early-stage research in that therapeutic area. If our view of the drug
development process, and the responsiveness of its different stages to changes in generic penetration, is
correct, then it suggests a further robustness check. Drugs at the later stages of the development process
should be significantly less responsive to our measures of generic penetration than our measures of earlier
stage innovations.17
Following this logic, in Models 3 and 4 of Table 5, we redefine our dependent variable, Late
Stage Iijt, as a count of firm i’s products in Phase 2 or Phase 3 trials in market j at time t. In these models,
we find that neither measure for generic penetration, Gijt-1 or Gjt-1Mijt-1, is significantly correlated with latestage product innovation.18 This is in line with our expectations, and strengthens our interpretation of the
results using measures of early-stage product development.
Our final robustness check seeks to incorporate ATC 2-digit fixed effects and the interactions of
ATC 2-digit market fixed effects and year fixed effects into the specification. This is not feasible in the
fixed effects negative binomial models -- attempts to estimate these nonlinear specifications with so many
fixed effects fail to reach convergence. However, it is possible to incorporate ATC 2-digit fixed effects
and even the interaction of ATC 2-digit fixed effects with year effects into a linear specification of
Equation (1). The results for the full specification, including ATC2 and (Year*ATC2) interaction fixed
effects, are shown in Models 5 and 6 of Table 5. We view this an especially strong test of the hypothesis
that an increase in generic penetration is associated with a decline in innovative activity, because all of the
factors associated with an ATC 2-digit market that vary over time in a common way across firms are
swept out with the interaction terms. Despite this, and despite the imperfect fit between the count data in
our dependent variable and the statistical assumptions undergirding our linear specification, we still find
that both measures of generic penetration are negatively associated with early-stage drug development,
and these effects are statistically significant at conventional levels.19 The elasticity from Model 5 implies
We thank Jeff Macher of Georgetown University for suggesting this robustness check.
In these regressions, our dependent variable is identical to Pijt-1, so we omit this variable from our set of control
variables.
19
Recall that our unit of observation is at the firm-market-year where market j is defined at the ATC2 level. As
such, in these models the loss of significance on Ojt-1 and Vjt+2 should not be surprising given the ATC2 fixed effect
and the (Year*ATC2) interaction fixed effect.
17
18

25

that a 10% increase in generic penetration in a particular market will lower early-stage innovations, in that
same market, by 4.1%.
5.5

Are generics driving a switch to biologics-based drug development?
Other researchers have conjectured that declining revenues associated with small-molecule

(chemical-based) products are increasingly motivating firms to switch to large-molecule (biologic-based)
products (Wong, 2009; Golec et al, 2010). As we have noted above, such a shift could have mixed
consequences for future drug development. Biologics are more expensive than chemical-based products,
on average (Aitken et al., 2009; Trusheim et al., 2010), and final regulatory guidance that provides a
pathway for biosimilar entry in the U.S. market has yet to be issued. This means that even after the
patents of a branded biologic-based product expire, there is no pathway for generic entry without full
clinical trials. If uptake between the two types of products over their entire product lifecycle remains
similar, then a shift from chemistry-based to biologic-based drugs could imply that, all else equal, the
percent of overall health care expenditures spent on pharmaceuticals will increase.20
In order to consider whether a shift to biologic-based products may be occurring as a
consequence of rising generic penetration, we estimate the specification described in Equation 2. The
dependent variable in this specification is the difference between early-stage chemical-based innovations
and early-stage biologic-based innovations. As constructed, this variable can now take on negative values,
which prevents us from using count data models. Instead, we create a variable, cat(CIijt-BIijt), that equals
1, 2 and 3 if the difference (CIijt – BIijt) is negative, zero, or positive, respectively, and we estimate
Equation 2 using an ordered logit model (Models 1-3, Table 6). Model 1 in Table 6 reports our complete
baseline specification with all fixed effects except the (Year*ATC ) interaction. Models 2 and 3 include
the full set of fixed effects across both measures of generic penetration. For comparative purposes, we
also report results from a linear regression on the same dependent variable with our standard set of
controls and fixed effects. These results are reported in Models 4 and 5. Across all specifications our
measure of generic penetration is negatively and significantly related to the difference in types of earlystage innovations. This suggests that as generic penetration increases, our dependent variable, cat(CIijtBIijt), declines which, in turn, implies that the difference, (CIijt – BIijt) is decreasing. In other words as
generic penetration increases, the flow of biologic-based innovations is greater than the flow of chemical-

20

Even after final guidance is issued for biosimilars in the U.S., as long as the data exclusivity period remains at 12
years there will still be a significant difference between the regulatory incentives for biologic-based drugs and
chemical-based drugs. As of this writing, data exclusivity for chemical-based drugs is 5 years (with additional
extensions available for pediatric use, orphan designation and reformulations.)

26

based innovations for firm i, in market j, at time t. It appears that pharmaceutical firms are responding to
generic competition by shifting to biologics, where they do not face similar competitive constraints.
The coefficient on Ojt-1 remains positive and statistically significant, as in earlier regressions. Our
controls for firm capabilities also remain consistent. The difference in chemical-based and biologic-based
approved late-stage innovations, (CPijt-1 – BPijt-1), and approved products, (CDijt-1 – BDijt-1), is positive and
significant, as expected. In other words, if a firm has more chemical-based products relative to biologicbased products then the flow of chemical-based early-stage innovations relative to biologic-based
innovations is greater. Not only do pharmaceutical firms continue to develop products within the same
therapeutic category but they also appear to continue to develop products of the same type.
Table 7 provides results from a third specification -- one in which two separate linear models
predicting chemical-based product innovations and biologic-based production innovations, respectively,
are run as a system, using the seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) approach. In Model 1, with our
primary measure of generic penetration, Gijt-1, we can see that is negatively associated with chemicalbased innovation, but positively associated with biologic-based innovation, and both relationships are
significant at the conventional threshold levels. We noted earlier in the paper that our sample is limited to
firms with at least one approved product and at least one candidate drug in early-stage development. This
sampling restriction excludes some small, research-intensive firms. However, these smaller entities are
overwhelmingly focused on biologic drug development. We strongly believe their inclusion in our
empirical analysis would, if anything, significantly strengthen the general tenor of our findings, especially
those concerning the shift out of chemical-based drugs and into biologic-based drugs.
6

Conclusion
For many years, researchers and industry observers have conjectured that rising generic

penetration might have an impact on the rate and direction of pharmaceutical innovation. Using a new
combination of data sets, we are able to estimate the effects of rising generic penetration on early-stage
pharmaceutical innovation. While the overall level of early-stage drug development has continued to
increase, generics have had a statistically and economically significant impact on where that development
activity is concentrated and how it is done. In the full sample, we find that, as our baseline measure of
generic penetration increases by 10% within a therapeutic market, we observe a decrease of 7.9% in
early-stage innovation in that market. This implies that drug development activity is moving out of
markets where generic competition is increasing and into domains where it is relatively less intense.

27

Our preferred interpretation of this relationship, namely that a rise in generic penetration leads to
a decline in drug development in that market, is strengthened by the finding that this relationship varies
across therapeutic areas in ways that conform to our prior expectations. In earlier work (Branstetter et al.,
2013), we pointed out that the degree of substitution between generics and branded products can vary
substantially across therapeutic areas. In markets where the substitution possibilities between generics and
branded drugs are more limited, changes in generic penetration could be expected to have a weaker
impact on innovation. This is indeed what we observe when we focus on three markets containing drugs
that treat neurological and psychiatric disorders, where clinicians are sometimes reluctant to move away
from a good "match" between a patient and a drug, even when a cheaper generic alternative (of a different
drug) becomes available. In these markets, we find no statistically significant effect of generics on earlystage innovations. However, in markets with high levels of cross-molecular substitution we see the
opposite.
In a similar manner, we would expect the measured negative correlation between rising generic
penetration and new drug development to be strong and significant for early-stage drug development,
where it is still feasible to redirect research efforts, but much weaker in late-stage drug development,
where candidate drugs have already proved their safety and efficacy in a series of increasingly expensive
and stringent clinical trials and are generally introduced even if the market is known to be limited by
increasing generic competition. We find exactly this pattern in the data, providing further support for our
preferred interpretation of the statistical relationship. The robustness of our results is also confirmed when
we limit our sample to drugs candidates designated as "novel" by our Pharmaprojects database. These
drugs are first in their class. This shows that our results are not driven by generic competition simply
pushing out "me-to" drugs or reformulation/recombinations of existing therapies. For better or worse, the
rise in generic penetration is associated with a decline in novel drug development. The elasticity from our
results implies that a 10% increase in generic penetration in a particular market will lower early-stage
novel drug development, in that same market, by 4.6%.
We also note that, in a linear specification, the negative relationship between drug development
and rising generic penetration is robust to the inclusion of a full set of ATC 2-digit dummy variables and
the interaction of these dummy variables with our year dummy variables. In this specification, where all
the unobserved factors impacting a 2-digit therapeutic area over time in a common way across firms are
effectively removed, the key empirical relationship remains negative, strong, and statistically robust,
regardless of how we measure it. The elasticity from our results implies that a 10% increase in generic
penetration in a particular market will lower early-stage innovation, in that same market, by 4.1%.
28

Finally, we also consider the economic incentives created by regulation to shift, within
therapeutic markets, from chemical-based to biologic-based products. Currently, data exclusivity is much
longer for biologic-based products, and the regulatory pathway to market for biosimilars has yet to be
finalized. We conjecture that as chemical-based products are pressured by generics, pharmaceutical firms
will begin to change the nature of their innovation by shifting to biologics. This is indeed what we
observe. Increases in generic penetration in market j appear to lead to an increase in the relative amount
of biologic-based drug development. As generic penetration in market j rises, firms do not appear to be
abandoning market j completely, but rather changing the nature of the innovation they pursue.
We have shown that the rise of generic competition is reshaping the locus of drug development
activity. Is this a good thing? In this paper, we have refrained from taking a strong stand on the welfare
impact of this shift. The data we would need to determine this are not yet available, and, at this point, we
can only speculate on the sign of the ultimate welfare impact. On the positive side, one can argue that
social welfare is enhanced when pharmaceutical firms are induced to shift development efforts away from
markets where a broad range of effective and cheap generic therapies already exist to ones with far fewer
treatment options. This can be true even if the probabilities of research success are lower in the domains
into which research effort is being pushed, because the social returns to expanding the range of treatment
options is so relatively high. Even an increasing shift to more expensive biologic-based drugs may be
beneficial in the long run if much of the potential for further advance in small-molecule drugs has already
been exhausted. However, it is equally easy - and for us, equally plausible - to imagine a less positive
outcome. Rising generic competition could be eliminating the development of new drugs that have all the
benefits of existing therapies without the side effects. Such new drugs would have social value, even in
markets with an extensive range of existing therapies. The less explored domains into which the
pharmaceutical industry's small-molecule developments are being pushed may yield little or no success.
Such pessimism would be consistent with much of the discussion of the pharmaceutical industry's
longstanding "productivity crisis." Finally, by tilting the regulatory playing field so heavily against smallmolecule drug development and in favor of biologics, we may be inducing the global industry to give up
on the former domain that has done so much to advance global health through the provision of cheap,
relatively simple, effective drugs long before the potential benefits of further research have been
exhausted.21

In fact, many industry insiders believe that there are hundreds of small molecule compounds with as yet
undiscovered therapeutic benefits. Because the patents on these compounds expired long ago, there is no mechanism
by which a branded pharmaceutical company could appropriate the returns from R&D into these new therapeutic
benefits. This line of thinking raises the possibility that there is a gold mine of potentially high-return research
21

29

The first step toward a more definitive conclusion about the welfare impact of the shift in drug
development would be the creation of a map that locates the various therapeutic categories in terms of
their proximity in technology space. It is reasonable that firms pressed by rising generic competition
would seek to redeploy their R&D resources in domains that are not wholly dissimilar from the ones in
which they have been working. Despite decades of high-quality empirical research on the pharmaceutical
industry, no researchers have yet created such a mapping. With such data at hand, we could begin to
explore not just the declines in drug development that have been induced by generic competition, but the
increases in development in technologically proximate markets. These data would also facilitate the
comparison of research success probabilities in the domains where drug development effort is declining
and ones in which it is increasing.
Even with such data at hand, assessment of the full welfare impact of the recent shift will require
strong assumptions that allow us to sketch out the counterfactual distribution of research effort that would
have existed in the absence of the recent rise in generic competition. Despite this, we believe the effort is
not just worthwhile, but necessary. Whether the effect was intended or not, the rise of generics in the U.S.
market is significantly reshaping the pattern of global drug development efforts. We need to know if this
is pushing that pattern closer to or further away from the social optimum. As is usually the case in
economic research, much remains to be done.

projects that are currently inaccessible to the global pharmaceutical industry. Meanwhile, the existing regulatory
regime induces them to spend billions on extremely complex, large-molecule therapies whose full interaction with
the human body is imperfectly understood, and where the rate of failure in clinical trials is correspondingly high.
See Higgins et al. (2014) and Roin (2014) for an explication of this idea and potential policy solutions.

30

References
Acemoglu, D. and Linn, J., 2004. Market size in innovation: Theory and evidence from the
pharmaceutical industry. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3), 1049-1090.
Aitken, M., Berndt, E., Cutler, D., 2009. Prescription drug spending trends in the U.S.: Looking beyond
the turning point. Health Affairs 28(1), 151-160.
Arcidiacono, P., Ellickson, P. B., Landry, P., Ridley, D. B., 2013. Pharmaceutical followers. International
Journal of Industrial Organization 31(5), 538-553.
Berndt, E., Mortimer, R., Bhattacharjya, A., Parece, A., Tuttle, E., 2007. Authorized generic drugs, price
competition and consumers’ welfare. Health Affairs 26(3), 790-799.
Berndt, E., Aitken, M., 2010. Brand loyalty, generic entry, and price competition in pharmaceuticals in
the quarter century after the 1984 Hatch-Waxman legislation. NBER Working Paper No. 16431.
Bokhari, F. A., Fournier, G. M. 2013. Entry in the ADHD drugs market: Welfare impact of generics and
me‐too's. The Journal of Industrial Economics 61(2), 339-392.
Branstetter, L., Chatterjee, C., Higgins, M. 2013. Regulation and welfare: Evidence from Paragraph IV
generic entry in the pharmaceutical industry. Revision of NBER working paper 17188.
Budish, E., Roin, B., Williams, H. 2013. Do fixed patent terms distort innovation? Evidence from cancer
clinical trials. NBER Working Paper 19340.
Caves, R., Whinston, M., Hurwitz, M., 1991. Patent expiration, entry and competition in the U.S.
pharmaceutical industry. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1-48.
Ceccagnoli, M., Graham, J., S., Higgins, J., M., Lee, J. 2010. Productivity and the role of complementary
assets in firms’ demand for technology innovations. Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(3), 839-869.
Chan, T., Nickerson, A., J, Owan, H. 2007. Strategic management of R&D pipelines with cospecialized
investments and technology markets. Management Science 53, 667–682.
Chiou, J., Magazzini, L., Pammoli, F., Riccaboni, M., 2012.The value of failure in pharmaceutical R&D.
Unpublished working paper, IMT Lucca EIC Working Paper Series 01.
Cleanthous, P., 2002. Patient welfare implications of innovation in the U.S. antidepressant market.
Unpublished working paper, New York University.
Cockburn, I. M. 2006. Is the pharmaceutical industry in a productivity crisis? in Innovation Policy and the
Economy, Jaffe, A. B., Lerner, J. & Stern, S. (eds), 7(1), 1–32, The MIT Press.
Cohen, W., 2010. Fifty Years of Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity and Performance. In Brownyn
H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg (ed.), Handbook in Economics of Innovation, North-Holland.
Cohen, W., Nelson, R., Walsh, J., 2002. Links and impacts: The influence of public research on industrial
R&D. Management Science 48(1), 1 – 23.

31

Congressional Budget Office, 1998. How increased competition from generic drugs has affected process
and returns in the pharmaceutical industry. Congressional Budget Office, The Congress of the United
Sates, http://www.cbo.gov.
DiMasi, J., Hansen, R., Grabowski, H., 1991. Cost of innovation in the pharmaceutical industry. Journal
of Health Economics 10(2), 151-185.
DiMasi, J., Hansen, R., Grabowski, H., 2003. The price of innovation: new estimation of drug
development costs. Journal of Health Economics 22, 151-185.
DiMasi, J. A., Grabowski, H. G., 2012. R&D costs and returns to new drug development: a review of the
evidence. Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development. March/April CSDD Impact Report. The
Oxford handbook of the economics of the biopharmaceutical industry. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
21-46.
Dunn, A. 2012. Drug innovations and welfare measures computed from market demand: The case of anticholesterol drugs. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(3), 167-189.
Ellickson, P., Stern, S., Trajtenberg, M. 2001. Patient welfare and patient compliance -An empirical
framework for measuring the benefits from pharmaceutical innovation. In Medical Care Output and
Productivity (pp. 539-564). University of Chicago Press.
Federal Trade Commission, 2002. Generic entry prior to patent expiration: FTC study. U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C., July.
Fuchs, Victor, 1982. Who Shall Live? Health, Economics, and Social Choice. Wiley, New York.
Furman, J.L., Kyle, K., M. Cockburn, I. Henderson, M., R. 2006. Public and private spillovers, location,
and the productivity of pharmaceutical research. NBER Working Paper Number 12509.
General Accounting Office, 2012. Research on Savings from Generic Drug Use. GAO-12371R.http://www.gao.gov/assets/590/588064.pdf
Gittelman, M., Kogut, B., 2003. Does good science lead to valuable knowledge? Biotechnology firms and
the evolutionary logic of citation patterns. Management Science 49 (4), 366–382.
Golec, J., Hegde, S., Vernon., M. J., 2010.Pharmaceutical R&D spending and threats of price regulation.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 239-264.
Grabowski, H., 2007. Competition between generic and branded drugs. In Pharmaceutical Innovation:
Incentives, Competition, and Cost-Benefit Analysis in International Perspective, Sloan, F., Hsieh, C.
(eds.), Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Grabowski, H., Kyle, M., 2007. Generic competition and market exclusivity periods in pharmaceuticals.
Managerial and Decision Economics 28, 491-502.
Hausman, J., Hall, H. B., Griliches, Z. 1984. Econometric models for count data with an application to the
patents-R&D relationship. Econometrica 52, 909-938.
Hausman, J., Lo, A., MacKinlay, C. 1992. An ordered probit analysis of transaction stock prices. Journal
of Financial Economics 34, 83-104.

32

Hemphill, S., Sampat, B., 2011. When do generics challenge drug patents. Journal of Empirical Legal
Studies 8(4), 619-649.
Hemphill, C., Sampat, B., 2012. Evergreening, patent challenges, and effective market life in
pharmaceuticals. Journal of Health Economics, 327-341.
Higgins, M.J., Graham, S., 2009. Balancing innovation and access: patent challenges tip the scales.
Science 326, 370-372.
Higgins, M.J., Thursby, J., Thursby, M., 2014. Bench-to-bench bottlenecks in translation. Science
Translational Medicine 6, 250fs32.
Hughes, J., Moore, M., Snyder, E., 2002. Napsterizing pharmaceuticals: Access, innovation and consumer
welfare. NBER Working Paper No. 9229.
Knowles, S., 2010. Fixing the legal framework for pharmaceutical research. Science 327, 1083-1084.
Lichtenberg, F. R. 2001. The benefits and costs of newer drugs: Evidence from the 1996 medical
expenditure panel survey. NBER Working paper 8147.
Lichtenberg, F. R. 2004. Public policy and innovation in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry. In: HoltzEakin, D., Rosen, H. (eds), Entrepreneurship and Public Policy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Lichtenberg, F. R. 2007. The impact of new drug launches on U.S. longevity and medical expenditure.
American Economic Review 97, 438-441.
Mansfield, E. 1995. Academic research underlying industrial innovation: Sources, characteristics and
financing. Review of Economics and Statistics 77, 55-65.
Mossinghoff, G., 1999. Overview of Hatch-Waxman act and its impact on the drug development process.
Food and Drug Law Journal 54(2), 187-194.
New York Times, 1989. The Generic Drug Scandal. October 2, 1989.
Nordhaus, D., William. 1999. The health of nations: The contribution of improved health to living
standards. NBER working paper 8818, accessed at http://nordhaus.econ.yale.edu/health_nber_w8818.pdf
Pammolli, F., Magazzini, L., Riccaboni, M., 2011.The productivity crisis in pharmaceutical R&D. Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 10, 428-438.
Panattoni, L., 2011. The effect of Paragraph IV decisions and generic entry before patent expiration on
brand pharmaceutical firms. Journal of Health Economics 30, 126-145.
Reiffen, D., Ward, M., 2005. Generic drug industry dynamics. Review of Economics and Statistics 87,
37-49.
Roin, B., 2014. Solving the problem of new uses. Michigan State Law Review, forthcoming.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2337821.
Saha, A., Grabowski, H., Birnbaum, H., Greenberg, P., Bizen, O., 2006. Generic competition in the US
pharmaceutical industry. International Journal of the Economics of Business 13, 15-38
33

Scherer, F. M., 2010. Pharmaceutical Innovation. In Brownyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg (ed.),
Handbook in Economics of Innovation, North-Holland.
Teece, D.J. 1986. Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing and public policy, Research Policy 15, 286-305.
Trusheim, M., Aitken, M., Berndt, E., 2010. Characterizing markets for biopharmaceutical innovations:
Do biologics differ from small molecules? Forum for Health Economics and Policy 13(1), 1-43.
Wong, G., 2009. Biotech scientists bank on big pharma’s biologics push. Nature Biotechnology 27, 293295.
Wooldridge, J., 1999. Distribution-free estimation of some nonlinear panel data models. Journal of
Econometrics 90(1), 77-97.

34

FIGURE 1. EARLY-STAGE INNOVATIONS, 1998-2010. This figure tracks the aggregate flow of early-stage
pharmaceutical innovations, defined as the annual count of compounds at the preclinical stage or in Phase
1 clinical trials. We provide annual aggregate counts for our sample firms (solid line) and for the entire
population (dotted line) of compounds contained in the Pharmaprojects database. Over our time period,
1998-2010, the number of early-stage innovations, including both small- and large-molecules, has
increased. Our sample closely tracks the population, with differences being explained by our sample
restrictions. Recall, firms must have at least one approved product and one early-stage innovation in order
to be incorporated into our sample.

7,000

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

35

FIGURE 2. EXCLUSIVITIES AND INNOVATION IN PHARMACEUTICALS. This figure illustrates the two
types of protection conferred on new drugs. When a new drug is approved by the FDA, the first five year
period (seven years for orphan drugs and 5 ½ years for pediatric drugs) carries with it a regulatory
protection called ‘data exclusivity’ that runs concurrent with underlying patent protection. Data
exclusivity protects the underlying clinical data. The FDA will approve no generics during data
exclusivity, regardless of whether the innovator has patents in force. At the conclusion of data exclusivity
a drug is protected only by its patents until they expire or are successfully challenged, a period termed
‘market exclusivity’. Para-IV challenges occur only during the market exclusivity period. Note that
patents are generally applied for and granted well before drugs are approved by the FDA.

36

FIGURE 3. ANDA PATENT CERTIFICATION OPTIONS FOR GENERIC MANUFACTURERS.
Generic entry in the U.S. market can occur in through one of four regulatory pathways, each denoted by
the number of the paragraph in the Hatch-Waxman Act that defines them. Paragraph I, Paragraph II, and
Paragraph III are used by generic manufacturers for drugs whose patents are either not listed in the FDA
Orange Book or for those patents that have expired (or will expire). Paragraph IV is the only pathway that
facilitates generic entry before the expiry of patents. Source: FTC (2002).

Certification

Requirement

Outcome

Required patent
information has not been
filed

FDA may approve ANDA
immediately; one or more
generic applicant may
enter

Paragraph II:

Patent has expired

FDA may approve ANDA
immediately; one or more
generic applicant may
enter

Paragraph III:

Patent has not yet expired
but will expire on a
particular day

FDA may approve ANDA
effective on the date the
patent expires; one or
more generic applicant
may enter

Patent is invalid or is noninfringed by generic
applicant

Generic applicant
provides notice to the
patent holder and NDA
filer. Entry by the firstfiler may or may not
occur.

Paragraph I:

Paragraph IV:

37

FIGURE 4. RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION TO TOTAL INNOVATIONS ACROSS THERAPEUTIC CATEGORIES

2010

ATC A

2009

ATC B

2008

ATC C
ATC D

2007

ATC F

2006

ATC G

2005

ATC H
ATC I

2004

ATC J

2003

ATC K
ATC M

2002

ATC N
2001

ATC P
ATC R

2000

ATC S

1999

ATC T
1998

ATC V
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

38

TABLE 1. VARIABLE DEFINITION AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

VARIABLES

SOURCE

OBS

MEAN

S. DEV .

MIN

MAX

Early stage innovations:Count of early stage pipeline (preclinical + phase 1) at i, j, t level.

Pharmaprojects

29,486

0.78

1.81

0

36

Gijt-1

Generic penetration, baseline measure: Ratio of generic sales
to sum of focal firm and generic sales at i, j, t-1 level.

IMS MIDAS™

29,486

0.54

.46

0

1

Gjt-1Mijt-1

Generic penetration alternative: Ratio of generic sales to
total sales at j, t-1 level multiplied by the ratio of firm i sales
in j at time t-1 to total firm i sales in all markets at time t-1.

IMS MIDAS™

29,486

0.54

.46

0

1

Vjt+2

Expected market value: Logarithm of total sales in market j
averaged over years t, t+1, and t+2.

IMS MIDAS™

29,486

13.05

3.82

0

16.79

Ojt-1

Technological opportunity: Logarithm of stock of citationweighted articles in year t-1 for jth therapeutic market.

IMS NDTI™& MIDAS™,
PubMed and
SCOPUSSciverse

29,486

8.09

7.30

0

17.9

Zijt-1

Technological challenges: Counts of suspended or
discontinued pipeline projects and withdrawn approved
products at i, j, t-1 level.

Pharmaprojects

29,486

0.05

0.26

0

6

Dijt-1

Firm innovative capability I: Moving average of product
introductions in t-1, t-2, t-3 at the i, j, t-1 level.

Pharmaprojects

29,486

0.24

1.01

0

25.67

Pijt-1

Firm innovative capability II: Count of Phase II and Phase
III products at the i, j, t-1 level.

Pharmaprojects

29,486

0.09

0.35

0

6

SAijt

Downstream co-specialized assets: Ratio of promotions at
the i,j, t level and total pharmaceutical sales at the i, j, t level.

IMS MIDAS™

29,486

0.45

19.36

0

2225

Sit

Firm size: Logarithm of total pharmaceutical sales at the i, t
level.

IMS MIDAS™

29,486

12.64

4.45

0

17.23

Iijt

DEFINITION

39

TABLE 2. FLOW OF INNOVATION: POISSON REGRESSION

MODEL 1

MODEL 2

MODEL 3

MODEL 4

MODEL 5

MODEL 6

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

-1.638***
(0.116)

-1.368***
(0.135)

-1.354***
(0.135)

Gijt-1
Gjt-1Mijt-1

-5.446***
(1.199)

Ojt-1

0.023***
(0.005)

0.005
(0.004)

0.045***
(0.004)

0.046***
(0.004)

0.026***
(0.005)

Zijt-1

0.383***
(0.031)

0.447***
(0.029)

0.355***
(0.026)

0.357***
(0.024)

0.388***
(0.027)

Vjt+2

-0.046***
(0.012)

-0.074***
(0.011)

0.007***
(0.005)

-0.071***
(0.011)

-0.074***
(0.011)

-0.083***
(0.012)

Dijt-1

0.110***
(0.010)

0.123***
(0.0106)

0.088***
(0.013)

0.110***
(0.009)

0.114***
(0.008)

0.128***
(0.009)

Pijt-1

0.244***
(0.044)

0.134***
(0.036)

0.241***
(0.050)

0.127***
(0.033)

0.136***
(0.035)

0.141***
(0.037)

SAijt

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.003
(0.003)

Sit

0.010*
(0.006)

0.012**
(0.006)

0.019**
(0.008)

0.020***
(0.008)

0.020**
(0.008)

0.013**
(0.006)

Firm FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

ATC1 FE

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

(Year*ATC1) FE

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

N
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
Notes: Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by firm) are reported. ATC is defined as anatomical therapeutic
chemical classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

40

TABLE 3. FLOW OF INNOVATION : NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSION
MODEL 1

MODEL 2

MODEL 3

MODEL 4

MODEL 5

MODEL 6

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

-1.745***
(0.104)

-1.471***
(0.113)

-1.458***
(0.113)

Gijt-1
Gjt-1Mijt-1

-6.422***
(1.076)

Ojt-1

0.017***
(0.005)

0.015***
(0.004)

0.044***
(0.004)

0.044***
(0.004)

0.019***
(0.005)

Zijt-1

0.649***
(0.032)

0.674***
(0.038)

0.568***
(0.031)

0.566***
(0.031)

0.644***
(0.032)

Vjt+2

-0.026**
(0.011)

-0.057***
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.054***
(0.010)

-0.056***
(0.010)

-0.065***
(0.012)

Dijt-1

0.229***
(0.032)

0.213***
(0.030)

0.207***
(0.036)

0.179***
(0.025)

0.178***
(0.025)

0.214***
(0.029)

Pijt-1

0.200***
(0.041)

0.122***
(0.042)

0.276***
(0.055)

0.101**
(0.039)

0.102***
(0.040)

0.125***
(0.043)

SAijt

-0.005
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.005
(0.004)

Sit

0.001
(0.007)

0.005
(0.007)

0.011
(0.008)

0.014*
(0.008)

0.014*
(0.008)

0.007
(0.007)

Firm FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

ATC1 FE

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

(Year*ATC1) FE

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
N
Notes: Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by firm) are reported. ATC is defined as anatomical therapeutic
chemical classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

41

TABLE 4. FLOW OF INNOVATION , LOW CMS MARKETS: NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSIONS

MODEL 1
Iijt

MODEL 2
Iijt

MODEL 3
Iijt

MODEL 4
Iijt

MODEL 5
Iijt

-4.967
(8.108)

2.619
(3.523)

-0.146
(0.271)

Gijt-1

Gjt-1Mijt-1
0.376**
(0.145)

0.383***
(0.147)

0.370***
(0.131)

0.370***
(0.145)

0.266**
(0.075)

0.265***
(0.076)

0.575***
(0.114)

0.263***
(0.077)

0.880***
(0.201)

-0.217
(0.280)

-0.222
(0.283)

-0.056
(0.261)

-0.166
(0.279)

0.169***
(0.029)

0.132***
(0.03)

0.125***
(0.028)

0.443***
(0.124)

0.127***
(0.031)

-0.009
(0.108)

-0.056
(0.102)

-0.046
(0.101)

0.209
(0.174)

-0.064
(0.106)

-0.279
(0.567)

-0.107
(0.513)

-0.025
(0.503)

-0.245
(0.265)

-0.108
(0.511)

Sit

0.002
(0.028)

0.017
(0.025)

0.022
(0.027)

0.052*
(0.031)

0.014
(0.023)

Firm FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

1,577

1,577

1,577

1,577

1,577

Ojt-1

Zijt-1
Vjt+2

Dijt-1
Pijt-1

SAijt

Notes: Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by firm) are reported. Low cross-molecular substitution (CMS)
markets include three neurology markets: N3 (anti-epileptics), N5 (psycholeptics) and N6 (psychoanaleptics). Since
these three sub-markets are included in ATC N, we exclude 1-digit ATC fixed effects from these specifications. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

42

TABLE 5. FLOW OF INNOVATION : ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

Gijt-1

MODEL 1

MODEL 2

MODEL 3

MODEL 4

MODEL 5

MODEL 6

NEG BN

NEG BN

NEG BN

NEG BN

OLS

OLS

Novel Iijt

Novel Iijt

Late Stage
Iijt

Late Stage
Iijt

Iijt

Iijt

-0.821***
(0.023)

0.175
(0.176)
-6.222***
(2.034)

Gjt-1Mijt-1

-0.583***
(0.071)
0.497
(2.685)

0.048***
(0.011)

0.036***
(0.013)

-0.001
(0.010)

0.011
(0.010)

Zijt-1

0.355***
(0.055)

0.406***
(0.056)

0.319***
(0.029)

0.476***
(0.035)

Vjt+2

-0.168***
(0.032)

-0.185***
(0.043)

-0.004
(0.016)

-0.0155
(0.021)

0.097***
(0.018)

0.120***
(0.021)

0.120***
(0.020)

0.195***
(0.027)

0.036
(0.071)

0.049
(0.010)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.003)

0.013
(0.016)

Sit

0.004
(0.010)

-0.004
(0.009)

Firm FE

Y

Year FE

Ojt-1

-0.909***
(0.267)

1.505***
(0.179)

1.532***
(0.174)

0.364***
(0.042)

0.371***
(0.042)

0.478***
(0.126)

0.501***
(0.125)

-0.015**
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.012
(0.009)

-0.016
(0.011)

0.009
(0.011)

0.010
(0.010)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

ATC1 FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

ATC2 FE

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

(Year*ATC1) FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

(Year*ATC2) FE

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

Dijt-1
Pijt-1

SAijt

29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
N
Notes: Models 1 – 4 report results from negative binomial fixed effects regressions and include 1-digit ATC fixed
effects. Models 5 and 6 report results from OLS regressions with 2-digit ATC fixed effects and year*ATC2
interaction terms (Y*). Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by firm) are reported. ATC is defined as
anatomical therapeutic chemical classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
43

TABLE 6. SHIFT FROM CHEMICAL-BASED TO BIOLOGIC-BASED DRUGS

Gijt-1

MODEL 1

MODEL 2

MODEL 3

MODEL 4

MODEL 5

OLOGIT

OLOGIT

OLOGIT

OLS

OLS

cat(CIijt-BIijt)

cat(CIijt-BIijt)

cat(CIijt-BIijt)

cat(CIijt-BIijt)

cat(CIijt-BIijt)

-1.818***
(0.048)

-1.824***
(0.048)

-0.332***
(0.021)
-3.880***
(0.294)

Gjt-1Mijt-1

-0.713***
(0.117)

0.029***
(0.003)

0.032***
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

0.006***
(0.001)

0.002
(0.001)

diff(Zijt-1)

2.426***
(0.203)

2.445***
(0.204)

2.50***
(0.193)

0.174***
(0.029)

0.194***
(0.031)

Vjt+2

-0.056***
(0.014)

-0.065***
(0.014)

-0.087***
(0.014)

-0.013***
(0.004)

-0.017***
(0.004)

0.778***
(0.056)

0.781***
(0.057)

0.787***
(0.057)

0.063***
(0.010)

0.064***
(0.011)

1.871***
(0.065)

1.877***
(0.066)

2.006***
(0.061)

0.209***
(0.018)

0.226***
(0.019)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

Sit

0.020*
(0.011)

0.023**
(0.011)

0.022**
(0.011)

0.002
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

Firm FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

ATC1 FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

(Year*ATC1) FE

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Ojt-1

diff(Dijt-1)
diff(Pijt-1)

diff(SAijt)

N
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
Notes: Models 1-3 report results from ordered logit regressions. Models 4 and 5 report results from OLS regressions.
Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by firm) are reported. ATC is defined as anatomical therapeutic chemical
classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

44

TABLE 7. SHIFT FROM CHEMICAL-BASED TO BIOLOGIC-BASED DRUGS: SUR REGRESSION

MODEL 1
cat(CIijt-BIijt)
CIijt

BIijt

-0.587***
(0.021)

0.042***
(0.017)

0.023***
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

Zijt-1

1.307***
(0.028)

0.404***
(0.023)

Vjt+2

-0.046***
(0.005)

-0.023***
(0.004)

0.209***
(0.007)

0.169***
(0.006)

0.130***
(0.021)

0.494***
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

Sit

0.008**
(0.004)

0.001
(0.003)

Firm FE

Y

Y

Year FE

Y

Y

ATC1 FE

Y

Y

(Year*ATC1) FE

Y

Y

Gijt-1

Ojt-1

Dijt-1
Pijt-1

SAijt

N
29,486
29,486
Notes: Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by firm) are reported. ATC is defined as
anatomical therapeutic chemical classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

45

APPENDIX TABLE A1. FLOW OF INNOVATION : POISSON REGRESSION

MODEL 1
Iijt

MODEL 2
Iijt

Gijt-1
Gjt-1Mijt-1
Ojt-1
Zijt-1
Dijt-1
Pijt-1
SAijt
Sit
Vjt+2

0.110***
(0.0209)
0.244***
(0.0767)
-0.00239
(0.00433)
0.0101**
(0.00399)
-0.0455
(0.0604)

0.0234
(0.0174)
0.383***
(0.104)
0.123***
(0.0175)
0.134*
(0.0720)
-0.00239
(0.00422)
0.0124**
(0.00517)
-0.0740
(0.0618)

MODEL 3
Iijt

MODEL 4
Iijt

MODEL 5
Iijt

-1.638***
(0.304)

-1.368***
(0.251)

-1.354***
(0.249)

0.00495
(0.0171)
0.447***
(0.0890)
0.0880***
(0.0223)
0.241**
(0.0978)
-0.000699
(0.00211)
0.0192**
(0.00753)
0.00734
(0.0242)

0.0453***
(0.0131)
0.355***
(0.0882)
0.110***
(0.0163)
0.127*
(0.0721)
-0.000624
(0.00165)
0.0202***
(0.00616)
-0.0710
(0.0569)

0.0456***
(0.0132)
0.357***
(0.0893)
0.114***
(0.0175)
0.136*
(0.0720)
-0.000572
(0.00167)
0.0199***
(0.00622)
-0.0744
(0.0585)

MODEL 6
Iijt

-5.446***
(1.283)
0.0256
(0.0170)
0.388***
(0.106)
0.128***
(0.0198)
0.141**
(0.0702)
-0.00256
(0.00468)
0.0134**
(0.00560)
-0.0829
(0.0632)

Firm FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
ATC1 FE
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
(ATC1*Year) FE
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
Notes: Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by ATC) are reported. ATC is defined as anatomical therapeutic
chemical classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

46

APPENDIX TABLE A2. FLOW OF INNOVATION : NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSION

MODEL 1
Iijt

MODEL 2
Iijt

Gijt-1
Gjt-1Mijt-1
Ojt-1
Zijt-1
Dijt-1
Pijt-1
SAijt
Sit
Vjt+2

0.229***
(0.0568)
0.200*
(0.102)
-0.00463
(0.00499)
0.000849
(0.00420)
-0.0264
(0.0572)

0.0167
(0.0158)
0.649***
(0.0976)
0.213***
(0.0526)
0.122
(0.0953)
-0.00434
(0.00487)
0.00470
(0.00428)
-0.0566
(0.0508)

MODEL 3
Iijt

MODEL 4
Iijt

MODEL 5
Iijt

-1.745***
(0.265)

-1.471***
(0.230)

-1.458***
(0.230)

0.0146
(0.0150)
0.674***
(0.0733)
0.207***
(0.0583)
0.276**
(0.130)
-0.00139
(0.00237)
0.0114*
(0.00677)
-0.00226
(0.0237)

0.0437***
(0.0116)
0.568***
(0.0786)
0.179***
(0.0433)
0.101
(0.0975)
-0.00158
(0.00242)
0.0143**
(0.00610)
-0.0543
(0.0474)

0.0436***
(0.0119)
0.566***
(0.0796)
0.178***
(0.0425)
0.102
(0.0959)
-0.00150
(0.00241)
0.0140**
(0.00619)
-0.0563
(0.0518)

MODEL 6
Iijt

-6.422***
(1.299)
0.0188
(0.0156)
0.644***
(0.0966)
0.214***
(0.0523)
0.125
(0.0933)
-0.00459
(0.00523)
0.00698
(0.00446)
-0.0647
(0.0552)

Firm FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
ATC1 FE
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
(ATC1*Year) FE
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
29,486
Notes: Coefficients and clustered standard errors (by ATC) are reported. ATC is defined as anatomical therapeutic
chemical classification. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

47

