                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INSURANCE MARKETS FOR THE ELDERLY

                                           Hanming Fang

                                        Working Paper 20549
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20549


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




This paper is prepared for Handbook of the Economics of Population Ageing, edited by John Piggott
and Alan Woodland. I would like to thank David Bloom, Olivia Mitchell, Edward Norton, and especially
two anonymous reviewers and the editors (John Piggott and Alan Woodland), as well as participants
in the Harvard-CEPAR Conference for the Handbook contributors for useful comments. I also like
to thank my coauthors, Naoki Aizawa, Alessandro Gavazza, Edward Kung, Michael P. Keane and
Dan Silverman, whose collaboration led me to better understand the issues discussed in this chapter.
Junwen (Caroline) Liu provided capable research assistance on the preparation of this manuscript.
I gratefully acknowledge the financial support from NSF Grant SES-0844845. All remaining errors
are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hanming Fang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Insurance Markets for the Elderly
Hanming Fang
NBER Working Paper No. 20549
October 2014
JEL No. D14,G22,H51,H55,I13

                                            ABSTRACT

We describe the risks faced by the ageing population and survey the corresponding insurance markets
for these risks. We focus on income risk, health expenditure risk, long-term care expenditure risk and
mortality risk. We also discuss the interactions between social insurance and private insurance markets.


Hanming Fang
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                                                           2

2 Risks Faced by the Elderly                                                                                                                              4
  2.1 Income Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
  2.2 Health and Health Expenditure Risks        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  2.3 Longevity/Mortality Uncertainty . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
  2.4 Morbidity/Long Term Care Risks . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12

3 Insurance Markets                                                                                                                                      13
  3.1 Health Insurance Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
      3.1.1 U.S. Health Insurance System for the Elderly . . . . . . . . .                                           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
      3.1.2 Health Insurance Reform in the United States . . . . . . . . .                                           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
      3.1.3 Health Insurance System in Other OECD Countries . . . . .                                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
  3.2 Annuity Insurance Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
      3.2.1 Theory of the Demand of Annuities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
      3.2.2 Under-Annuitization Puzzle and its Solutions? . . . . . . . .                                            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
      3.2.3 Reverse Mortgage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
  3.3 Life Insurance Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   29
      3.3.1 Front-Loaded Premiums and Reclassification Risk Insurance .                                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31
      3.3.2 Life Settlement Market and its Welfare Effects . . . . . . . .                                           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   33
      3.3.3 Why Do Life Insurance Policyholders Lapse? . . . . . . . . .                                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   35
  3.4 Long Term Care Insurance Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   36
      3.4.1 Basic Facts of Long Term Care Arrangements . . . . . . . . .                                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   37
      3.4.2 Why is Private LTC Insurance Market So Small? . . . . . . .                                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   38

4 Interactions between Social Insurance and Private Insurance Programs                                                                                   40
  4.1 Medicaid and Long Term Care Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                      .   .   .   .   40
  4.2 Medicare and Private Health Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                  .   .   .   .   42
       4.2.1 Medicare and Medigap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                  .   .   .   .   42
       4.2.2 Medicare and Medicare Advantage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                     .   .   .   .   43
       4.2.3 Medicare and Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance . . . . . . . . . .                                                        .   .   .   .   44
       4.2.4 Medicaid and Medicaid Managed Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                      .   .   .   .   45

5 Summary and Directions for Future Research                                                                                                             45

6 Tables                                                                                                                                                 63

7 Figures                                                                                                                                                71
1    Introduction
    Many nations, including almost all of the industrialized countries, are facing challenges from
several demographic developments. First, the baby boomer generation, the large cohort born within
two decades after World War II, is approaching retirement and old age. Second, fertility rates have
fallen in most countries. Third, mortality rates have also been falling, and life expectancies have
been rising. These demographic trends will lead to a significant increase of both the number and
fraction of the old population (those older than 65) and the very old population (those older than
85). Table 1 shows the number and percentage of the U.S. population that are respectively aged 65
and over and 85 and over. It shows that the percentage of the population aged 65 and over in the
U.S. has risen from about 8% in 1950 to 13% in 2010, and is expected to further increase to close
to 20% in the coming decades. Moreover, average life expectancies for men and women at age 65
have both been rising over time, which leads to an increasing proportion of the oldest-old (age 85
and over). Table 1 shows that the percentage of population age 85 and over has risen substantially
from 0.4% in 1950 to 1.8% in 2010 and is projected to increase to 4.3% in 2050.

                                    [Insert Table 1 About Here]

   The trend of population ageing is by no means unique to the U.S. In fact, the U.S. is relatively
young compared with Europe and Japan. Table 2 shows, according to United Nations Population
Prospects (2012), the percentage of the population aged 65 and over in 2010, and projected to 2030
and 2050. It shows that while Europe and Japan are currently the oldest, several Asian countries
and regions will join the ranks of the oldest by 2030.

                                    [Insert Table 2 About Here]
                                    [Insert Table 3 About Here]

    The increasing percentage of the elderly in the population will raise the dependency ratio (see
Table 3 for selected OECD countries) and impose significant strains on the financing of social
insurance programs, e.g. the U.S. Social Security system and the Medicare program (which is the
government-provided medical insurance program for the retirees in the U.S.), that most of the
retirees rely on. Figure 1 plots the sources of income for married couples and non-married persons
aged 65 and over. It shows that since the early 1960s, Social Security has provided the largest share
of the total income for older Americans at around 40%. It also shows that the share of income from
pension withdrawals increased rapidly in the 1960s and 1970s to a peak in 1992, but has fluctuated
since then at about a fifth of aggregate income. The share of income from assets peaked in the mid-
1980s and has generally declined since then. The share from earnings has had the opposite pattern
– declining until the mid-1980s and generally increasing since then. In 2010, the aggregate income
for the population aged 65 and over came largely from four sources: Social Security accounted for
37 percent, earnings 30 percent, pensions 19 percent, and asset incomes 11 percent. Given rising
elderly dependency ratio, projected for the U.S. to be 29% in 2025, surveys have shown that there
are serious concerns among baby-boomer generations regarding the sustainable benefit generosity

                                                 2
of Social Security when they retire (see Bernheim and Levin, 1989; Bottazzi et al., 2006; Dominitz
and Manski, 2006; and Delavande and Rohwedder, 2010 for survey evidence).1, 2

                                          [Insert Figure 1 About Here]

    What Figure 1 does not show is that retired households face a substantial drop in their income
upon retirement. While it is true the assets for the average household tend to peak at retirement,
most assets are subject to significant rates of return risks (see Section 2.1 below). In fact, the
elderly also face a multitude of other risks related to their health care expenditures, long term care
expenditures and their longevity, among others (see Section 2).
    When there are risks, there is scope for insurance to protect individuals against the risks. Given
the retirees’ diminishing (over age) earnings capacity, and the increasing risks (again over age) they
expect to face, insurance is of uttermost importance for the welfare of the elderly. Indeed, most
of the developed economies have instituted a variety of government-administered social insurance
programs, for example, Social Security programs as a form of public annuity and Medicare as
retirees’ health insurance, etc. However, it is unlikely that public insurance will meet all of the
insurance needs of the retirees, thus the retirees may still have to think about the costs and benefits
of purchasing additional insurance from private insurance markets. Of course, retirees may also
be insured through informal insurance, including self-insurance (i.e. savings) and transfers from
relatives and children.3
    While the details differ in terms of how each of the insurance products we describe below
impacts individuals’ welfare, the basic economics for the value of insurance to hedge against the
risks is common to all and is very simple. Consider the simplest case where the relevant risk is
related to the out-of-pocket health expenditures, which will then impact the individuals’ level of
consumption. Consumers are risk averse in the sense that their preferences can be represented by a
strictly concave utility function u (c) where c is level of consumption, and is given by c = y − ẽ where
y is the income and ẽ is the random out-of-pocket medical expenditures drawn from a distribution
f (e) with mean Eẽ = µe . Suppose that if the consumer purchases a health insurance at premium
p, her out-of-pocket medical expenditure is reduced to 0. Her expected utility from purchasing the
insurance is simply u (y − p) , while her expected utility without insurance is Eu (y − ẽ) . If the
insurance premium p is actuarially fair, i.e., if p = Eẽ, then we know from Jensen’s inequality that
   1
     In the most annual report, the U.S. Social Security and Medicare Boards of Trustees (2014) projected
that, under the current Social Security and Medicare benefits and tax rules, the Treasury would start to re-
deem the Social Security trust fund asset reserves from 2019 and the trust fund reserves would be depleted
in 2033, from when the tax income would be sufficient to pay about three-quarters of scheduled benefits (see
http://www.ssa.gov/oact/tr/2014/index.html).
   2
     See also Auerbach et al. (1989) for a quantitative analysis of the sustainability of Social Security system in a
computable dynamic general equilibrium model with an ageing popultion.
   3
     We will focus on formal private and public insurance in this Chapter, but clearly self-insurance via precautionary
saving and informal insurance via family support are both important components of individuals” strategy to deal
with risks in retirement. See Attanasio, Kitao and Weber (2014, Chapter 4 of this Handbook) for a focused discussion
of consumption and saving.



                                                          3
u (y − p) > Eu (y − ẽ) ; that is, the consumer is strictly better off by purchasing an actuarially fair
insurance than without.4 In essence, the welfare gain from actuarially fair insurance is obtained
by transferring resources from states with low marginal utility of consumption (i.e., states without
losses) to states with high marginal utility of consumption (i.e., states with losses).
    While the above simple example illustrates the potential source of welfare gains from owning
insurance, the reality for the elderly is a lot more complicated. First, the risks the elderly face are
multi-dimensional, including health expenditure risks, income risks, mortality risks and long-term
care expenditure risks, to name the most important ones. Second, the distributions of the risks are
often affected by their own behavior; for example, health expenditure risks may depend on prior
health investment, and income risks are affected by their retirement portfolio choices and labor
supply decisions. Third, insurance markets are often subject to adverse selection and other forms
of market failure (Arrow, 1963; Akerlof, 1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). Fourth, individuals’
demand for and benefits from purchasing private insurance are often impacted by social insurance,
leading to important and interesting interactions between public and private insurance markets,
both on the demand and supply sides.
    The remainder of this Chapter is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the ma-
jor risks that the elderly face, including income risks, health risks, longevity/mortality risks, and
morbidity/long-term care expenditure risks. In Section 3, we describe a variety of insurance prod-
ucts, offered either via the private markets or via government-administered programs, and the main
theoretical and empirical findings regarding the workings of these insurance markets. In Section 4
we discuss the literature on the interaction between social insurance program and the correspond-
ing private insurance markets. Finally in Section 5 we conclude and discuss directions for future
research. We would like to point out upfront that most of the literature we review in this Chapter
is about the U.S. experience, though when appropriate also have some discussions about evidence
from other OECD countries.


2       Risks Faced by the Elderly
   In this section, we describe the multitude of risks the elderly faces. We focus on income risks,
health and health expenditure risks, longevity/mortality risks, and morbidity/long-term care ex-
penditure risks.

2.1     Income Risks
    The income risks the elderly face can originate from a variety of sources. To the extent that
the elderly still work, they face job displacement risks and labor income risks. But they also face
risks in investment income, housing equity and other pension incomes.
    This simple argument assumes that the marginal utility of consumption u0 (·) does not depend on health status.
    4

Also, self-insurance tends to complicate the welfare gains from insurance, though it is well-known that saving is an
imperfect substitute of insurance (see, e.g., Baily, 1978).




                                                         4
    An ever-growing fraction of elderly workers still participate in the labor force. According to
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012a), the labor force participation rates for Americans aged 65 and
over have been steadily increasing since 1990s, a reversal of the long-standing prior trend toward
ever-earlier retirement. The labor force participation rate for men aged 65 and over has increased
from 16.3% in 1990 to 22.1% in 2010 and is projected to increase further to 26.7% in 2020. Similarly,
the labor force participation rate for women aged 65 and over has increased from 8.6% in 1990 to
13.8% in 2010 and is projected to be 19.2% in 2020. The increase in labor force participation
rates also applies to even older population: the labor force participation rate for men (women,
respectively) aged 75 and over increased from 7.1% (2.7%, respectively) in 1990 to 10.4% (5.3%,
respectively) in 2010 and will further increase to 12.8% (8.0%) in 2020.5 Of course, the labor force
participation decision is endogenous, and working often constitutes an informal channel for the
elderly to cope with risks they face; moreover, rising life expectancy also contributes to the increase
in the labor force participation rates among those 65 and over.6

Job Displacement and Labor Income Risks. A very large literature documents the job
displacement rates for near-retirement age workers. Farber (2005) founds that the three-year job
displacement rate for the 50-64 age group averages around 9 to 10 percent for the two decades
from 1981 to 2003. There is evidence that older workers are less likely to become displaced from
their jobs than the younger workers. For example, Johnson and Mommaerts (2011), using Survey
of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data from 1996, 2001 and 2004, found that between
1996 and 2007 men aged 50 to 61 are 21% less likely (respectively, men aged 62 and older are 23%
less likely) than those aged 25 to 34 to become displaced from their jobs each month. A similar
pattern also applies to women. However, they pointed out that this is mainly driven by the tenure
with their employers, not by age. Once they held job tenure and other characteristics constant,
they found that older workers are just as likely as younger workers to lose their jobs. Similarly,
Munnell, Muldoon and Sass (2009), using data from Displaced Worker Survey over 1984-2006, found
that the difference in the displacement rates between younger (25-54) and older (55+) workers has
disappeared.
    There is also strong evidence that older workers have a harder time finding a job, if they are
displaced, than younger workers. Heidkamp, Corre and Horn (2010) reported that, according to
data from the Heldrich Center’s “No End in Sight” survey conducted in August 2009 of men and
women who had been unemployed at some point in the previous 12 months, only 14% respondents
who were above 55 had found new jobs as of March 2010 compared to 37% of the younger job
seekers. Two thirds of the older job seeks are still actively looking for work as compared to only
52% for the prime age group. Statistics from Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012b) showed that the
median duration of unemployment for those aged 55 to 64 is 33.4 weeks, as compared to 21 weeks
   5
    See Table 3 in Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012a).
   6
    Fries (1980) and recently, Cutler, Ghosh, and Landrum (2013) documented evidence for significant compression
of morbidity in the elderly U.S. population, suggesting that increases in life expectancy lead to increases in healthy
and productive lives.



                                                          5
for those aged 34-44 and 27.6 for those aged 45-54. Johnson and Mommaerts (2011) found that
displaced men aged 50 to 61 (respectively, men aged 62 and older) are 39% (respectively, 51%) less
likely to become reemployed each month than otherwise identical men aged 25 to 34. Johnson and
Kawachi (2007) examined older adults’ employment opportunities by studying job changes at ages
45 to 75 using data from the Health and Retirement Study. They found that many older workers
move to new occupations and industries when they switch jobs, often assuming positions that
involve less stress and physical effort, and they generally experience sharp hourly wage reductions
and often lose pension coverage and health benefits.
    Evidence also shows that older workers suffer from wage cuts in new jobs. Chan and Stevens
(2001) focused on workers above age 50 in the Health and Retirement Study 1992.7 They found
that among reemployed workers, half receive wages at least 19 percent below their pre-displacement
wages, and almost 25 percent see their wages halved. On the other hand, non-displaced workers
enjoy about 5 percent earnings growth between the waves. They found that six or more years
after displacement, earnings losses still range from 23% to 29%. Couch, Jolly and Placzek (2010),
using administrative earnings data from Connecticut unemployment insurance records, compared
the experience of workers who were impacted in a mass layoff with those who remained continu-
ously employed during the period of 1993-1998. They found that on average, six years after job
displacement due to mass layoffs, older workers’ earnings remain 26% below those of the compar-
ison group; workers aged 40 and above still have a 14% reduction in earnings while the reduction
in earnings is a more steep 37% for those aged 55 and above. Similarly, Johnson and Mommaerts
(2011) found that older displaced workers who find a job usually experience a sharp wage decline:
for those reemployed at age 50 to 61, the new median wage falls 20% below the old median wage
and the median wage fall is an even steeper 36% for people 62 or older.

Investment Income Risks. Because wealth accumulation typically takes place over individu-
als’ entire working life, elderly households have more assets on average than younger households.
Household wealth includes housing, various forms of financial assets, Social Security and pension
wealth. Poterba and Samwick (2001), using data from Survey of Consumer Finances, showed that
both the median and the mean household typically enters a period of fairly rapid accumulation of
financial assets when they are about thirty-four years old, and that median and mean holdings of
financial assets peak at about age fifty-eight and sixty-four, respectively. They also found interest-
ing life-cycle patterns of asset accumulation: as a percentage of total assets, financial assets show
a U-shaped pattern with age; specifically, they decline as households age, then begin to increase
at advanced ages. However, investment real estate and equity in privately held business display a
hump-shaped pattern, while owner-occupied housing does not decline at older ages. Also, Poterba
and Samwick (2001) found that, within financial assets, the percentage in bonds, particularly tax-
exempt bonds, significantly rise with age; but the portfolio share of all taxable equity exhibits a
rather flat age profile, suggesting that households do not necessarily follow the popular financial
  7
      See also Chan and Stevens (1999).




                                                  6
advice to switch from stocks to bonds as they approach retirement.8

                                              [Insert Figure 2 Here]

    To the extent that risky investments, including equity or bond holdings in either taxable or
tax-deferred accounts, are in the households’ financial portfolios, older individuals are thus more
exposed, at least in absolute magnitude, to the volatilities in the asset market than younger workers
(see Figure 2 for the series of S&P 500 index at the beginning of each month between 1970-2012). For
example, Vanguard Report (2008) showed that about 2/3 of retirees’ 401(k) portfolios are invested
in equities, and as a result stock market volatilities often would result in significant risks for older
workers’ financial wealth, with little time for the market to recover. In fact, Glover, Heathcote,
Krueger and Rios-Rull (2011), using 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances data, documented that the
average net worth is 1.9 times the average labor income for 20-29 year olds, while it is 21.1 times
for households age 70 or older. They revalued these portfolios using relevant market indices and
found that during the Great Recession people between ages 60 and 69 lose the most: $310,000 on
average, which is nearly four times their average annual income.9

Housing Wealth. In 1998, households aged 50 and older held over $24.8 trillion in net worth,
or 2.9 times the U.S. GDP for that year (Kopczuk and Lupton, 2007). Most of that wealth was
in the form of housing equity. At the household level, over 80 percent of households in their
fifties are homeowners. Housing wealth accounts for over 50 percent of household wealth among
homeowners, and it dominates other asset holdings for the majority of such households. Because
of the significance of housing wealth in the portfolio of the elderly, housing market volatilities also
contribute to the risks that the elderly face to the extent that they may be using housing equity
to finance their retirement (see Figure 3 for the S&P Case/Shiller home price indices from 1987
to 2013).10 In a series of papers, Venti and Wise (2001, 2004), using a variety of data sets, found
that as they age households do not seem too willing to use housing equity to support their general
non-housing consumption. They found that large reductions in home equity are typically associated
with the death of a spouse, retirement, or with other precipitating shocks. We will come back to
housing wealth and its potential role in insuring risks associated with retirement in Section 3.2.3
when we discuss reverse mortgages.

                                          [Insert Figure 3 About Here]
   8
     See also, Coile and Milligan (2009) for similar findings.
   9
     However, Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai (2010) focused on the early boomer population (aged 53-58) and
found a much smaller effect of the stock market decline on their wealth. Using Heatlh and Retirement Study data,
they reported that in 2006, those in their early to mid-fifties had only 15% of their total wealth in stocks, including
401(k) plans and IRAs.
  10
     Poterba, Venti and Wise (2011) also considered.the role of housing equity in the portfolios of retirement-age
households, and explores the extent to which households draw down housing equity and financial assets as they age.
They found that many households appear to treat housing equity and non-annuitized financial assets as “precautionary
savings.”



                                                          7
Decline of Defined Benefit Pension Plans. As shown in Figure 1, incomes from employer
pension plans constitutes an important source of retirement income. There are two main categories
of employer pension plans, the defined benefit plans (DB) and the defined contribution plans (DC).11
    In a DB pension plan, workers accrue a promise of a regular monthly payment from the date of
their retirement until their death, or, in some cases, until the death of their spouse. The promised
deferred life annuity is commonly based on a formula linked to an employee’s wage or salary and
years of tenure at the sponsoring firm. In contrast, in a DC pension plan, workers accrue funds in
individual accounts administered by the plan sponsor. The contributions of employees are typically
deducted directly from their pay and frequently some portion of these contributions is matched by
the employer. In contrast to a DB plan, it is the contributions rather than the benefit that is fixed
in a DC pension plan; the retirement income that will be provided is unknown in advance. The
pension benefit accumulated during the employee’s working career will depend on the contributions
made while working and the investment returns earned on the plan balances.
    DB and DC plans also differ in how several important risks are distributed between the employ-
ers and the employees. Under a DB plan, the employer bears the investment return risk associated
with the pension funds, and by promising a stream of annuity payments to the worker, bears the
worker’s longevity risk. In contrast, under a DC plan, the employee is fully responsible for the
investment return risk, as well as his/her own longevity risk.
    Traditional DB pension plans are gradually losing their dominance in the occupational pension
systems of many countries. Over the past few decades there has been a gradual shift towards DC
pensions and, in some countries, DC plans now account for the majority of invested assets in private
sector occupational pension plans. In 1983 more than 60 percent of U.S. workers had some kind of
defined benefit plan; today, it’s less than 20 percent.12 Using the Form 5500 Annual Report data
set, Figure 4 shows that in the United States, the total number of DB plans peaked around 1983
and has been steadily declining; in contrast, the number of DC plans has been steadily increasing
from 1975.13 Figure 5 shows that as a percentage of total number of employer pension plans, DB
plans have been steadily losing ground to DC plans: in 1975, about 32% of all employer pension
plans are DB plans, but in 2009 only 8% are DB plans. Notice that Figures 4 and 5 are in terms
of the number of employer pension plans un-weighted by the asset levels in each plan. Figure 6
shows the evolution of percentage share of pension assets in DB and DC plans respectively from
1975 till 2009, using data in the U.S. Flow of Funds Accounts. It shows that the share of assets in
DB plans has been steadily declining in the last 30 years.
    A number of explanations have been offered for the shift from DB to DC pension plans (see
Broadbent, Palumbo and Woodman, 2006). Increased workforce mobility associated with demo-
graphic and industrial changes appears to be an important driver of the shift away from DB pension
  11
     See Mitchell and Piggott (2014) in this volume for a detailed analysis of the economic aspects of occupational
pensions.
  12
     See Broadbent, Palumbo and Woodman (2006) for a detailed overview of the shift from DB to DC plans and the
associated implications for asset allocation and risk management.
  13
     The Form 5500 Annual Report is the primary source of information about the operations, funding and investments
of approximately 800,000 employer-sponsored retirement and benefit plans.


                                                        8
plans; all else being equal, mobile workers have less of a preference for DB pensions because tra-
ditional benefit formulas are “back-loaded”, favouring long-tenured employees, and because DB
benefits are not portable from one employer to another. Other factors that may have contributed
to the trend towards DC plans include: pension under-funding and its persistence due to a decline
in long-term interest rates; the move to more market-based accounting; increasing regulatory bur-
den; and the uncertainty and recognition of the effects of increased longevity on plan costs. It is
also linked to the regulatory and accounting reforms that are making these risks more transparent.
Since DC contributions can be fixed as a predictable share of payroll, migrating to a DC plan offers
employers a means of reducing balance sheet and earnings volatility at least over the long term.
    As employers shift their pension plans from defined benefits to defined contribution, the risks
and responsibilities associated with providing retirement income are increasingly shifted from the
employer to the employee (Munnell and Sunden, 2004; Friedberg and Webb, 2005). In terms of
responsibilities, the employee in a DC plan decides whether or not to participate, how much to
contribute, how to invest the assets, and how to withdraw the money at retirement. However,
Munnell and Sunden (2004) found that 26 percent of workers who are eligible do not participate;
less than 10 percent of those who do participate contribute the maximum; over half do not diversify
their investments, and almost none rebalance their portfolios in response to age or market returns;
many cash out when they change jobs; and most do not annuitize at retirement.

                                             [Insert Figure 4 About Here]
                                             [Insert Figure 5 About Here]
                                             [Insert Figure 6 About Here]

2.2      Health and Health Expenditure Risks
    Older age is often accompanied by increased risk of certain diseases and disorders. Large
proportions of older Americans report a variety of chronic health conditions such as hypertension
and arthritis. According to Older Americans (2012), in 2009-2010, 38 percent of people aged 65 and
over were obese, compared with 22 percent in 1988-1994; and total health care costs (including both
out-of-pocket costs and costs covered by insurance) increased significantly among older Americans
from $9,850 in 1992 to $15,709 in 2008 (in 2008 constant dollars). From 1977 to 2009, the percentage
of household income that people aged 65 and over allocate to out-of-pocket spending for health
care services increased among those in the poor/near poor income category from 12 percent to 22
percent. French, De Nardi, Jones, Baker and Doctor (2006) found that death is often preceded by
a costly illness; out-of-pocket medical expenditures related to increased drug costs, doctor visits,
and hospital and nursing home stays go up by about 200 percent in the few years before death; and
that the increase in medical spending before death, combined with burial expenses, can explain
about 24 percent of the decline in assets of the soon-to-be deceased, and about 37 percent of the
decline in assets in the last year of life.14
 14
      See also Kelley et al. (2013) for similar findings.



                                                            9
    In the United States, the retirees are almost all covered by Medicare (see Section 3.1.1 below
for details). However, Medicare pays just over half of total health care costs; thus retirees are still
exposed to high out-of-pocket spending because it has substantial deductibles and cost sharing.15
For example, in 2012, Medicare Part A includes a deductible of $1,156 per hospitalization; for
hospital stays longer than 60 days, beneficiaries have cost sharing of $289 per day for days 61-90,
$578 per day for days 91-150, and receive no coverage after 150 days. For Part B, beneficiaries pay
a $140 deductible and 20% coinsurance per visit. There is also significant cost sharing and limited
coverage for skilled nursing. Even with supplemental insurance for medical and prescription drug
expenses, retirees face out-of-pocket expenses for cost-sharing obligations and for items or services
not covered by Medicare or supplemental coverage. And, of course, they are subject to pay for the
premiums for Medicare supplemental coverages. Hoffman and Jackson (2012) found that in 2006,
the major components of out-of-pocket spending were: premiums (39%); long-term care (19%);
medical providers and supplies (15%); prescription drugs (14%); dental (6%); and inpatient and
outpatient hospital costs (5%).
    A large literature investigates the mean total medical expenditures or the mean out-of-pocket
medical expenditure by age. Meara, White and Cutler (2004) used a combination of household
surveys and total spending data to analyze the trends in medical spending from 1963 to 2000.
They found that, during this nearly forty-year period, total medical spending grew fastest among
the elderly. Per person spending among the elderly grew rapidly from 1963 to 1987, but this
trend was then reversed during the next decade. In contrast, Norton, Wang and Stearns (2006)
focused on out-of-pocket health care expenditures paid by elderly Americans. Using data from
the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (1992–1998), they showed in Figure 7 reproduced from
their paper, that mean monthly out-of-pocket health care expenditures rise steadily as a function
of age, from $85 per month at age 66 to $485 per month at age 95. It also shows that the
increase in total out-of-pocket health care expenditures by age is driven almost entirely by long-
term care; other out-of-pocket expenditures such as primarily inpatient care, physician services, and
pharmaceuticals, are essentially independent of age. Figure 8 shows that the ratio of out-of-pocket
medical expenditure over income at different percentiles (25th, 50th, 75th and 90th) for different
ages. It shows an increasing range of out-of-pocket health care expenditure relative to income as
retirees get older. Marshall, McGarry and Skinner (2011) focused on the risk of out-of-pocket health
care expenditures at the end of life using HRS 1998-2006. They found substantial variations in
out-of-pocket expenditures near death, with the largest single category of the spending near death
being nursing home care.

                                        [Figure 7 About Here]
                                        [Figure 8 About Here]

   For individuals who are thinking about insurance choices, the more relevant risk is total health
care expenditure, not just the out-of-pocket expenditures given their current health insurance cover-
 15
    See Department of Health and Human Services, What are the Medicare Premiums and Coinsurance Rates for
2012, at http://answers.hhs.gov/questions/3006.


                                                   10
ages; this is particularly true due to the uncertainty about the funding and coverage of government-
provided health insurance programs. Figure 10 shows the variances of unpredictable medical ex-
penditures using data from Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) 2009. In constructing the
graph, total medical expenditure information in MEPS data is regressed on self-reported health
status, sex and gender, and the variance of the residual expenditures for each age is calculated
and plotted.16 Figure 10 shows that the variances of medical expenditures that can not be easily
predicted increase significantly after age 50.17

                                         [Insert Figure 10 About Here]

2.3    Longevity/Mortality Uncertainty
    Another important risk that the elderly face is their longevity/mortality risk. Mortality risk
is simply the risk that an individual will die at any age. Longevity risk is the risk that a retired
person will live significantly beyond her expected life span and thus run out of money for retirement.
These two risks are important in determining how much individuals, including and particularly the
retirees, should consume, how much they need to save, and how much bequest to leave to their
children and loved ones.
    Brown (2000) documented the remaining life expectancy and probabilities of survival to se-
lected ages for 65-year olds in the year 2000: while men and women at age 65 can expect to live,
respectively, an additional 16.4 and 19.6 years, 12 percent of men and 7.7 percent of women will die
prior to their 70th birthday, while 17.5 percent of men and 31.4 percent of women will live to age
90 or beyond. More generally, Figure 9, which we reproduce from Benartzi, Previtero and Thaler
(2011), shows a large variation in life expectancy at age 65. There is a 22-year difference between
the 10th and 90th percentile of the distribution for men (dying at 70 versus 92). Similarly, there is
a 23-year difference between the 10th and 90th percentile of the distribution for women (dying at
72 versus 95).18

                                         [Insert Figure 9 About Here]

    Not only is there significant uncertainty in the life expectancy, there is also substantial het-
erogeneity in this uncertainty. Table 4 is reproduced from De Nardi, French and Jones (2009).
They used the AHEAD dataset and found that rich people, women, and healthy people live much
longer than their poor, male, and sick counterparts, conditional on being alive at age 70. Table 5,
also from De Nardi, French and Jones (2009), showed that there is a substantial variation in the
probability of living to age 85 and 95, conditional on being alive at age 70, and these variations are
importantly related to income, gender and health status at 70.
  16
     In order to smooth the graph due to small samples especially for children and the elderly, the sample used in the
construction of variance at each age bin includes individuals within a two-year bandwidth.
  17
     See Capatina (2012) for an interesting study on the life-cycle effects of health risks.
  18
     Also see Brown (2000) for similar findings.




                                                         11
                                             [Table 4 About Here]
                                             [Table 5 About Here]

2.4    Morbidity/Long Term Care Risks
    An important risk that is specially pertinent to the elderly is the morbidity risk, which is related
to the need for long term care.19 Long-term care is a range of services and supports necessary for
health or personal care needs over a long period of time (see Norton 2000). It is important to note
that most long-term care is not medical care, but rather assistance with the basic personal tasks
of everyday life (sometimes called Activities of Daily Living, ADLs), and assistance with everyday
tasks (sometimes called Instrumental Activities of Daily Living, IADLs).20
    The morbidity risk, and consequently the risk for long term care needs, that the elderly faces
depends importantly on the number of limitations in ADLs and IADLs. Table 6, from National
Center for Health Statistics, shows that as retirees age, the limitations in ADLs and IADLs both
increase substantially; and also importantly, there are substantial variations in the number of
limitations in both ADLs and IADLs even conditional on age.

                                         [Insert Table 6 About Here]

    As a result of experiencing the limitations in ADLs and IADLs, about 70% of people will need
some form of long-term care at some point in their lives (Brown and Finkelstein, 2008). The
duration and level of long-term care needs vary from person to person and often change over time.
On average, an individual who is 65 today will need some type of long-term care services and
supports for three years, and women need care longer (3.7 years) than men (2.2 years). However,
about one-third of today’s 65 year-olds may never need long-term care support, but 20 percent will
need it for longer than 5 years.21
    The “very old” elderly receive long-term care either at home, or in community service orga-
nizations or in long-term care facilities. Examples of home care services include unpaid caregiver
who may be a family member or friend, or a nurse, home health or home care aide, and/or thera-
pist who comes to the home. Community support services include adult day care service centers,
transportation services or home care agencies that provide services on a daily basis or as needed.
Outside the home, a variety of facility-based programs exist. Nursing homes provide the most com-
prehensive range of services, including nursing care and 24-hour supervision. Other facility-based
choices include assisted living, board and care homes, and continuing care retirement communities.
Brown and Finkelstein (2008) use Robinson model to predict the probability distribution of long-
term care utilization. Table 7, reproduced from Brown and Finkelstein (2008), shows that there is
  19
     See Sherris (2014, Chapter 12, this book) for research related to longevity and morbidity projections.
  20
     ADLs include needing the help of other persons with bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out
of bed or chairs, using the toilet (including getting to the toilet), and getting around inside the home; IADLs
include everyday household chores, doing necessary business, shopping, or getting around for other purposes. See
http://longtermcare.gov.
  21
     Manton, Gu and Lamb (2006), however, showed that age-specific incidence of ADL limitations have been declining
over time in the U.S.


                                                        12
a considerable right tail risk to this distribution. For example, although 73 percent of 65-year-old
men (and 56 percent of 65-year-old women, respectively) will never enter a nursing home, of those
who do, 12 percent of men (and 22 percent of women, respectively) will spend more than three
years there.22

                                         [Insert Table 7 About Here]


3        Insurance Markets
   The elderly deals with the above risks in a variety of ways, particularly, they may use insurance
products to help cope with these risks. In this section, we describe several important insurance
markets. We will mostly focus on private insurance markets, but will discuss public insurances as
well.

3.1      Health Insurance Market
3.1.1     U.S. Health Insurance System for the Elderly

    The United States does not have a national health insurance system. However, the health
insurance coverage for those aged 65 and older is almost universal. The sources of health insurance
coverage for this population mainly consist of the following: Medicare, Medicaid, employer-provided
coverage and supplemental insurance (known as Medigap). According to Kaiser Family Foundation
reports, on average basic Medicare benefits cover about 50% of the personal health care expenditures
(excluding long-term care costs) of aged beneficiaries in the United States. Retirees must finance
these costs not covered by Medicare by purchasing insurance coverage supplemental to Medicare or
by paying directly for such costs out of pocket. Ninety percent of all retirees obtain supplemental
insurance coverage, from one of four main sources, to help fill in these gaps: Supplemental Employer-
Sponsored Insurance for Retirees (about 1/3); Medicare Advantage (about 1/4); Medigap policies
(about 18%); and Medicaid for which about 15-16% of Medicare beneficiaries are “dually eligible”
if they are disabled or meet the income and assets thresholds.23

Medicare. The main source of health insurance coverage for the elderly is Medicare. Medicare
is a national social insurance program established in 1965 under Title XVIII of the Social Security
Act that provides health insurance for Americans aged 65 and older.24 Anyone who has or whose
spouse has worked for at least forty quarters in Medicare-covered employment (i.e. paid FICA
    22
     However, see Friedberg et al. (2014) which updated and modified the Robinson model using the most recent
National Long Term Care Survey for 1999-2004.
  23
     While varying across states, these thresholds are low across the board, which means that Medicaid coverage only
protects a subset of the poorest retirees against significant out-of-pocket exposure. See French et al (2012) for a
discussion of the relationship between Medicaid and the elderly.
  24
     Medicare also provides health insurance coverage to younger people with disabilities as well as people with end
stage renal disease and persons with Lou Gehrig’s disease (see Medicare.gov website).



                                                        13
taxes) is eligible for Medicare coverage. It is important to note that, as a social insurance program,
the eligibility for Medicare does not depend on the retirees’ income and asset levels. Note that
Medicare does not use any mechanism (either pricing mechanism or eligibility criterion) to select
risk, which differs substantially from private health insurances that manage their risk portfolio by
both pricing and underwriting mechanisms.
     Medicare has four parts. Part A provides coverage for hospital care, while Part B provides out-
patient medical services (i.e. doctor visits). Medicare enrollees also have the choice between what
is called the “traditional Medicare” and Medicare Part C (also known as “Medicare Advantage”).
Part D is for prescription drugs.
     Part A, known as “Hospital Insurance,” covers inpatient hospital stays (at least overnight). The
maximum length of stay that Medicare Part A covers in a hospital inpatient stay is typically 90
days, where the first 60 days would be paid for in full by Medicare but days 61 and 90 require a
co-payment (as of 2012, $289 per day). The beneficiary is also allocated at most 60 days of “lifetime
reserve days” that can be used after 90 days, which also requires a co-payment (as of 2012, $578
per day). Part A also covers brief stays for convalescence in a skilled nursing facility, and hospice
benefits for terminally ill persons with less than six months to live as determined by the patient’s
physician. Medicare eligible retirees are automatically covered for Part A.
     Part B, known as “Medical Insurance,” pays for some services and products not covered by Part
A on an outpatient basis. Part B coverage includes physician and nursing services, and a list of
diagnostic tests and other outpatient hospital procedures and medical treatments administered in
a doctor’s office. Part B also covers the purchase of necessary durable medical equipment (DME).
Part B coverage begins once a patient meets his or her deductible ($140 in 2012), then typically
covers 80% of approved services, while the remaining 20% is paid by the patient.
     Enrollment in Part B may be deferred if the beneficiary or his/her spouse is still working and
has group health coverage through that employer. The retirees have to pay a small premium, which
does not depend on assets or on existing health conditions, for enrollment in Part B. Almost all
Medicare enrollees who do not work enroll in Part B.
     Part C, also known as “Medicare Advantage,” was introduced in 1997, where Medicare bene-
ficiaries were given the option to receive their Medicare benefits through private health insurance
plans, instead of through the original Medicare (Parts A and B) which is sometimes also referred
to as the “fee-for-service” Medicare. Retirees face a trade-off in the choice between the traditional
Medicare and the Medicare Advantage. The traditional Medicare allows enrollees access to any
doctors and hospitals that accept Medicare patients, but its coverage is limited to the standard
Medicare benefit package; enrollees of a Medicare Advantage plan, however, is restricted to ac-
cess only the doctors and hospitals in the network of the private insurer who sells the Medicare
Advantage plan, but the enrollees face lower copayments and deductibles and may receive more
benefits than offered by the traditional Medicare (for example, prescription drugs). For people who
choose to enroll in a Medicare Advantage health plan, Medicare pays the private health plan a fixed
amount every month; and the members may also have to pay a small premium in addition to the
Medicare Part B premium for benefits not included in the traditional Medicare. In Section 4.2 we


                                                 14
discuss the interactions between Medicare and Medicare Advantage plans.
    Part D covers prescription drugs. It was introduced in the Medicare Modernization Act en-
acted in 2003 and took effect from 2006. Anyone with Part A or B is eligible for Part D. To receive
this benefit, a person with Medicare must enroll in a stand-alone Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) or
Medicare Advantage plan with prescription drug coverage. These plans are approved and regulated
by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), but are actually designed and adminis-
tered by private health insurance companies and private drug companies. Part D coverage is not
standardized, and approved plans are allowed to choose which drugs (or even classes of drugs) they
wish to cover, at what level (or tier) they wish to cover it, and are free to choose not to cover
some drugs at all, though Medicare specifically excludes some drugs from coverage (see Duggan,
Healy and Scott-Morton, 2008 for an extensive description of the Medicare Part D program). A
large literature studies the Medicare Part D program, including causes of its increasing costs (e.g.,
Duggan and Scott-Morton, 2010), consumers’ choice of plans (Heiss, McFadden and Winter, 2007;
Abaluck and Gruber, 2009; Kling, Mullainathan, Shafir, Vermeulen and Wrobel, 2010; Ketcham,
Lucarelli, Miravete and Roebuck, 2010; Ericson, 2010; Heiss, Leive, McFadden and Winter, 2012)
and insurer behavior (Decarolis, 2013).

Medicaid. Medicaid is the health program for families and individuals with low income and
resources in the United States. It is a government insurance program for persons of all ages whose
income and resources are insufficient to pay for health care. In contrast to Medicare, Medicaid is a
means-tested program that is jointly funded by the state and federal governments and managed by
the states, with each state enjoying substantial discretion in determining eligibility and coverage.
Because Medicaid is for individuals of all ages, as long as they are low income and meet the asset
eligibility rules, many retirees also are on Medicaid. Importantly, if a retiree becomes eligible
for Medicaid, the coverage provided under Medicaid is much broader than that under Medicare,
particularly for long-term care (see Section 3.4). It should be noted that for beneficiaries who are
dual-eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid, Medicaid may pay for drugs not covered by part D
of Medicare.
    As we will describe in Section 3.1.2, the recent Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
health care reform will significantly expand both eligibility for and federal funding of Medicaid
beginning on January 1, 2014. Under the law as written, all U.S. citizens and legal residents with
income up to 133% of the poverty line, including adults without dependent children, would qualify
for Medicaid coverage. However, the United States Supreme Court ruled in National Federation
of Independent Business v. Sebelius that states do not have to agree to this expansion in order
to continue to receive existing levels of federal Medicaid funding, and many states have chosen to
continue with current funding levels and eligibility standards.

Employer Coverage for Retirees. Retiree health benefits are an important consideration for
older workers making decisions about their retirement. Health benefits for retirees provide an
important supplement to Medicare for retirees aged 65 or older. This constitutes another important


                                                 15
source of health insurance coverage for retirees. However, the fraction of firms that offer retiree
health coverage is fast declining. According to a recent report by the Kaiser Family Foundation
and the Health Research and Educational Trust (2012), just 25 percent of employers with more
than 200 workers even offered retiree health benefits to their workers in 2012. There has been a
downward trend in the percentage of firms offering retirees coverage, from 66% in 1988 to 32%
in 2005 (see Figure 11). Moreover, Kaiser Foundation surveys found that the offering of retiree
health benefits varies considerably by firm characteristics. For example, in 2012, it found that
large firms are much more likely to offer retiree health benefits than small firms – 25% vs. 4%.
Moreover, the rate of offering retiree health benefits among large firms also vary by industry, and
by the fraction of lower-wage workers in the firm: large firms in the retail industry are less likely
(9%) to offer retiree health benefits than large firms in other industries; and large firms with fewer
lower-wage workers (those learning $24,000 or less annually) are more likely to offer retiree health
benefits. Importantly, among firms offering retiree health benefits, most large firms offer them to
early retirees under the age of 65 (88%). A lower percentage (74%) of large firms offering retiree
health benefits offer them to Medicare-age retirees.25

                                        [Insert Figure 11 About Here]

Medicare Supplemental Insurance. Medicare supplemental insurance, also known as “Medi-
gap”, refers to various private supplemental health insurance plans sold to Medicare beneficiaries in
the United States that provide coverage for medical expenses that are not or only partially covered
by Medicare, the “gaps” in the Medicare coverage. As of 2006, 18% of Medicare beneficiaries were
covered by a Medigap policy. In order to enroll in Medigap, a person must be enrolled in part A
and B of Medicare. The Medigap insurance market is heavily regulated. Since 1992, the coverage
and pricing of Medigap policies have been highly regulated by the U.S. government. Specifically, in
all but three States (Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Wisconsin), insurance companies can only sell
ten standardized Medigap policy types; moreover, within the six month Medigap open enrollment
period – which starts when an individual is both older than 65 and enrolled in Medicare Part B
– an insurer cannot deny Medigap coverage, or place conditions on a policy, or charge more for
pre-existing health conditions. Outside of open enrollment, the issuing insurance company may
require medical screening and may obtain an attending physician’s statement if necessary.
    Medigap plans are standardized by plan type, organized alphabetically from A-N. Although
these plans often have high premium costs, most offer first-dollar coverage of many or all of the
costs not covered by Medicare, leading to criticism that they invite moral hazard. The most popular
plans (Plans C and F) cover nearly all costs that Medicare does not; some Plan F beneficiaries
opt for a “high deductible” option where they pay the first $2,000 in expenditures, after which the
Medigap plan covers all costs. Premiums for these plans vary by plan type and by state, and by
the gender and age of the enrollees, and can range from under $100 to over $400 per month. Some
  25
     See Monk and Munnell (2009) for a study on the potential consequences of the declining retiree health insurance
offering for both pre-Medicare and Medicare-eligible retirees.



                                                        16
Medigap policies sold before January 1, 2006 may include prescription drug coverage, but after
that date no new Medigap policies could be sold with drug coverage due to the introduction of the
Medicare Part D benefit.

3.1.2      Health Insurance Reform in the United States

    In March 2010, the U.S. enacted the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and typically
known as the Affordable Care Act, or the ACA, which represents the most significant reforms to
the U.S. health insurance and health care market since the establishment of Medicare in 1965. This
legislation has many components, the four most important of which are as follows:

       • (Individual Mandate) All individuals must have health insurance that meets the law’s
         minimum standards or face a penalty when filing taxes for the year, which will be 2.5 percent
         of income or $695, whichever is higher.26, 27

       • (Employer Mandate) Employers with more than 50 full-time employees will be required
         to provide health insurance or pay a fine of $2,000 per worker each year if they do not offer
         health insurance, where the fines would apply to the total number of employees minus some
         allowances.

       • (Insurance Exchanges) State-based health insurance exchanges will be established where
         the unemployed, the self-employed and workers who are not covered by employer-sponsored
         health insurance (ESHI) can purchase insurance. Importantly, the premiums for individuals
         who purchase their insurance from the insurance exchanges will be based on the average
         health expenditure risks of those in the exchange pool.28 Insurance companies that want to
         participate in an exchange need to meet a series of statutory requirements in order for their
         plans to be designated as “qualified health plans.”

       • (Premium Subsidies) All adults in households with income under 133% of Federal Poverty
         Line (FPL) will be eligible for receiving Medicaid coverage with no cost sharing. For indi-
         viduals and families whose income is between the 133 percent and 400 percent of the FPL,
         subsidies will be provided toward the purchase of health insurance from the exchanges.

    Most of the changes introduced in the ACA are for the purpose of reducing the uninsured
rate, and thus increase the access to affordable health care, in the US population. However as we
mentioned earlier, because of the almost universal coverage of the elderly Medicare, the ACA reform
will have a rather small impact on the insurance coverage of those aged 65 and over. Nonetheless,
  26
     These penalties would be implemented fully from 2016. In 2014, the penalty is 1 percent of income or $95 and
in 2015, it is 2 percent or $325, whichever is higher. Cost-of-living adjustments will be made annually after 2016.
Hardship exemptions are permitted if the least inexpensive policy available cost more than 8 percent of one’s income.
  27
     This component of the ACA was one of the core issues in the U.S. Supreme Course case 567 U.S. 2012 where
the constitutionality of the individual mandate and the Medicaid expansion are challenged. The U.S. Supreme Court
ruled to uphold the constitutioniality of the individual mandate on a 5-to-4 decision.
  28
     States that opt not to establish their own exchanges will be pooled in a federal health insurance exchange.


                                                         17
there are two important changes introduced in the ACA that are relevant to the elderly population
we focus on here. First, the “premium subsidies” component of the ACA represents a significant
expansion of the current Medicaid system because many states currently cover adults with children
only if their income is considerably lower, and do not cover childless adults at all. Prior to the
ACA, states differ in their income thresholds for Medicaid eligibility, and on average it is about
65% of the FPL. Thus raising the Medicaid income threshold to 133% of the FPL line represents
a significant expansion of Medicaid coverage. Because Medicare enrollees can be dual eligible for
Medicaid, this could impact the retiree population as well.29
     The second important change relevant to the Medicare population is the introduction of a Medi-
care surtax on investment income for high-income households. Specifically, a new 3.8% Medicare
surtax will be levied on the lesser of net investment income or the excess of modified adjusted gross
income (MAGI) above $200,000 for individuals, $250,000 for couples filing jointly, and $125,000
for spouses filing separately. In additional, wages above $200,000 (individuals) and $250,000 (joint
filers) will now have to pay an additional 0.9% on earned income above the thresholds mentioned
above.
     An emerging literature studies the impact of the ACA on both health insurance coverage and la-
bor market. Aizawa and Fang (2013) studied the equilibrium impact of the health insurance reform
described in Section 3.1.2 on the labor market, with an emphasis of firms’ endogenous responses in
their compensation package offerings in response to the ACA. Aizawa (2013) studied the optimal
design of health insurance exchange using an estimated life-cycle equilibrium labor market model.
Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2013) studied the equilibrium of the health insurance exchange un-
der community rating regulation; they argue that, on the one hand, community rating regulation
worsens the problem of adverse selection and leads to potential welfare loss, but on the other hand,
it can generate welfare gains because it provides reclassification risk insurance to individuals. They
find that welfare gains from reclassification risk insurance dominate the welfare loss from adverse
selection. Cole, Kim and Krueger (2013) argued that guaranteed issuance and community rating
regulations of the Affordable Care Act will lead to reduced incentives for individuals to invest in
their health. Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2013) constructed and calibrated a general equilibrium
life-cycle model that incorporates both medical expenses and labor income risks to evaluate the
welfare effects of the community-rating regulation of the individual health insurance market and
an increase in income redistribution in the economy, both features of the ACA . Neither Cole, Kim
and Krueger (2013) nor Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2013) modelled the firm-side responses to
the ACA.
  29
     The U.S. Supreme Court also ruled on June 28, 2012 that the law’s provision that, if a State does not comply
with the ACA’s new coverage requirements, it may lose not only the federal funding for those requirements, but all
of its federal Medicaid funds, is unconstitutional. This ruling allows states to opt out of ACA’s Medicaid expansion,
leaving each state’s decision to participate in the hands of governors and state leaders. As of the writing of this
article, 25 states are moving forward with the Medicaid expansion, 22 states will not, and 4 are still weighing their
options.




                                                         18
3.1.3    Health Insurance System in Other OECD Countries

    According to OECD (2011), among the 31 OECD countries as of early 2010, all except four
(Chile, Mexico, Turkey and the U.S.) have universal health insurance. Among those, thirteen
(Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom) offer automatic national health insurance coverage to
their citizens financed by general tax revenue. Twelve (Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Poland and Slovakia) achieve universal
coverage by mandating that all citizens purchase a single-pool national health insurance. But the
financing of the coverage is not through general tax revenues, instead, except for Czech Republic and
Slovakia, the premium is paid privately though the government provides an income-based premium
subsidy. In the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the health insurance premium for working individuals
is shared by the worker and his/her employer, while the premium for those who do not work is paid
for by the government. Germany differs slightly from the other countries in this group: it allows
high-income individuals to opt out of the national health insurance risk pool and purchase private
health insurance. The Netherlands and Switzerland also achieve universal health insurance through
a mandate, however, in these two countries, health insurance is not provided through the state,
instead it is purchased from regulated private health insurers. Private insurance companies that
operate in the health insurance market compete for enrollees, while subject to community-rating
regulations. The government provides premium support to low-income individuals. Because of the
lack of national health insurance or a mandatory health insurance requirement in Chile, Mexico,
Turkey and the U.S. (see the U.S. health insurance reform above), there is a substantial fraction of
uninsured in these countries.
    Even with national health insurance, primary health insurance does not cover all costs. Table
8, from OECD (2011), summarizes the share of the costs for selected functions of care covered in
2008-2009 by the basic primary health insurance in various countries.

                                         [Table 8 About Here]

3.2     Annuity Insurance Market
    Annuities are generally defined as contracts that provide periodic payments for an agreed-
upon span of time. They include annuities certain, which provide periodic payouts for a fixed
number of years, and life annuities, which provide such payouts for the duration of one or more
persons’ lives. As we described in Section 2.3, retirees face significant risks in longevity, which poses
problems in ensuring sufficient savings for retirement. The principal role of life annuities to protect
individuals against outliving their resources. All developed countries have instituted some form of
public annuity, e.g. Social Security in the United States, pension schemes in the United Kingdom
and Ireland, and superannuation plans in Australia and New Zealand. Retirement pensions are
typically in the form of a guaranteed life annuity, thus insuring against the risk of longevity. Social
Security and public insurance are the focus of Chapter 16 by Borsch-Supan (2014) in this volume;
as a result, we focus on private annuity insurance market.

                                                   19
3.2.1      Theory of the Demand of Annuities

     The theoretical literature on annuities started with the classic paper of Yaari (1965) where he
considered the optimal consumption/saving/insurance problem for a consumer facing an uncertain
lifetime in a continuous time model, and showed the classic result that in the absence of bequest
motives, an individual should annuitize all of his income, in order to insure against the lifetime
uncertainty.30 Yarri’s (1965) results have been recently revisited in a simpler discrete time setting
and under a somewhat more general asset structure by Davidoff, Brown and Diamond (2005). In
what follows, we illustrate the economic benefit of annuitization in a simple two period model as
in Davidoff, Brown and Diamond (2005).
     Consider a consumer who is definitely alive in period 1 but may be alive in period 2 with
probability 1−q ∈ (0, 1) so q ∈ (0, 1) is the death probability. Suppose that he has a utility function
U (c1 , c2 ) over his consumption profile (c1 , c2 ) where c2 should be interpreted as his consumption
level in period 2 if he is alive.
     Suppose that the consumer has access to two securities: the first is a bond that returns RB
units of consumption in period 2 regardless of whether or not he is alive, in exchange for each unit
of consumption good in period 1;31 the second is an annuity, which returns RA in period 2 if he is
alive and nothing otherwise, again in exchange for each unit of consumption good in period 1. In
this simple environment without asymmetric information (i.e., the death probability q is known to
the insurance company), an actuarially fair annuity would have:
                                                              RB
                                                    RA =         .
                                                             1−q
However, suppose that we just impose a weaker restriction:

                                                     RA > RB .

    Let us denote by A the consumer’s choice of savings in the form of annuities and B his saving
in terms of bonds. Suppose that he has no income in period 2 and his asset or income in period 1
is Y, his choice problem in period 1 is simply

                                                 max U (c1 , RA A + RB B)
                                                {c1 ,A,B}
                                      s.t.      c1 + A + B ≤ Y
                                                A ≥ 0, B ≥ 0.

It immediately follows from the first order conditions with respect to c1 , A and B that in the
optimum, B ∗ = 0 as long as RA > RB , i.e., all the consumption in the uncertain second period of
the life should be funded by annuity, not bond. This is the well-known full annuitization result.
The intuition is very simple: if B ∗ > 0, then one can increase second period consumption while
holding c∗1 constant by reducing the bond holding to zero, and use the proceeds B ∗ to purchase B ∗
units of annuity instead. This change of portfolio will increase c2 by B ∗ (RA − RB ) > 0.
 30
      See Sheshinski (2008) for a comprehensive review of the theory of annuities.
 31
      Thus the bond can be interpreted as a riskless saving instrument with interest rate RB − 1.


                                                            20
    The above full annuitization results can be generalized to environments with many periods and
many states, when the market is complete. To see this, let us generalize the utility function of
the consumer to U (c1 , c2 ) where now c2 is a vector of date-state contingent consumption levels
(e.g. if there are T possible future periods and N states in each period, c2 will be a vector of
length N T ; let c2(t,ω) denote the element in vector c2 that corresponds to the consumption in a
future period t ∈ {2, ..., T + 1} and state ω ∈ Ω. The state ω can represent both uncertainty about
aggregate issues such as the macro economy, the performance of the stock market, or individual
issues including mortality or health. Suppose that we are in a complete market setting where we
have “Arrow bonds” and “Arrow annuities” that pay out in (t, ω) for all t ∈ {2, ..., T + 1} and ω ∈ Ω
with payout rates RB(t,ω) and RA(t,ω) respectively. Suppose the individual chooses, respectively,
B(t,ω) and A(t,ω) units of (t, ω)-contingent bonds and annuities, his consumption in (t, ω) , if he is
alive then, is c2(t,ω) = RB(t,ω) B(t,ω) + RA(t,ω) A(t,ω) . Thus the consumer’s problem is:

                                 max             U (c1 , c2 )
                         {c1 ,(A(t,ω) ,B(t,ω) )}
                                        X                           
               s.t.      c1 +                        A(t,ω) + B(t,ω) ≤ Y
                              (t,ω)∈{2,...,T }×Ω
             c2(t,ω) = RB(t,ω) B(t,ω) + RA(t,ω) A(t,ω) for all (t, ω) ∈ {2, ..., T + 1} × Ω
             A(t,ω) ≥ 0, B(t,ω) ≥ 0 for all (t, ω) ∈ {2, ..., T + 1} × Ω

Again, the first order conditions for the above optimization problem immediately lead to the conclu-
                                                                ∗
sion that in optimum, it must be the case that for all (t, ω) B(t,ω) = 0 as long as RA(t,ω) > RB(t,ω) ;
that is, all the consumption for the uncertain future periods and states should all be funded through
purchase of date and state contingent annuities. One may say that date and state continent an-
nuities differ from the conventional life annuities that pay out in every date until death. But with
complete markets, we can always create such conventional annuities by combining these date and
state contingent Arrow annuities.
    Thus, we have a very general result about the optimality of full annuitization: in a complete-
market Arrow-Debreu equilibrium, it is optimal for a consumer without a bequest motive to an-
nuitize all savings. The full annuitization result does not hold when markets are incomplete, or
there are liquidity needs, or when individuals have bequest motives. However, the forces in favor of
annuitization underlying the full annuitization result would imply that some annuitization would
be optimal even under these circumstances. Let us consider the case of incomplete markets as
an example. Markets are incomplete if there does not exist a sufficiently rich set of Arrow bonds
and Arrow annuities such that the consumers can not achieve any consumption profile by choos-
ing appropriate combinations of these securities. For instance, most real world annuity markets
require that a consumer purchase a particular time path of payouts, or the payouts are linked to
the performance of the underlying portfolio of assets, or the actual mortality experience for the
class of investors. We can model the restrictions on the available annuity products by assuming
that the agent can only purchase annuity products that pay out in a set of states ω ∈ ΩA which
is a strict subset of Ω. Denote by ` a row vector with one in states that belong to ΩA . Let RB

                                                    21
denote the matrix of returns for the available set of bonds, and let B denote the collection of bond
assets. If RA A = RB B implies that A < `B, i.e., any consumption vector that may be purchased
strictly through annuities is less expensive when financed through annuities than when purchased
by a set of bonds with matching payoffs, then an arbitrage-like dominance of the annuity over the
matching combination of bonds, as long as such trade is feasible, which is the underlying force for
the full annuitization result above, still holds. Therefore, we can conclude that some annuitization
is optimal and the optimal portfolio has zero bonds in at least one dated event. Similar arguments
for the optimality of partial annuitization also apply in cases where consumers face liquidity needs,
ow when individuals have bequest motives.

3.2.2    Under-Annuitization Puzzle and its Solutions?

    The theoretical predictions that individuals should annuitize their wealth are derived under a
set of conditions, and calibrated life-cycle models taking into consideration bequest motives and
other market frictions suggest that typical 65-year-olds would be willing to pay one-fourth of their
wealth at retirement for access to actuarially fair annuities, which exceeds the usual 10 to 15 percent
of annuity loads (see Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky and Brown, 1999, among others). However,
in most countries voluntary annuitization is almost non-existent. For example, Johnson, Burman
and Kobes (2004) documented, using data from the Health and Retirement Study, that among
people at least 65 years old in the U.S. private annuities comprise just one percent of total wealth.
James and Song (2001) described the private annuity markets in Australia, Canada, Chile, Israel,
Singapore, Switzerland, the UK and the US, and concluded that in all of these countries, the
annuities markets remain under-developed, especially relative to the life insurance market (which
we describe in Section 3.3). The puzzle is not easily explained by the loadings of annuity products.
For example, Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky and Brown (1999) showed that annuity products in
the U.S. offer very high “money’s worth” – the ratio of expected discounted lifetime benefits to
initial capital cost of the annuity. Similar findings are obtained for other countries by James and
Song (2001), who found that, when discounting at the risk-free rate, money’s worth for annuitants
are greater than 95% in most countries and sometimes greater than 100%.
    The evidence has been termed the “under-annuitization puzzle,”32 and a large literature has
emerged to explain it (see, e.g., Brown, 2007; Benartzi, Previtero and Thaler, 2011). The existing
explanations can be categorized into two groups, demand-side based explanations and supply-side
based explanations. Supply-side explanations emphasize market failure due to barrier created by
asymmetric information (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004; Hendren, 2013), or due to the large loading
factor that limits the annuity returns (Friedman and Warshawsky, 1990). Demand-side explana-
tions, on the other hand, emphasize that the consumers may have substantial bequest motives that
make them unwilling to annuitize (Lockwood, 2011), or they may suffer from behavioral biases in
  32
    Modigliani (1986), in his Nobel acceptance speech given in 1985, noted: “It is a well known fact that annuity
contracts, other than in the form of group insurance through pension systems, are extremely rare. Why this should
be so is a subject of considerable current interest. It is still ill-understood.”




                                                       22
their decision making (Brown, Kling, Mullainathan and Wrobel, 2008).33,                   34



Information Problems in Annuity Insurance Market. The possibility of market failure
due to private information has been well-known since Akerlof (1970)’s classic paper on lemons.
Thus under-annuitization could have been a result of private information in the annuity insurance
market. It is indeed conceivable that informational barrier may be the reason for the low market
penetration rate in the annuity insurance market. For example, Finkelstein and Poterba (2004)
tested for evidence of private information using a unique administrative data from an annuity
insurance company in UK.
    Hendren (2013) developed a theory of low penetration in certain insurance markets based on
private information. He argued that if the adverse selection problem is sufficiently severe, then it is
rational for insurance companies to reject insurance applications. His model is as follows. Suppose
that there exists a unit mass of agents endowed with non-stochastic wealth w > 0. All agents face
a potential loss of size l > 0 which occurs with random probability P (with realization denoted
by p), which is private information to the agent. The random loss probability P is distributed in
the population with cumulative distribution function F (·) on the support Ψ ⊆ [0, 1] . Suppose that
agent with loss probability p has standard von-Neumann-Morgenstern preferences with expected
utility given by
                                     pu (cL ) + (1 − p) u (cN L )
where cL and cN L are respectively the consumption in the event of loss and no loss. Denote an
allocation by A = {cL (p) , cN L (p)}p∈Ψ which specifies the consumption level in the event of loss
and no loss for each type p ∈ Ψ. An allocation A is implementable if:

       • A is resource feasible, i.e.
                                Z
                                    [w − pl − pcL (p) − (1 − p) cN L (p)] dF (p) ≥ 0;

       • A is incentive compatible, i.e.

               pu (cL (p)) + (1 − p) u (cN L (p)) ≥ pu (cL (p̃)) + (1 − p) u (cN L (p̃)) for all p, p̃ ∈ Ψ;

       • A is individually rational, i.e.,

                   pu (cL (p)) + (1 − p) u (cN L (p)) ≥ pu (w − l) + (1 − p) u (w) for all p ∈ Ψ.
  33
      Pashchenko (2013) used a quantitative model to assess the importance of many potential impediments to annu-
itization, including large fraction of preannuitized wealth in retirees’ portfolios, adverse selection, bequest motives,
medical expense uncertainty, government safety net in terms of means-tested transfers, illiquidity of housing wealth
and restrictions on minimum amount of investment in annuities, and she found that quantitatively four explanations
play a big role in reducing annuity demand: preannuitized wealth, minimum annuity purchase requirement, illiquidity
of housing wealth, and bequest motives.
   34
      Brown and Poterba (2000) recognized that longevity risk sharing by couples may reduce their willingness to
pay for annuity products. They evaluated a married couple’s utility gain from joint-life annuitization using joint-
and-survivor life tables and found that previous estimates of the utility gain from annuitization, which applied to
individuals, overstate the benefits of annuitization for married couples.


                                                          23
   The key theoretical result is the following the no-trade theorem:
Theorem: The endowment, {(w − l, w) , for all p ∈ Ψ} , is the only implementable allocation if
and only if
                        p u0 (w − l)        E [P |P ≥ p]
                                0
                                       ≤                   for all p ∈ Ψ\ {1} .            (1)
                     1 − p w (w)          1 − E [P |P ≥ p]
Conversely, if the above condition does not hold, then there exists an implementable allocation
which strictly satisfies resource feasibility and individual rationality for a positive measure of types.
    The intuition for the above no-trade theorem can be described as follows. The left hand side
of (1) denotes the marginal rate of substitution between the consumption in the loss state and no
loss state, evaluated at the endowment (w − l, w) for a type-p agent. This is also type-p agent’s
willingness to pay for a small amount of additional consumption in the event of the loss, in terms
of consumption in the event of no loss. The actuarially fair cost of this transfer for type-p agent is
p/ (1 − p) , but such an actuarially fair price is not incentive feasible in an environment with private
information. Instead, the relevant price is the average cost if all types with risks higher than p also
obtain the transfer, i.e., at the price E [P |P ≥ p] / {1 − E [P |P ≥ p]} , which is the right hand of
(1). If no agent is willing to pay this cost, then endowment is the only implementable allocation.
    Based on condition (1), Hendren (2013) defines the pooled price ratio at p, T (p) , as:

                                                E [P |P ≥ p] 1 − p
                                    T (p) ≡                        ,
                                              1 − E [P |P ≥ p] p

then Condition (1) can be succinctly stated as

                                       u0 (w − l)
                                                  ≤ inf T (p) .
                                         w0 (w)    Ψ\{1}

The statistic inf Ψ\{1} T (p) , which is called the minimum pooled price ratio, can then be interpreted
as a measure of informational barrier to trade in an insurance market. The higher than the minimum
pooled price ratio, the harder it is to implement trade.
    Hendren (2013)’s idea to explain the low-penetration rate of some of the insurance markets
– such as those for annuities, long-term care and disability – is to estimate the distributions of
F (p|X) , where X are a vector of observable characteristics, respectively for those who are rejected
by the insurance company and those who are served by the insurance company, and to show that
the estimated risk distributions imply that the minimum pooled price ratio for the rejectees is
higher than that for those who are served by the market. Indeed he found larger barriers to trade
imposed by private information for the rejectees, for whom private information imposes a barrier
to trade equivalent to an implicit tax on insurance premiums of 82% in long term care, 42% in life
insurance, and 66% in disability insurance; in contrast, he found that smaller implicit taxes for the
non-rejectees that are not statistically different from zero in any of the three market settings.
    While Hendren (2013) provided conditions under which adverse selection in consumer’s risk
type may lead to no trade, one of the major findings in the recent literature on the test of asym-
metric information in insurance markets is that consumers may have multi -dimensional private



                                                   24
information.35 For example, Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) examined a unique data set from a
large annuity insurance company in UK where retirees are required to annuitize at least a certain
fraction of their tax-preferred retirement savings account balance, but- have a choice over the annu-
ity products that differ in guaranteed payout periods (0 years, 5 years or 10 years) and in whether
they are capital-protected. They found evidence of systematic relationships between the ex post
mortality and some annuity characteristics such as the timing of payments and the possibility of
payments to the annuitants’ estate, which suggests the presence of selection based on private in-
formation. Using the same data set, Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf (2010) estimated a structural
model where individuals are hypothesized to have private information regarding their mortality
risk as well as their bequest motive, and these two dimensions of private information are allowed
to be correlated. They identify and estimate the two dimensions of private information based on
the retirees’ choice of annuity guarantee length and their ex post mortality experience. They found
strong evidence of positive correlation between the two dimensions of private information. In re-
lated papers on the long term care insurance market by Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) which
we will discuss in Section 3.4, and on Medigap insurance market by Fang, Keane and Silverman
(2008) which we discussed in Section 4.2, all found evidence that consumers’ insurance purchases
are likely driven by both their risk type, their preference type (e.g. risk aversion) and even their
cognitive ability.
    While selection based on risk type has been emphasized in the classic papers such as Akerlof
(1970) and Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), the recent empirical finding of the presence and im-
portance of selection based on preference types – in particular, selection based on risk aversion
– may offer a unified explanation for why different insurance markets vary so much in size: for
example, markets for health, home and life insurance are all large, while markets for annuities and
for long-term care insurance are quite small.
    To illustrate how selection based on multi-dimensional private information provides a potential
unified explanation for size differences across insurance markets, it is useful to contrast the life
and annuity insurance markets. These markets cover opposite risks: life insurance covers the risk
of mortality while annuities cover the risk of longevity. In life insurance markets, the “bad risks”
from an insurer’s viewpoint are people with higher mortality probabilities. In a uni-dimensional
model, less healthy people should have a greater demand for life insurance. But, it is plausible
that more cognitively able people or those with more income also demand more life insurance,
and tend to be healthier because they invest more in their health (similar to what we find in the
health insurance market). If these two forces roughly balance, it is possible that overall there is no
positive correlation between life insurance coverage and ex post mortality risk, as empirically found
by Cawley and Philipson (1999). Given the lack of adverse selection in the aggregate, this market
can be expected to be large.
    In contrast, in an annuity insurance market, the “bad risks” from an insurer’s viewpoint are
healthy people who expect to live long lives. People with private information that they are relatively
 35
      For a survey, see Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010).




                                                          25
healthy should be more likely to purchase annuities, creating an adverse selection problem. Now
let us assume, as before, that (i) more cognitively able people and those with more income are both
more likely to purchase annuities, just as they are more likely to purchase health or life insurance,
and (ii) more cognitively able people and those with more income are healthier and live longer,
because they invest more in their health. This creates an additional source of adverse selection.
    Thus, while selection based on cognitive ability and income alleviates the problem of adverse
selection based on health risk in the life insurance market, it exacerbates the adverse selection
problem in the annuity market. Similar patterns hold when we look at the other markets we
mention above (auto, health, long-term care). That is, in markets where we would expect selection
based on cognitive ability or income to exacerbate selection based on risk type, the market is small,
and vice-versa. Thus the theory of advantageous selection provides a plausible explanation of the
size difference between life, annuity and other insurance markets without relying on institutional
assumptions.36

High Loadings of Annuities. Friedman and Warshawsky (1990) argued that people may decide
not to purchase individual annuities because such products are not priced fairly in the actuarial
sense because of high loading factors. Such loading factors could reflect ordinary transaction costs,
including taxes and competitive returns to the annuity insurer’s capital. However, Brown (2007)
argued this explanation for the under-annuitization does not seem to square with the behavior
of Social Security participants. He noted that in the United states, individuals are allowed to
start claiming Social Security benefits as early as age 62 but do not have to begin claiming before
turning age 70. As one delays longer before claiming benefits, the benefits are adjusted upward in an
actuarially fair manner. Specifically, for each year after the normal retirement age that benefits are
delayed up until age 70, the amount of benefits increases by roughly 8 percent a year.37 Effectively,
the Social Security Administration is offering the participants, by delaying the start-date of the
social security benefits, to buy at an actuarially fair premium, a large annuity.38 However, Muldoon
and Kopcke (2008) showed that most people begin claiming social security benefits within a year
of becoming eligible, and less than five percent delay claiming benefits past age 66.39

Bequest motives. As is known in Yaari (1965), bequest motives could be a reason not to annu-
itize all of the individual’s wealth. There are several recent studies that try to quantify how much
can bequest motive explain the low penetration rate of voluntary annuitization. For example,
  36
     Nevertheless, at this point these arguments are only speculative. Rigorous theoretical analysis of the relationship
between equilibrium market size and the presence of advantageous selection is an interesting area for future research.
  37
     The Social Security Administration describes the benefit adjustment for delayed retirement at
http://www.ssa.gov/oact/quickcalc/early late.html.
  38
     The premium is in the form of the forgone normal benefits the participant is entitled to receive had he/she retired
at the normal benefit age. Since Social Security benefit is indexed for inflation and offers survivor benefits, one may
even argue that the premium for delayed benefits is actuarially favorable.
  39
     Sun and Webb (2011) showed that, for plausible prefence parameters, the optimal age for claiming Social Security
benefits for non-liquidity constrained single individuals and married men is between 67 and 70.



                                                          26
Friedman and Warshawsky (1990) and vidal-Melia and Lejarraga-Garcia (2006) both showed that
sufficiently strong bequest motives can eliminate purchases of annuities with high enough loads.
Lockwood (2012) also quantified the strength of bequest motives needed to eliminate the demand
for actuarially unfair annuity products. He found that moderate bequest motives, much weaker
than those required to eliminate purchases of actuarially fair annuities, can eliminate purchases
of available annuities. Even in a model in which the only reason to prefer non-annuity wealth to
annuity income is that non-annuity wealth is bequeathable, altruists who wish to leave bequests
gain little from actuarially unfair annuities and are in many cases better off not annuitizing any
wealth at available rates. Moreover, in simulations of annuity decisions by single retirees in the
U.S., five out of the six estimates of bequest motives from the saving literature significantly reduce
the predicted demand for annuities.40

Behavioral Explanations. Brown, Kling, Mullainathan and Wrobel (2008) provided experi-
mental evidence that individuals’ aversion to annuities may be related to whether the annuity
product is viewed by the consumer through the “consumption frame” or through an “investment
frame.” When annuity is viewed through the consumption frame, the consumer focuses on the end
result of what can be spent over time; but when it is viewed through the investment frame, the
consumer instead focuses on the intermediate results of return and risk features when choosing
assets and does not consider the consequences for consumption. For the sake of illustrating the
potential differences of the two frames, consider a simplest two-period case where the individual
has probability q of dying. If an individual invests wealth W in a simple bond with a return R, he
will be able to consumer W (1 + R) in the second period if he stays alive. If, in contrast, he buys
an actuarially fair annuity, he is able to consume W (1 + R) / (1 − q) if he lives. Viewed from a
consumption frame, the consumer will notice that what he is able to consume in the second period
with an annuity, W (1 + R) / (1 − q) , is higher than what he can consume with a simple bond,
W (1 + R) . However, viewed from an investment frame, the consumer may focus on the rate of
return and the variance of payments of the two investment alternatives. In the above example, a
bond has return of R and poses no risk, since it pays the same irrespective of the state; on the
other hand, the annuity has a return of (1 + R) / (1 − q) with probability q and a return of 0 with
probability q. Even though the bond and the annuity has the same expected return, the annuity
appears riskier than the bond. Brown, Kling, Mullainathan and Wrobel (2008) conducted choice
experiments in which subjects are asked to choose to allocate a certain amount of money between
a life annuity and a bond, but the choices are either described, randomly, using an “investment
frame” or a “consumption frame.” They found that 72 percent of respondents prefer a life annuity
over a savings account when the choice is framed in terms of consumption, but only 21 percent of
  40
    Ameriks et al. (2010) also considered the possible role of what they referred to as “public care aversion” in under-
annuitization. The idea is that if one annuitizes too much of his/her wealth, the probability of having insufficient
wealth for private long-term care and therefore needing public care, which the individual is averse to, will increase.
They administered a novel strategic survey instrument that includes hypothetical questions to disentangle the relative
importance of public care aversion and bequest motive. They found that public care aversion is very significant, and
that bequest motives are strong also for middle class.


                                                          27
respondents prefer a life annuity when the choice is framed in terms of investment features.41

3.2.3    Reverse Mortgage

    A reverse mortgage insurance, or sometimes called a reverse mortgage loan, can be a valuable
retirement planning tool that can greatly increase retirees’ income streams by using their largest
assets - their homes. As we described in Section 2.1, home equity is the dominant form of wealth for
older Americans, particularly widows. Based on the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances, Aizcorbe,
Kennickell and Moore (2003, quoted in Davidoff and Welke, 2004), showed that 76 percent of
household heads 75 or over own a home, with a median value of $92,500, and only 11% of these
households owe any mortgage debt. Among the majority of older single women in the 2000 AHEAD
survey who own homes, the median ratio of home value to total assets was 79%.42
    A reverse mortgage allows homeowners to borrow against their home equity, while still main-
taining ownership of the home until they die. The modern reverse mortgage industry dates to 1961
in the U.S. and the early part of 20th Century in Europe.43 A reverse mortgage borrowers must
be 62 or older, must be homeowners with very little outstanding mortgage debt, and must live
in the house. The amount that homeowners can borrow via a reverse mortgage, called the initial
principal limit, is larger if the house value is larger, if there is a lower (or zero) outstanding balance
on other mortgage loans, if the borrower is older, and if the interest rate is lower. Once the lender
calculates the initial principal limit, the borrower can generally take out up to 60% of his/her initial
principal limit in the first year. Reverse mortgage borrowers can receive payments in several forms:
a borrower may receive a single lump sum payment, or a line of credit with an increasing maximum
outstanding balance, or monthly payments that last for a fixed period (term payments), or monthly
payments that last as long as the borrower lives in the home (tenure payments). Borrowers may
receive payments in a combination of any of these forms. The line of credit is by far the most
popular option (and it includes lump sum payments as a subset). If a borrower decides to take a
reverse mortgage with tenure payments, it may be considered as an annuity insurance with one’s
home equity as the capital, which can potentially insure the borrower both against the risks of
housing market and his/her longevity risk.
    In the United States, the most popular reverse mortgage is administered by the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), called a home equity conversion mortgage (HECM), while the private mar-
ket for reverse mortgages has been shrinking.44 Shan (2011) reported that HECM loans represent
over 90% of all reverse mortgages originated in the U.S. market. It should be pointed out that
with a reverse mortgage borrowers are insured against substantial drops in house prices because
the reverse mortgage loan includes an insurance in all HECM administered by the FHA. Borrowers
  41
     Agnew et al. (2008) also used experiments to examine the role of gender, framing and default on annuity choices.
  42
     See Davidoff and Welke (2004) for more discussions about the reverse mortgage market. Nakajima (2012) provided
a very useful basic introduction.
  43
     In French, reverse mortgage is known as a “viager.”
  44
     In 2011, the two biggest lenders of reverse mortgage loans, Bank of America and Wells Fargo, exited the reverse
mortgage market (see New York Times, “2 Big Banks Exit Reverse Mortgage Business,” June 17, 2011).



                                                         28
(or their heirs) can repay the loan either by letting the reverse mortgage lender sell the house or
by paying in cash. Most use the first option. In the first case, a mortgage lender sells the house
attached to the reverse mortgage loan and uses the proceeds of the sale to repay the loan and to
pay for various costs. If the sale value of the house turns out to be larger than the sum of the
total loan amount and the various costs of the loan, the borrowers receive the remaining value. In
the opposite case, where the house value cannot cover the total costs of the loan, the insurance
covers the difference and the borrowers do not need to pay anything extra (see Nakajima, 2012).
The number of households with reverse mortgages has been growing. Figure 12, reproduced from
Nakajima and Telyukova (2013), shows the proportion of homeowner households of age 65 and
above that have reverse mortgages, including both the HECM loans and private mortgage loans,
between 1997 and 2011. Figure 12 shows that reverse mortgage market was very small before 2000.
In 2001, the share of eligible homeowners with reverse mortgages was about 0.2%. This share
increased rapidly since then, reaching 2.1% in 2011.

                                            [Figure 12 About Here]

     There is a growing economics literature that investigates various aspects of the reverse mortgage
market. Davidoff and Welke (2004) empirically showed that the reverse mortgage market is char-
acterized by advantageous selection; i.e., reverse mortgage borrowers appear to exit their homes at
a faster pace than the general population. The authors suggested that higher discount rate among
the borrowers combined with housing price appreciation may explain observed advantageous selec-
tion. Nakajima and Telyukova (2013) analyze reverse mortgages in a life-cycle model of retirement,
calibrated to age-asset profiles. They found that the ex ante welfare gain from reverse mortgages
is sizeable at $1,000 per household.. They also argued that bequest motives, nursing home moving
risk, house price risk, and interest and insurance costs all contributed to the low take-up rate of
reverse mortgages.

3.3    Life Insurance Market
    Individuals face mortality risks as described in Section 2.3. If they care about their dependents
(e.g. the spouse, the children, or sometimes the parents or any other person), they have desire to
insure that their dependents’ quality of life is not affected by their death.45 Life insurance provides
such protection. The basic economic theory of the demand for life insurance starts with Fischer
(1973) and Karni and Zilcha (1986), and have been summarized in a recent survey by Villeneuve
(2000).
  45
    As shown in Fang and Kung (2012a), the life insurance ownership rates are high among the Health Retirement
Study respondents whose ages range from 54 to 84. In 1996, when the respondents are between 54 to 74 years old, life
insurance ownership rate is at 88.1%; in 2006, when the surviving respondents are between 64 and 84 years old, the
ownership rate remains high at 78.6%. It is somewhat a puzzle why elderly individuals continue to own life insurance.
Brown (2001) provided evidence against the hypothesis that elderly individuals with strong bequest motives purchase
term life insurance to offset mandatory annuitization by the existing Social Security system.




                                                         29
     There are two main types of individual life insurance products, term life insurance and whole
life insurance.46 A term life insurance policy covers a person for a specific duration at a fixed or
variable premium for each year. If the person dies during the coverage period, the life insurance
company pays the face amount of the policy to his/her beneficiaries, provided that the premium
payment has never lapsed. The most popular type of term life insurance has a fixed premium
during the coverage period and is called level term life insurance. A whole life insurance policy,
on the other hand, covers a person’s entire life, usually at a fixed premium. In any period, life
insurance is a contract between the insured and the insurance company that specifies a premium,
and a benefit amount payable to the beneficiary of the life insurance policy (known as the face
amount) conditional on the death of the insured. Both term life and whole life are contracts that
specify a sequence of such annual premium/death benefit combinations, and the difference is that
under term life, the sequence has a fixed period (so, e.g., a 20-year term life insurance policy has
a sequence of 20 years), while under whole life, the sequence has a random length equal to the
random longevity of the policyholder.
     In contrast to the rather small private annuity insurance market, as discussed in Section 3.2,
the life insurance market is large and important.47 According to Life Insurance Marketing and
Research Association International (LIMRA International), 78 percent of American families owned
some type of life insurance in 2004. By the end of 2008, the total number of individual life insurance
policies in force in the United States stood at about 156 million; and the total individual policy
face amount in force reached over 10 trillion dollars (see ACLI, 2009). In the United States at
year-end 2008, 54 percent of all life insurance policies in force were Term Life insurance. Of the
new individual life insurance policies purchased in 2008, 43 percent, or 4 million policies, were term
insurance, totaling $1.3 trillion, or 73 percent, of the individual life face amount issued (see ACLI,
2009). Besides the difference in the period of coverage, term and whole life insurance policies also
differ in the amount of receivable cash surrender value (CSV) if the policyholder surrenders the
policy to the insurance company before the end of the coverage period. For term life insurance, the
CSV is zero; for whole life insurance, the CSV is typically positive and pre-specified to depend on
the length of time that the policyholder has owned the policy. One important feature of the CSV
on whole life policies relevant to our discussions below is that by government regulation, CSVs do
not depend on the health status of the policyholder when surrendering the policy.48
  46
      The whole life insurance has several variations such as universal life (UL), variable life (VL) and variable-universal
life (VUL). Universal life allows flexible premiums subject to certain minimums and maximums. For variable life,
the death benefit varies with the performance of a portfolio of investments chosen by the policyholder. Variable-
universal life combines the flexible premium options of UL with the varied investment option of VL (see Gilbert and
Schultz,1994).
   47
      The discussion here borrows from Fang and Kung (2012a).
   48
      The life insurance industry typically thinks of the CSV from the whole life insurance as a form of tax-advantaged
investment instrument (see Gilbert and Schultz, 1994).




                                                            30
3.3.1    Front-Loaded Premiums and Reclassification Risk Insurance

    An important feature of life insurance contracts is that life insurers often offer long-term insur-
ance contracts with fixed premiums that is front-loaded, that is, the premium is higher than the
actuarially fair premium in the early parts of the life insurance contract. Hendel and Lizzeri (2003)
provided an elegant model that explains the front-loading of life insurance premiums. They showed
that insurers require front-loaded premiums in order to provide reclassification risk insurance –
insuring against the risk from stochastic second-period premium as a result of stochastic second
period health realization – which is valued by policyholders.
    Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) consider a perfectly competitive primary market for life insurance
that includes individuals (policyholders) and life insurance companies.49 There are two periods. In
the first period, the policyholder has a probability of death p1 ∈ (0, 1) known to both himself and
the insurance companies. In the second period, the policyholder has a new probability of death
p2 ∈ [0, 1] which is randomly drawn from a continuous and differentiable cumulative distribution
function Φ(·) with a corresponding density φ (·). A consumer’s period 2 health state p2 is not
known in period 1, but p2 is symmetrically learned by the insurance company and the consumer,
and thus common knowledge, at the start of period 2.
    The policyholder’s income stream is y −g in period 1 and y +g in period 2, where y is interpreted
as the mean life-cycle income and g ∈ (0, ḡ] with ḡ < y captures the income growth over the periods.
Both y and g are assumed to be common knowledge.
    The policyholder has two sources of utility: his own consumption should he live, and his depen-
dents’ consumption should he die. If the policyholder lives, he derives utility u(c) if he consumes
c ≥ 0; if he dies, then he has a utility v(c) if his dependents consume c ≥ 0. u (·) and v (·) are both
strictly concave and twice differentiable.
    However, in period 2, there is a chance that the policyholder no longer has a bequest motive.
Denote by q ∈ (0, 1) the probability that the policyholder loses his bequest motive.50 The bequest
motive uncertainty is resolved at the same time as the period 2 health state; however, we assume
that it is private information to the policyholder and cannot be contracted upon. If the policyholder
retains his bequest motive, his utility in period 2 is again u(·) if he is alive and v(·) if he dies; if
the policyholder loses bequest motive, then his utility is u(·) if he stays alive, and some constant
which is normalized to zero if he dies. They assume that there are no capital markets, thus the
consumer cannot transfer income from period 1 to period 2. The only way for the consumer to
ensure a stream of income for his dependents is to purchase life insurance.
    We now provide more details about the timing of events. At the beginning period 1, after
learning the period-1 health state p1 , the consumer may purchase a long-term contract from an
insurance company. A long-term contract specifies a premium and face value for period 1, hQ1 , F1 i,
and a menu of health-contingent premiums and face values hQ2 (p2 ), F2 (p2 )i for each period-2 health
state p2 ∈ [0, 1]. In contrast, a spot contract is simply a premium and a face value hQ, F i which
  49
     This rendition of Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) model follows Fang and Kung (2010).
  50
     A loss of bequest motive could result from divorce, or from changes in the circumstances of the intended benefi-
ciaries of the life insurance policy.


                                                         31
earns zero expected profit for a given coverage period.
    The key assumption is that insurance companies can commit to these terms in period 2, but that
the policyholders cannot. The one-sided commitment assumption has two important implications.
First, it implies that the period-2 terms of the long-term insurance contract must be at least as
desirable to the policyholder as what he could obtain in the period-2 spot market; otherwise, the
policyholder will lapse the long-term contract into a new spot contract. This imposes a constraint
on the set of feasible long term contracts that consumers will demand in period 1. Second, if a
policyholder suddenly finds himself without a bequest motive, he could lapse his policy by refusing
to pay the second period premium.
    In period 2, after learning the period 2 health state p2 , the policyholder has three options. He
can either continue with his long-term contract purchased in period 1, or he can let the long-term
policy lapse and buy a period-2 spot contract, or he can let the long-term policy lapse and simply
remain uninsured.
    To characterize the equilibrium set of contracts, we first consider the actions of a policyholder
in the second period who no longer has a bequest motive. Given the absence of a secondary market,
and we have not yet allowed the insurance companies to buy back contracts through CSVs, the
best course of action for those who no longer have a bequest motive is to simply let the long-term
policy lapse and become uninsured.
    Competition among primary insurance companies ensures that the equilibrium contract is a
long-term contract h(Q1 , F1 ), (Q2 (p2 ), F2 (p2 )) : p2 ∈ [0, 1]i that solves:

                   max [u (y − g − Q1 ) + p1 v (F1 )]                                            (2)
                               Z (         "                      #                )
                                             u (y + g − Q2 (p2 ))
                   + (1 − p1 )    (1 − q)                           + qu (y + g) dΦ(p2 )
                                                +p2 v (F2 (p2 ))
                                                 Z
            s.t.   Q1 − p1 F1 + (1 − p1 ) (1 − q) [Q2 (p2 ) − p2 F2 (p2 )] dΦ(p2 ) = 0,          (3)
                   Q2 (p2 ) − p2 F2 (p2 ) ≤ 0, for all p2 ∈ [0, 1],                              (4)

where (2) is the expected utility the policyholders receive from the contract, (3) is the zero-profit
constraint that reflects perfect competition in the primary market, and constraints in (4) guarantee
that there will not be lapsation among policyholders with a bequest motive in the second period.
   Hendel and Lizzeri’s (2003) main results are summarized in the following proposition:
Proposition. (Hendel and Lizzeri 2003) The equilibrium set of contracts satisfies the following:

  1. There is a period-2 threshold health state p∗2 (which is higher than the period 1 death
     probability p1 ) such that for all p2 ≤ p∗2 the period-2 premiums are actuarially fair, and
     for all p2 > p∗2 the period-2 premiums are constant, actuarially favorable and given by
     Q2 (p2 ) = Q2 (p∗2 ) = Q1 + 2g;

  2. When the income growth parameter g is sufficiently small, p∗2 is strictly less than 1, i.e.
     reclassification risk insurance is provided for policyholders with low income growth.


                                                    32
     Part (1) of the above proposition provides a theoretical justification for level-term and whole
life insurance which typically have fixed premium in the duration of the contract. Figure 13 depicts
equilibrium premiums in the second period as a function of the period-2 health state p2 .51

                                              [Figure 13 About Here]

3.3.2    Life Settlement Market and its Welfare Effects

     A life settlement is a financial transaction in which a policyholder sells his/her life insurance
policy to a third party – the life settlement firm – for more than the cash value offered by the
policy itself. The life settlement firm subsequently assumes responsibility for all future premium
payments to the life insurance company, and becomes the new beneficiary of the life insurance
policy if the original policyholder dies within the coverage period.52 The life settlement industry
is quite recent, growing from just a few billion dollars in the late 1990s to about $12-$15 billion in
2007, and according to some projections, is expected to grow to more than $150 billion in the next
decade (see Chandik, 2008).
     The opportunity for the life settlement market results from two main features of life insurance
contracts. First, most life insurance policies purchased by consumers, either term or whole life,
have the feature that the insurance premium stays fixed over the course of the policy. Because
policyholders’ health typically deteriorates over time, the fixed premium implies that policyholders
initially pay a premium that is higher than actuarially fair, but in later years the same premium is
typically actuarially favorable. This is the front-loading phenomenon we described earlier. Front-
loading implies that policyholders of long-term life insurance policies, especially those with impaired
health, often have locked in premiums that are much more favorable than what they could obtain
in the spot market. This generates what has been known as the actuarial value of the life insurance
policy (see Deloitte Report, 2005). Second, as we mentioned earlier, the cash surrender value for
life insurance policies is either zero for term life insurance, or at a level that does not depend on
the health status of the policyholder. Because the actuarial value of a life insurance policy is much
higher for individuals with impaired health, the fact that the CSV does not respond to health
status provides an opening for gains of trade between policyholders with impaired health and life
settlement companies.53 Life settlement firms operate by offering policyholders, who are intending
  51
     Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) made the ingeneous observation that excatly the same outcome for the consumers
would obtain if the insurance company offers a contract that guarantees the second period premium to be Q1 + 2g
for all health states.
  52
     The legal basis for the life settlement market seems to be the Supreme Court ruling in Grigsby v. Russell [222
U.S. 149, 1911], which upheld that for life insurance an “insurable interest” only needs to be established at the time
the policy becomes effective, but does not have to exist at the time the loss occurs. The life insurance industry has
typically included a two-year contestability period during which transfer of the life insurance policy will void the
insurance.
  53
     Deloitte Report (2005, p.3) states that the CSVs of whole life insurance policies are, by regulation, not allowed to
be conditioned on health impairments of the policyholder who surrenders the policy. Doherty and Singer (2002) also
argue that regulatory constraints faced by life insurance carriers deter life insurance companies from offering health
dependent cash surrender values: “Such an offering of explicit health-dependent surrender values by a life insurance


                                                           33
to either lapse or surrender their life insurance policies, more cash than the cash surrender value
offered by the insurers.
    The emerging life settlement market has triggered controversies between some life insurance
companies who oppose it, and the life settlement industry who supports it. The views from the two
opposing camps are represented by Doherty and Singer (2002) and Singer and Stallard (2005) on
the proponent side, and Deloitte Report (2005) on the opponent side. Dohergy and Singer (2002)
argued that a secondary market for life insurance enhances life insurance policyholders’ liquidity
by eroding the monopsony power of the carrier. This will increase the surplus of policyholders and
in the long run will lead to a larger primary insurance market. On the other side, life insurance
companies, as represented by Deloitte Report (2005), claim that the life settlement market, by
denying them the return on lapsing or surrendered policies, increases the costs of providing policies
in the primary market. They allege that these costs will have be passed on to consumers, which
would ultimately make consumers worse off.
    A key issue in the contention between the opposing sides is the role of lapsing or surrendering
in the pricing of life insurance in the primary market (see Daily 2004). Policyholders may choose to
lapse or surrender in a variety of situations. First, the beneficiary for whom the policy was originally
purchased could be deceased or no longer need the policy; second, the policyholder may experience
a negative income shock (or a large expense shock) that leads him to favor more cash now over
a bequest.54 In the absence of the life settlement market, when a health-impaired policyholder
chooses to lapse or surrender its policy, the life insurance company pockets the intrinsic economic
value of the policy, which potentially allows the life insurance company to offer insurance at a lower
premium. In the presence of the life settlement market, these policies will be purchased by the life
settlement firms as assets, thus the primary insurance company will always have to pay their face
amount if the original policyholder dies within the coverage period.
    Daily, Hendel and Lizzeri (2008) and Fang and Kung (2010) studied the effect of life settlement
on the primary life insurance market, using a dynamic equilibrium model of life insurance similar
to Hendel and Lizzeri (2003), under the assumption that the lapsation of policyholders is driven
by loss of bequest motives. Fang and Kung (2010) showed that the life settlement market affects
the equilibrium life insurance contracts in a qualitatively important manner: with the settlement
market, risk reclassification insurance will be offered in the form of premium discounts, rather than
in the form of flat premiums as is the case without a settlement market, which we discussed in the
previous section. This may lead to a smaller degree of front-loading in the first period. They also
show a general welfare result that the presence of the settlement market always leads to a decrease
of consumer welfare relative to what could be achieved in the absence of the settlement market.
They also provide conditions under which the life settlement market could lead to a complete
carrier, however, would be fraught with regulatory, actuarial, and administrative difficulties. Life insurance carriers
do not offer health-adjusted surrender values, which suggests that these difficulties outweigh the benefits that carriers
would obtain by offering health-dependent surrender values to consumers.” Life settlement firms so far are not yet
regulated in their pricing of life insurance policies.
  54
     For example, Wall Street Journal reports that older adults are turning to the “life settlement” industry to help
them through tough times in an article titled “Source of Cash for Seniors are Drying Up” (November 13, 2008).


                                                           34
collapse of reclassification risk insurance as a result of unraveling. If one relaxes the assumption
that prohibits endogenously chosen CSVs, Fang and Kung (2010) found that whether or not CSVs
can be made health-contingent has crucial implications. If cash surrender values are restricted to be
non-health-contingent, we show that endogenous CSV is an ineffective tool for primary insurance
companies to counter the threat of the life settlement industry. Fang and Kung (2012b), however,
shows that if policyholders’ lapsation is driven by income or liquidity shocks, then a life settlement
market may potentially improve consumer welfare.
    The intuition for the difference in the welfare result is as follows. Life insurance is typically a
long-term contract with one-sided commitment in which the life insurance companies commit to a
specified death benefit provided that the premium payments are made, whereas the policyholder
can lapse anytime. Because the premium of life insurance policies are typically front-loaded, the life
insurance company pockets the so-called lapsation profits whenever a policyholder lapses his/her
policy after holding it for several periods, which is factored into the pricing of the life insurance
policy to start with due to competition (see Gilbert and Schultz, 1994). The key effect of the
settlement firms on the life insurers is that the settlement firms will effectively take away the
lapsation profits, forcing the life insurers to adjust the policy premiums and possibly the whole
structure of the life insurance policy since lapsation profits can no longer exist. In the theoretical
analysis, we showed that life insurers may respond to the threat of life settlement by limiting the
degree of reclassification risk insurance, which certainly reduces consumer welfare. However, the
settlement firms are providing cash payments to policyholders when the policies are sold to the life
settlement firms. The welfare loss from the reduction in extent of reclassification risk insurance
has to be balanced against the welfare gain to the consumers when they receive payments from the
settlement firms. If policyholders sell their policies due to income shocks, then the cash payments
are received at a time when the marginal utility of income is particularly high, and the balance
of the two effects may result in a net welfare gain for the policyholders. If policyholders sell their
policies as a result of losing bequest motives, the balance of the two effects on net result in a
welfare loss. Thus, to inform policy-makers on how the emerging life settlement market should be
regulated, an empirical understanding of why policyholders lapse is of crucial importance.

3.3.3    Why Do Life Insurance Policyholders Lapse?

    The theoretical prediction that the equilibrium effect of life settlement market on consumer
welfare depends on why policyholder lapse – loss of bequest motives or income shocks – motivates
an empirical analysis on why do policyholders their life insurance policies in Fang and Kung (2012a).
    Lapsation is an important phenomenon in life insurance markets. Both LIMRA and the Society
of Actuaries consider that a policy lapses if its premium is not paid by the end of a specified time
(often called the grace period).55 According to LIMRA (2009, p. 11), the life insurance industry
calculates the annualized lapsation rate as the ratio of the number of policies lapsed during the
  55
    This implies that if a policyholder surrenders his/her policy for cash surrender value, it is also considered as a
lapsation.



                                                         35
year over the number of policies exposed to lapse during the year. The number of policies exposed
to lapse is based on the length of time the policy is exposed to the risk of lapsation during the year.
Termination of policies due to death, maturity, or conversion are not included in the number of
policies lapsing and contribute to the exposure for only the fraction of the policy year they were in
force. Table 9 provides the lapsation rates of individual life insurance policies, calculated according
to the above formula, both according to face amount and the number of policies for the period of
1998-2008. Of course, the lapsation rates also differ significantly by the age of the policies. For
example, LIMRA (2009, p. 18) showed that the lapsation rates are about 2-4% per year for policies
that have been in force for more than 11 years in 2004-2005.56

                                             [Table 9 About Here]

    Fang and Kung (2012a) presented and empirically implemented a structural dynamic discrete
choice model of life insurance decisions to study why life insurance policyholders lapse their poli-
cies using the limited life insurance holding information from the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS) data. They found that a large fraction of life insurance lapsation is driven by idiosyncratic
choice specific shocks, particularly when policyholders are relatively young. But as the remaining
policyholders get older, the role of such idiosyncratic shocks gets less important, and more of their
lapsation is driven either by income, health or bequest motive shocks. Income and health shocks are
relatively more important than bequest motive shocks in explaining lapsation when policyholders
are young, but as they age, the bequest motive shocks play a more important role. These em-
pirical findings have important implications regarding the effect of the life settlement industry on
consumer welfare. As shown in theoretical analysis in Daily, Hendel and Lizzeri (2008) and Fang
and Kung (2010), the theoretical predictions about the effect of life settlement on consumer welfare
crucially depend on why life insurance policyholders lapse their policies. If bequest motive shocks
are the reason for lapsation, then the life settlement industry is shown to reduce consumer welfare
in equilibrium; but if income shocks are the reason for lapsation, then life settlements may increase
consumer welfare. To the extent that we found both income shocks and bequest motive shocks play
important roles in explaining life insurance lapsations, particularly among the elderly population
targeted by the life settlement industry, our research suggests that the effect of life settlement on
consumer welfare is ambiguous.

3.4    Long Term Care Insurance Market
   As we mentioned in Section 2.4, retirees face significant risks in their morbidity and needs for
long-term care. Long-term care in the United States is expensive. According to Metlife Mature
Market Institute (2012), the cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $222 per
  56
    Krebs et al. (2011) also studied the life insurance choices in a life-cycle macroeconomic model with physical and
human capital, human capital risk, and limited contract enforcement, and found both theoretically and empirically
using Survey of Consumer Finance data that young households are the most exposed to human capital risk and are
also the least insured.



                                                         36
day or $6,753 per month, and $248 per day or $7,543 per month for a private room in a nursing
home. It is somewhat cheaper in an assisted living facility at a cost of $3,550 per month. A home
health aide costs on average about $21 per hour, and it costs $70 per day for services in an adult
day health care center.57 Not only is long-term care expensive, but also lifetime long-term care
expenditures are spread unevenly across the population: as described in Table 7, between 35 and
50 percent of 65 year-olds will use a nursing home at some point in their remaining lives. Of those
who use a nursing home, 10 to 20 percent will live there more than 5 years (Brown and Finkelstein,
2009).58
    As emphasized in Norton (2000), long term care differs from acute medical care in four important
ways: long-term care is care for chronic illness; the nursing home industry is dominated by for-profit
facilities sometimes facing excess demand; long-term care is often provided by unpaid caregivers;
and little private long-term care insurance is purchased.59 In this section, we will focus on the
private long-term care insurance (or lack of it).

3.4.1    Basic Facts of Long Term Care Arrangements

    Long-term care includes both home health care for people residing in the community as well
as institutional care provided in nursing homes or assisted living facilities. Expenditures on home
health care account for about one-third of the total long-term care spending (Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, 2010).

                                            [Table 12 About Here]

    Table 12, reproduced from Byrne, Goeree, Hiedemann and Stern (2009), shows how the care
arrangements for elderly parents vary across families.60 In their sample, which is from the 1993
wave of the AHEAD data set, 22% of elderly individuals receive formal or informal care in their
homes. Among those receiving some type of care, 18% receive formal care, 90% receive informal
care, and 8% receive both formal and informal care. Overall, 6% of unmarried, childless respondents
and 38% of married, childless respondents receive care in their homes. Regardless of the number of
children, roughly one-fourth of elderly parents receive some type of care. Among families providing
some type of care, the provision of informal care depends positively and the provision of formal care
depends negatively on the number of adult children. Among elderly individuals receiving informal
care, 63% receive care from their spouse, 42% receive care from their children, and 5% receive care
from both their spouse and at least one of their children. Conditional on the receipt of informal
  57
     Cost of long term care information is obtained from http://longtermcare.gov/costs-how-to-pay/costs-of-care/
  58
     See Friedberg et al. (2013) for some new evidencee on the probability of using nursing home and the average
duration of nursing home stay conditional on use.
  59
     See also Chapter 17 in this Handbook by Norton (2014) which summarizes the key connections between long-term
care and population ageing.
  60
     Note that the target population for the AHEAD survey consists of United States household residents who were
born in 1923 or earlier. Persons in institutions (including nursing home, long-term medical care or dependent care
facilities, prisons and jails) at the time of the Wave 1 survey are ineligible for AHEAD (see Heeringa, 1995). This
initial sample selection could biased some of the statistics of the care utilization patterns.


                                                        37
care from at least one family member, the likelihood that the spouse and at least one adult child
share informal care-giving responsibilities ranges from 3% of those with one child to 9% of those
with five children. A more common type of shared care-giving involves two or more adult children.
Among families with at least one informal care provider and at least two adult children, 14% include
multiple caregivers among the younger generation. Not surprisingly, the likelihood that siblings
share care-giving responsibilities depends positively on family size. Conditional on the receipt of
informal care from at least one family member, 10% of elderly individuals with two children receive
care from both children, whereas 17%, 19%, and 23% of elderly individuals with three, four, and
five children, respectively, receive care from more than one child. Among families where elderly
individuals receive formal home health care, 9% of elderly parents receive financial contributions
for this care from their children.61

3.4.2    Why is Private LTC Insurance Market So Small?

    Given the uncertain and expensive nature of the long-term care needs and expenses, we might
have expected that there would be large demand for long-term care (LTC) insurance. However, in
the United States and in many developed countries, most of the long-term care expenditure risk
is not insured. The private LTC insurance is rather small, at least relative to health insurance
that covers acute health expenditure risks. Congressional Budget Office (2004) estimates that in
the U.S., only 4 percent of long term care expenditures are paid for by private insurance, while
33 percent are paid out of pocket; public insurance, including Medicare and particularly Medicaid,
covers about 60 percent of long-term care expenditures.62
    It is useful to describe briefly the means of payment for long-term care expenditures mentioned
above. Medicare is designed mostly to cover care costs associated with recovery from acute illness
episodes following a hospital stay of more than three consecutive days, rather than chronic impair-
ments. It only pays for care provided in skilled nursing facility for up to 100 days, but does not
pay for non-skilled assistance with Activities of Daily Living (ADL), which makes up the majority
of long-term care services.63
    Medicaid serves as a second-payer insurance and pays for long-term care for individuals who
meet Medicaid’s income and asset eligibility thresholds. Medicaid is a rather imperfect form of
insurance for long-term care risks because its asset eligibility requirement is essentially a deductible
of nearly all of one’s wealth.64 However, as we will discuss in Section 4.1, Brown and Finkelstein
  61
     Byrne et al (2009) note that these statistics understate the prevalence of informal and formal care, because only
those AHEAD respondents reporting an ADL or IADL problem were asked about the provision of care. Furthermore,
in the presence of an ADL or IADL problem, respondents were asked who provides care only if they reported receiving
help with the problem “most of the time,” and the amount of care is recorded only if the caregiver provided help at
least once a week during the month prior to the survey.
  62
     For the related figures corresponding to other OECD countries, see OECD (2011b).
  63
     Most employer-sponsored or private health insurance plans cover only the same kinds of skilled, short-term,
medically necessary care as Medicare, if they cover long-term care at all.
  64
     From 1988, the U.S. Congress passed the so-called “Medicaid spousal impoverishment” provisions under which a
certain amount of the couple’s combined resources is protected for the spouse living in the community.



                                                         38
(2008) argued convincingly that the long-term care coverages provided by Medicaid contribute in
an important way to the small size of the private long-term care insurance market.
    Long-term care insurance is designed to cover long-term services and supports, including per-
sonal and custodial care in a variety of settings such as home, community organization or other
facility. Long-term care insurance policies typically reimburse policyholders a daily amount (up
to a pre-selected limit) for services to assist them with activities of daily living such as bathing,
dressing, or eating. Many long-term care insurance policies have limits on how long or how much
they will pay; most policies will pay the costs of the long-term care for two to five years. The
premium of a long-term care policy is based on the age at the purchase of the policy, the maximum
amount that a policy will pay per day, the maximum number of days (years) that a policy will pay.
Importantly, individuals who are in poor health or already receiving long-term care services may
not qualify for long-term care insurance as most individual policies require medical underwriting.
    It should be noted that private long-term care insurance policies typically set a relatively low
maximum on the amount of covered expenses that the policy will reimburse per day in care. The
average maximum daily benefit for nursing home care for policies sold in 2005 was only $142, which
was substantially below the average daily nursing home costs of almost $200 per day in 2008 (Metlife
Mature Market Institute, 2009). Moreover, since about one-quarter of policies have maximum daily
benefit that is fixed in nominal terms, the daily benefit caps are even more binding in practice.
    An important literature examines the question of why is the private LTC insurance market so
small, which is analogous to the literature on the under-annuitization puzzle discussed in Section
3.2. Similar to the proposed solutions to the under-annuitization puzzle, the explanations for the
small private LTC market can also be grouped into explanations based on supply and demand side
imperfections. While the most compelling explanation for why private LTC insurance is so small is
that of Brown and Finkelstein (2008), which we discuss in Section 4.1, we will describe below two
complementary explanations, one based on information barriers (and thus market failure) and the
other based on strategic lack of demand for long-term care insurance.

Informational Barriers in the LTC Insurance Market Finkelstein and McGarry’s (2006)
study of the long-term care (LTC) insurance market used panel data from a sample of Americans
born before 1923 (the AHEAD study), and found that there is no statistically significant correla-
tion between LTC coverage in 1995 and use of nursing home care in the period between 1995-2000,
even after controlling for insurers’ assessment of a person’s risk type. This evidence, alone, is
consistent both with no asymmetric information and with multi-dimensional private information.
To distinguish between these stories, they first eliminated the no asymmetric information inter-
pretation. Specifically, they found that a subjective probability assessment contained in the 1995
AHEAD questionnaire, “What do you think are the chances that you will move to a nursing home
in the next five years?”, is positively correlated with both LTC coverage and nursing home use in
1995-2000, even after controlling for insurers’ risk assessment. Since this variable is presumably
unobserved by the insurer, these positive correlations suggest private information, and adverse se-
lection by the insured. Then they developed a proxy for risk aversion, using information on whether


                                                 39
respondents undertake various types of preventive health care. They found that people who are
more risk averse by this measure are both more likely to own LTC insurance and less likely to
enter a nursing home – consistent with multi-dimensional private information and advantageous
selection based on risk aversion. In fact, their findings suggest that, on net, adverse selection based
on risk and advantageous selection based on risk aversion roughly cancel out in the LTC insurance
market. This in fact presents an apparently larger puzzle: if adverse selection based on risk and
advantageous selection based on risk aversion roughly cancel out, why is the LTC insurance market
still so small? The no-trade theorem of Hendren (2013) discussed in Section 3.2 also applies to the
LTC insurance setting.

Strategic Rational Non-Purchase Pauly (1990) provided another explanation for rational
non-purchase of long-term care insurance, even for middle- or high-wealth individuals. He con-
sidered a model in which the parent prefers long-term care provided by her children over institu-
tionalized care in nursing homes. The parent decides whether or not to purchase long-term care
insurance before she becomes enfeebled, but her children decide the form of their parent’s long-
term care once chronic illness occurs to their parent. The parent anticipates that the purchase of
long-term care insurance reduces the price of the institutionalized care, thus encouraging her chil-
dren to initiate more formal (non-family-provided) care than would be the case without insurance.
More specifically, without insurance, the children know that the nursing home care expenditure will
reduce their inheritance, but if full insurance is available, there is no such impact on the amount
of their inheritance if nursing home care is chosen. Since the parent prefers family-provided-care
over institutionalized care, she will rationally choose not to purchase long-term care insurance.
This explanation even predicts that the parent may not even permit their children to purchase
long-term care insurance on their behalf. However, this explanation of strategic non-purchase of
LTC insurance does not apply to people without children.


4     Interactions between Social Insurance and Private Insurance
      Programs
    So far we have described how retirees rely on combinations of social insurance programs, such
as Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, and private insurance purchases to insure against the
multitude of risks they face. An important literature describes the interactions between the social
insurance programs and private insurance markets. We summarize some of the key studies in this
area.

4.1   Medicaid and Long Term Care Insurance
    Brown and Finkelstein (2008) argued that a potential explanation for the small size of the
private long-term care insurance market is that the public insurance provided by Medicaid may
crowd out the demand for private insurance. Recall that Medicaid is a public insurance program


                                                  40
which provides health insurance, as well as long term care insurance for the poor elderly. own
and Finkelstein (2008) developed an optimization model of a 65-year-old risk averse individual who
chooses an intertemporal consumption path in an environment with long-term care expenditure
risks. The individuals in their model face the typical state Medicaid rules and they can buy long-
term care insurance from the private market whose prices and coverages are also calibrated to the
actual available policies.
    The model is as follows. Suppose that a consumer at care state s at month t derives utility
from consumption Cs,t and some portion of the long-term care expenditures (e.g. provision of food
or shelter in a nursing home), denoted by Fs,t , according to Us (Cs,t + Fs,t ) . The care state s can
take five possible values: at home receiving no care, at home receiving home health care, residence
in an assisted-living facility, residence in a nursing home or deceased. At month t, the individual
has an expectation that his/her care state will be s with probability Qs,t ; and the monthly discount
rate is ρ. The consumer thus chooses consumptions paths to maximize
                                                       Qs,t
                                       ΣTt=1 Σ5s=1            Us (Cs,t + Fs,t )
                                                     (1 + ρ)t
subject to three constraints: first, an initial level of non-annuitized wealth W0 and a given trajec-
tory of annuitized income At from Social Security; second, a no-borrowing constraint imposed to
eliminate the possibility that the individual dies in debt; and third, a wealth accumulation equation
which depends on whether the individual is eligible for Medicaid and whether he/she has purchased
private long-term care insurance.
     Under assumed preference parameters and calibrated Medicaid rules and long-term care insur-
ance premiums and coverages, Brown and Finkelstein (2008) estimated how much a risk-averse
life-cycle consumer would be willing to pay, over and above the required premiums, to purchase a
long-term care insurance contract.
     Their results suggest that Medicaid has a quantitatively large crowd-out effect on private long-
term care insurance demand; specifically they found that given the current structure of Medicaid,
two-thirds of the wealth distribution would be unwilling to buy long-term care insurance even if it
were offered at an actuarially fair price. Therefore, crowd-out of the Medicaid seems to be a major
contributor to the small size of the long-term care insurance.65 Moreover, their results show that
Medicaid’s large crowd-out effect mainly results from the combination of its means-tested eligibility
and its secondary payer status for individuals with private insurance. Medicaid’s secondary payer
status for long-term care expenses for those with private insurance imposes an “implicit tax” on
long-term care insurance purchase because a large part of the premium for private policy pays for
benefits that would have been provided by Medicaid. The presence of public Medicaid insurance
thus limits the market for private long-term care insurance, but because of the means-testing
for Medicaid eligibility, Medicaid actually provides a rather inadequate consumption smoothing
mechanism for all but the poorest of individuals.66
  65
     Brown and Finkelstein (2008) predict that the LTC insurance purchase rate should be about 1/3, still substantially
higher than the 10% insurance rate in the data.
  66
     Brown and Finkelstein (2008) used a care status transition matrix developed by Robinson (1996). However,


                                                           41
4.2     Medicare and Private Health Insurance
    There is also a large literature on the interaction between the social insurance program of
Medicare and the private supplemental insurance known as Medigap, the Mecicare Advantage plans
(also known as Medicare Part C, see Section 3.1.1), and the employer-provided health insurance
for workers.

4.2.1    Medicare and Medigap

    Using Medicare Current Beneficiary (MCBS) data, Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008) studied
who among the Medicare eligibles are more likely to enroll in the supplemental Medigap insurance.
Table 10, reproduced from Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008), reports two panels of results from
regressing “Total Medical Expenditure” on Medigap status, along with controls for the determinants
of price (gender, a third-order polynomial of age, and controls for state and year), with or without
controlling for health status of the individuals. Each panel reports results separately for the full
sample, and for male and female sub-samples.
    In Panel A where no health controls are included, we found a large and statistically signifi-
cant relationship between total medical expenditure and Medigap status. Specifically, in the whole
sample, those with Medigap have expenditures that are, on average, about $4,000 less than those
without Medigap; the negative relationship between Medigap coverage and total medical expendi-
ture is stronger for women (about $6,000) than for men (about $2,000).
    The regressions in Panel B are analogous to those in Panel A, but with the addition of extensive
controls for health, which we describe in detail in the Data Appendix. Conditional on observable
(but not priced) health indicators, in the full sample those with Medigap have total health care
spending of about $1,900 more, on average, than those without Medigap. The positive association
between Medigap and total medical expenditure seems to be stronger for males (about $2,400) than
for females (about $1,700).67
    The results in Panel A alone indicate the presence of multi-dimensional private information.
The results of Panel A and B together imply, indirectly, that there is advantageous selection in
the Medigap market - i.e., those with better health are more likely to purchase Medigap. That is
the only way to rationalize simultaneously the large negative correlation between Medigap and ex
post health expenditure in Panel A without health controls, and the large positive correlation with
health controls in Panel B. The results in Panel B indicate that once we condition on health status,
those with Medigap have higher total health expenditures. This is what we would expect, and may
be related to the effects of moral hazard; for individuals with the same health, those with Medigap
insurance face a lower price of health care.
    To summarize, the results from Table 10 clearly illustrates two kind of possible interactions
Friedberg et al. (2014) showed that this understates the risk but overstates the conditional mean duration. They
show that using a corrected transition matrix reduces the percent with a positive willingness to pay to levels closer
to those observed in the data.
  67
     Monk and Munnell (2009) obtained similar findings.



                                                         42
between Medicare and Medigap. The first interaction is risk selection, namely, healthier Medicare
eligibles are more likely to purchase Medigap plans. This type of risk selection has been called
“advantageous selection” because it is favorable to the private insurers who sell the Medigap policies.
Whether the advantageous selection is due to retirees’ themselves or it is induced by the private
insurance company via, e.g., advertising targeting the relatively healthier individuals, is somewhat
understudied for the Medigap insurance market.68 The second kind of interaction between Medigap
and Medicare is moral hazard. Medigap effectively reduces Medicare enrollees’ out-of-pocket costs
to very low levels, thus increasing Medigap enrollees’ health expenditure beyond what they would
have spent if they did not have Medigap. This interaction results in a rather significant fiscal
externality by the supplemental Medigap on Medicare. Indeed, the U.S. government has noticed
the fiscal impact of Medigap on Medicare expenditures and in 2013 the Obama administration has
proposed to impose a surcharge by adding an amount equal to about 15% of the average Medigap
policy premium onto a Medigap policy owner’s Medicare Part B premium to be effective from 2017.

                                             [Table 10 About Here]

4.2.2    Medicare and Medicare Advantage

    As we described in Section 3.1.1, the traditional fee-for-service Medicare (Part A and B) reim-
burses costs of each medical care utilized by a beneficiary. Medicare still leaves seniors at significant
risk of health expenditure. On average, basic Medicare benefits cover about 50 percent of the per-
sonal health care expenditures of aged beneficiaries in the U.S. (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2005).
Medicare Advantage, which is private managed care plans (either health maintenance organizations,
HMO; or preferred provider organizations, PPO), is a private alternative to traditional Medicare
run by a qualified private insurer. Insurers wishing to enroll Medicare beneficiaries sign contracts
with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) describing what coverage they would
provide, and at what costs. A Medicare Advantage (MA) plan typically offers an enrollee more
comprehensive coverage (e.g. lower deductibles and copays) and provides benefits that are not
available in traditional Medicare.69 However, enrollees in the Medicare Advantage plans can only
access the provider network of the private insurer, which is more restricted than the network avail-
able under traditional Medicare - namely, any providers that accept Medicare payments. In 2011,
about 25% of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in MA.
    Private insurers that offer MA plans receive a capitation payment from the government for each
enrollee and then bears their health care costs. The capitation payments account for most of the
plans’ revenues because typically the MA plans charges zero to small premiums. However, it has
been widely documented that the capitation payment received by private insurers does not fully
  68
     See Aizawa and Kim (2013) discussed below for evidence of the role of insurer advertising in risk selection in the
Medicare Advantage market.
  69
     For example, many Medicare Advantage plans offer hearing, vision and dental benefits which are not covered
by Medicare Part A or B. Before the introduction of Part D, prescription drug coverage was available in Medicare
Advantage plans.



                                                          43
reflect the cost of caring for an enrollee. Table 11 from Aizawa and Kim (2013) reports the average
capitation payment and expected health expenditures by self-reported health status in Los Angeles
County between years 2000-2003, calculated from Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey data.70 It
shows that, from the perspective of the private insurers that offer MA plans, enrolling retirees with
excellent or very good health is hugely profitable but enrolling those with fair or poor health leads
to losses. This leads to strong incentives by the insurers to engage in risk selection.
    Indeed, Langwell and Hadley (1989), Mello et al. (2003) and Batata (2004) found that healthier
individuals are systematically more likely to enroll in a MA plan. This pattern of selection could be
a result of consumer driven selection or induced by insurers through, e.g., targeted advertising or
choices of plan characteristics. Consumer driven risk selection occurs when healthier individuals,
by themselves, are more likely than less healthier individuals to find the Medicare Advantage plans
(which have lower co-payments and deductibles and more extensive benefits, but more restricted
HMO network than the traditional Medicare) preferable to the traditional Medicare. Lustig (2011)
studied how MA insurers may endogenously choose MA premium and plan generosity to induce
advantageous risk selection. Aizawa and Kim (2013) studied the role of advertising spending choice
by private insurers in the advantageous risk selection (favorable to the private insurers) in the
Medicare Advantage market. They found that consumer driven risk selection accounts for about
85% of advantageous risk selection, while insurer driven (via advertising) accounts for 15% of risk
selection.
    From 2004, Medicare began to base capitation payments on an individual’s “risk score,” gen-
erated by a risk-adjustment formula that accounts for over seventy disease conditions. Brown,
Duggan, Kuziemko and Woolston (2011) showed, however, this reform on the risk adjusted cap-
itation payment formula in fact increased overpayments and thus the government’s total cost of
financing the care of Medicare enrollees. They argued that this occurs for the following reason.
The risk adjustment in the capitation payment indeed decreases insurers’ scope for advantageous
selection along the dimensions included in the formula, but it increases their incentive to find indi-
viduals who are positively selected along dimensions excluded from the formula and are thus cheap
for their risk score.

                                              [Table 11 about Here]

4.2.3      Medicare and Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance

    Even though Medicare provides health insurance for those 65 years and older, it can nonetheless
affect their health behavior when they are in working age due to life-cycle considerations, generating
both a fiscal and health externality from employer-sponsored health insurance of the working age
population to Medicare. Fang and Gavazza (2011) provided evidence that workers in high turnover
industries spend less on medical care than workers in lower turnover industries during their working
years; however, the low level of medical expenditures during working years increases medical expen-
 70
      The pattern is common in all markets.



                                                       44
ditures during retirement.71 Moreover, workers in high turnover industries are less likely to receive
employer-sponsored insurance than their counterparts in low turnover industries. Overall, medical
expenditures over individuals’ life-cycle in the U.S. seems to be rather inefficiently allocated. Based
on their estimates, Fang and Gavazza (2011) found that overall medical expenditure in the U.S. is
substantially increased as a result of the fragmented health insurance system: employer-sponsored
health insurance for the working age population, but public Medicare for the elderly. Specifically,
they found that one additional dollar of health expenditures during one’s working years may lead
to approximately 2.8 dollars of savings in health expenditure during retirement. An employment-
based system, as compared to a national health-insurance system, steepens the increase of health
expenditures over an individual’s life-cycle, generating a substantial fiscal externality on Medicare
which covers retirees. An employment-based health system for the workers also does not internal-
ize the full long-term benefits of health investment while workers are young, and this leads to an
increase in the overall expenditure level.72

4.2.4     Medicaid and Medicaid Managed Care

    The interaction between public and private health insurance also occurs in the Medicaid pro-
gram. There is an increasing tendency for the state Medicaid program to contract the care of
Medicaid beneficiaries to private insurance plans, known as Medicaid Managed Care (MMC) in-
stead of directly insuring them through a public fee-for-service (FFS) plan. These private insurers
are regulated and received a capitation payment for every Medicaid beneficiary they enroll.73 The
MMC setting differs from the Medicare Advantage setting discussed previously in that the public
FFS options is no longer available once MMC is adopted in a State, while under the MA setting
the traditional Medicare is always available. Thus under the MMC setting private insurers can-
not engage in risk selection to leave unhealthy individuals on the public program, as occurs under
the MA setting. Interestingly, Kuziemko, Meckel, and Rossin-Slater (2013) showed that insurers
nonetheless try to retain low-cost clients and thus improve their care relative to high-cost clients,
who they would prefer to switch to a competitor. Related to this, Duggan (2004) found that
MMC increased Medicaid costs in California because competing MMC plans have limited ability
to negotiate favorable rates with providers relative to a consolidated FFS system.


5        Summary and Directions for Future Research
   In this chapter, we described the risks faced by the ageing population and surveyed the corre-
sponding insurance markets for these risks. We focused on income risk, health expenditure risk,
    71
     Interestingly, they do not find any statistically significant relationship between turnover rate of the industry and
the quantity of medical care in the United Kingdom, which has a national health insurance system.
  72
     Khwaja (2010) also found that Medicare leads to large increases in medical utilization because individuals defer
their medical care prior to Medicare eligibility.
  73
     The large majority of the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion will occur under this type of private, capitated
insurance plans with substantial government subsidies and regulation, instead of the public Fee-for-Service option.



                                                           45
longevity/mortality risk, and morbidity/long-term care expenditure risk, and the corresponding in-
surance markets. We also discussed the interactions between social insurance and private insurance
markets. Due to the challenges from several demographic developments that lead to significant
population ageing, retirees are likely to increasingly rely on private insurance markets to meet
all their insurance needs in old age because population ageing will undoubtedly worse the fiscal
conditions of many of the important social insurance programs. This chapter provides a selective
overview of the important research on some of the key insurance markets for the elderly.
    Among the literature we discussed in details in the survey, there are still many open questions.
For example, for long term care insurance, we presented several potential explanations for its small
size: Brown and Finkelstein’s (2008) explanation based on Medicaid crowding out; Pauly’s (1990)
strategic rational non-purchase; and Finkelstein and McGarry’s (2006) and Hendren’s (2014) infor-
mational barriers. However, the literature lacks a comprehensive evaluation about the contributions
of the various potential factors to the small LTC insurance puzzle. For example, Brown and Finkel-
stein (2008) predicted that the LTC insurance purchase rate should be about 1/3, which is still
substantially higher than the 10% insurance rate in the data. What accounts for the 23% or so
of the population who should have purchased despite Medicaid? Why don’t the LTC insurance
companies offer tailored insurance products to this population? Finkelstein and McGarry’s (2006)
showed that adverse selection based on risk and advantageous selection based on risk aversion al-
most cancel out using their proxy measure of risk aversion, but then how information asymmetry
exactly creates barriers to trade in this market? Building and estimating models that incorporate
all these potential explanations, together with the possibility of informal care by children, will be
an important area for future research. Similarly, we have presented several potential explanations
for the small size of the voluntary annuity market in Section 3.2; yet it is fair to say that the
literature still lacks a consensus. Developing more comprehensive data sets that reflect households’
overall incomes, expenditures and financial assets and liabilities, as well as the portfolio of their
insurance holdings, which we discuss below, can be an important first step for us to resolve the
under-annuitization puzzle.
    There are many interesting areas that pertain to the insurance markets for the elderly that we
did not discuss in this chapter. Below we list three interesting areas for future research.

Interaction between Insurance Markets and Labor Markets. Due to space constraints,
we did not discuss the interaction between insurance markets and labor market. Social insurance
programs such as Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid affect individuals’ decisions regarding
labor force participation, hours of work, retirement, and the equilibrium of the labor market in
general. Of course, there are many interesting papers that already examined such interactions;74
but we believe that recent developments in the insurance markets, particularly the U.S. health
insurance reform, provide new opportunities and questions. Rust and Phelan (1997) studied how
Social Security and Medicare affect retirement behavior in a world of incomplete markets. They
found that Social Security creates significant disincentives to labor force participation; and Medicare
 74
      See Blundell (2014, Chapter 2 of this Handbook) for extenstive discussions on related issues.


                                                          46
eligibility at age 65 largely explains the peaks in retirements at ages 62 and 65 in an environment
where there is significant market failure in the private health insurance market.75 The fraction of
firms that offer retiree health insurance is declining – according to the Kaiser Family Foundation
(2008), the percent of firms with 200 or more employees offering retiree health insurance fell by
more than half between 1988 and 2008 – thus the incentives studied in Rust and Phelan (1997) are
bound to be more important factors affecting the labor force participation rates for men at older
ages. This drop in the fraction of firms that offer retiree health insurance dramatically changes the
incentives facing workers in their late fifties and early sixties. If they stay with their employer, they
will continue to receive health insurance. If they leave before 65 when they qualify for Medicare,
they will be forced to purchase insurance on their own. Given the rapid rise in health care costs,
the decline of retiree health insurance creates a strong incentive for workers to remain employed
until 65.76
    Madrian (1994) tested that hypothesis that employer-provided health insurance may lead work-
ers to be “locked” into their jobs because preexisting conditions exclusions make it expensive for
individuals with medical problems to relinquish their current health insurance. She used data from
the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey to estimate the degree of job lock by comparing the
difference in turnover rates of those with high and low medical expenses for those with and without
employer provided health insurance, and finds that job lock reduces the voluntary turnover rate of
those with employer provided health insurance by about 25 percent. Dey and Flinn (2005) pro-
posed and estimated an equilibrium model of the labor market in which firms and workers bargain
over both wages and health insurance offerings to examine the question of whether the employer-
provided health insurance system leads to inefficiencies in workers’ mobility decisions (which are
often referred to as “job lock” or “job push” effects). They found a relative small degree of job lock
or job push.
    Bruegemann and Manovskii (2010) developed a search and matching model to study firms’
health insurance coverage decision. In their model, firm sizes are discrete to highlight the effect of
fluctuations in the health composition of employees on the dynamics of firm’s coverage decision,
and they argue that the insurance market for small firms suffers from adverse selection because
those firms try to purchase health insurance when most of their employees are unhealthy. Aizawa
and Fang (2013) study the equilibrium impact of the health insurance reform described in Section
3.1.2 on the labor market.77 Also, several papers by Kolstad and Kowalski (2012a, 2012b) use pre-
  75
     French and Jones (2011) provided an empirical analysis of the effects of employer-provided health insurance,
Medicare, and Social Security on retirement behavior. Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, they
estimated a dynamic programming model of retirement that accounts for both saving and uncertain medical expenses.
The key difference from Rust and Phelan (1997) is that this paper accounted for endogenous savings. Also see French
(2005).
  76
     See Blundell (2014) in this Handbook for a detailed analysis of the labour force participation and the retirement
decisions.
  77
     One of the main reasons in Aizawa and Fang (2013) that more productive firms are more likely to offer health
insurance to their workers are related to Fang and Gavazza (2011), which documents empirical evidence that worker
turnover discourages firm’s health insurance provision.



                                                         47
and post-reform data to study the effect of the Massachusetts Health Reform, implemented in 2006,
on medical expenditure, selection in insurance markets, and labor markets.
    Friedberg and Webb (2005) investigated how the decline in DB pension coverage in the U.S.
influences retirement. Using HRS data, they find substantial changes in retirement patterns as a
result of the spread of 401(k) and other DC plans in place of DB plans. Workers with DC plans are
retiring significantly later, which helps explain why employment rates recently have risen among
people in their 60s, after decades of decline. Workers with DB plans retire two years earlier on
average than workers with DC plans. The authors’ simulation suggests that the continuing shift
in pension structure will increase the median retirement age by about 10 months when comparing
employees with pensions who will be aged 53-57 in 2015 versus those who were aged 53-57 in 1983.
They argued that these changes arise, the authors say, because of major differences in accrual of
pension wealth. Pension wealth in DC plans accrues smoothly, while gains to pension wealth in
traditional DB plans spike sharply at older ages, then turn negative afterwards, creating a financial
incentive to retire at that point.
    The recent reform to the U.S. health insurance system, described in Section 3.1.2, offers many
interesting venues for further research. For example, in both Phelan and Rust (1997) and French and
Jones (2011), near-retirees can access group-rated private insurance only if they continue working
for employers that offer employer-sponsored health insurance. This plays an important role in their
models to explain the peaks in retirements at ages 62 and 65. Health insurance exchange under the
Affordable Care Act provides an opportunity to near-retirees to purchase community-rated private
insurance without having to work for an employer that offers employer-sponsored health insurance.
How would this impact the retirement behavior?
    It is also important to study how the Affordable Care Act can potentially impact employers’
incentives to offer health insurance benefits to spouses of the employees. There are several reasons
for this. The first is related to how the ACA specifies that individuals are eligible to receive tax
credits: (1). They have to purchase health insurance from their states’ health insurance market-
place; (2). Only individuals and families who make between 133 percent and 400 percent of the
federal poverty level (FPL) are eligible for a tax credit; (3). The individual does not have access to
affordable employer-sponsored health insurance, either from their own or their spouses’ employers,
or another government program. To the extent that, net of tax credits, the spouse of an employee
can get similar insurance from the health insurance exchange less than the full cost of spousal
insurance offered by the employer, the spouse would have preferred that the employer did not offer
spousal insurance benefits. The same could even happen for the employees themselves. Secondly,
the availability of health insurance from a regulated health insurance exchange under the ACA
can fundamentally change workers’ outside option and thus firms’ decisions to offer spousal health
insurance benefits. How would the interaction between households’ job labor market decisions and
firms’ decisions to offer employee and spousal insurance benefits be affected by the ACA?78
 78
      See Fang and Shephard (2014) for some attempt to study these issues.




                                                        48
A Portfolio Approach to Households’ Insurance Demands. So far, we have discussed indi-
viduals’/households’ demand for insurance for an insurance product that corresponds to a particular
risk. For example, we study the health insurance market for health and health expenditure risks,
the life insurance market for mortality risk, the annuity insurance market for longevity risk, the
long-term care insurance market for morbidity/long-term care expenditure risk. However, house-
holds do not make insurance decisions to cover each risk in isolation. Instead, households most
likely choose a portfolio of insurance products to address the insurance needs due to the multitude
of risks they face. Recently, Yogo, Koijen and van Nieuwerburgh (2012) provide a promising at-
tempt to model individuals’ choices of life insurance, health insurance, annuity insurance etc. in a
unified framework as a portfolio problem.79 They consider a life-cycle model in which a household
faces health and mortality risks that affects life expectancy, health expenses, and the marginal
utility of consumption or wealth. The household has access to a risk-free bond market, as well as
a complete set of health and longevity related insurance products which includes life insurance,
annuities and health insurance. The key simplification for Yogo, Koijen and van Nieuwerburgh
(2012) to analyze the households’ portfolio choice problem is to develop a pair of risk measures for
the universe of life and health insurance products. Health delta measures the differential payoff
that a product delivers in poor health, while mortality delta measures the differential payoff that
a product delivers at death. This allows them to simplify a life-cycle model of insurance choice to
replicate the optimal health and mortality delta through a portfolio of insurance products.80
    The portfolio perspective to households’ insurance demands also calls for more innovation in
insurance products. Umbrella, or bundled, insurance products that offer policyholders protection
against multitude of risks are relatively rare. It is an interesting question of why the market for
such insurance products, which may be called as livelihood insurance products, is not yet emerging.
It also calls for the need for collecting data that reflect households’ overall incomes, expenditures
and financial assets and liabilities, as well as the portfolio of their insurance holdings.81
    It should also be noted that there is now substantial evidence that individuals experience cog-
nitive declines as they age.82 For example, Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008) found that cognitive
ability is the key driving force for advantageous selection in the Medigap insurance market (see
Section 4.2). New insurance products must be simple to understand both in their benefits and costs
to be appealing to the ageing population. Studying how complexity of insurance product design
affects consumer demand is an important area of research for marketing.
  79
     See also Yogo (2007).
  80
     See Washawsky (2013) for a discussion of the various strategies to deal with retirement income risks.
  81
     For example, Webb and Gong (2010) evaluated the Advanced Life Deferred Annuity (ALDA), an annuity pur-
chased at retirement, providing an income commencing in advanced old age, and showed using numerical optimization
that it would provide a substantial proportion of the longevity insurance provided by an immediate annuity, at much
lower cost.
  82
     See Keane (2014, Chapter 5 of this Handbook) for detailed discussions about decision-making and cognitive
decline.




                                                        49
Insurer-Side Risks and Regulation. Finally, we have so far assumed that the insurance com-
panies can rely on the laws of large numbers when it comes to meet their payment obligations in
the insurance products they sell. However, when it comes to forecasting the risks the insurers may
be facing when they offer insurance products such as annuity insurance or long-term insurance,
there is significant level of aggregate uncertainty. For example, annuity insurers face significant
aggregate risks regarding life expectancy which could be affected by advances in new medical tech-
nology, and to the extent that insurers invest some of their premiums they could fact significant
investment return risks.83 These risks faced by insurers in turn are intimately related to the ageing
population. How should government regulate the insurers when insurers face such aggregate risks
that may impact their ability to meet payment obligations? What are the optimal strategies for life
and annuity insures to hedge against the aggregate longevity risks? These are interesting questions
that deserve serious studies.84


References
  [1] Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2009). “Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence from
      Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program.” NBER Working Paper 14759.

  [2] Agnew, Julie R., Lisa R. Anderson, Jeffrey R. Gerlach, and Lisa R. Szykman (2008). “Who
      Chooses Annuities? An Experimental Investigation of the Role of Gender, Framing, and
      Defaults.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 418-422.

  [3] Aizawa, Naoki (2013). “Health Insurance Exchange Design in an Empirical Equilibrium Labor
      Market Model.” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

  [4] Aizawa, Naoki and Hanming Fang (2013). “Equilibrium Labor Market Search and Health
      Insurance Reform.” NBER Working Paper No. 18698.

  [5] Aizawa, Naoki and You S. Kim (2013). “Advertising Competition and Risk Selection in
      Health Insurance Markets: Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” Working Paper, University
      of Pennsylvania.

  [6] Aizcorbe, Ana M., Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore (2003). “Recent Changes in
      U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances.”
      Federal Reserve Bulletin, 1-32.

  [7] Akerlof, George A. (1970). “The Market for ’Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
      Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3): 488–500.
  83
    see, e.g., Bauer and Weber (2008) for a demonstration of the impact of longevity risk on life insurers
  84
    See Blake et al. (2008) for discussions regarding how annuity providers and pension funds may be able to transfer
longevity risks to capital markets through securitization of longevity risks. Also, see Wong et al. (2013) for a study
of how insurers may be able to naturally hedge the longevity risk, i.e., the offsetting of risks in life insurance and
annuity business, by selling life insurance products and annuity products as part of a product portfolio.



                                                         50
 [8] American Council of Life Insurers (2009). 2009 Life Insurers Fact Book.

 [9] Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2010). “The Joy
     of Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion from
     the Bequest Motive.” Journal of Finance; also NBER Working Paper 13105.

[10] Arrow, Kenneth (1963). “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medicare Care.” Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 53 (6): 941–73.

[11] Attanasio, Orazio, Sagri Kitao and Guglielmo Weber (2014). “Consumption and Saving.”
     Chapter 5 in this Handbook.

[12] Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Robert Hagemann and Giuseppe Nicoletti (1989).
     “The Dynamics of an Aging Population: The Case of Four OECD Countries.” NBER Working
     Papers 2797, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[13] Baily, Martin (1978). “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of Public
     Economics, Vol. 10, 379-402.

[14] Batata, A. (2004). “The effect of HMOs on Fee-For-Service Health Care Expenditures: Evi-
     dence from Medicare Revisited.” Journal of Health Economics, 23 (5), 951-963.

[15] Bauer, D. and F. Weber (2008). “Assessing Investment and Longevity Risks within Immediate
     Annuities.” Asia-Pacific Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol. 3.

[16] Benartzi, Shlomo, Alessandro Previtero and Richard H. Thaler (2011). “Annutization Puz-
     zle.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 25, No. 4, 143-164.

[17] Bernheim, B. Douglas and Lawrence Levin (1989). “Social Security And Personal Saving:
     An Analysis Of Expectations.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 79(2),
     97-102.

[18] Blakje, D., A. Cairns and K. Dowd (2008). “The Birth of the Life Market.” Asia-Pacific
     Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol. 3.

[19] Blundell, Richard (2014). “Labour Force Participation and the Retirement Decision.” Chapter
     2 in this Handbook.

[20] Borsch-Supan, Axel (2014). “Social Security and Public Insurance.” Chapter 16, This Hand-
     book.

[21] Bottazzi, R., T. Jappelli and M. Padula (2006). “Retirement Expectations, Pension Reforms,
     and their Impact on Private Wealth Accumulation.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90,
     2187–2212.




                                              51
[22] Broadbent, John, Michael Palumbo and Elizabeth Woodman (2006). “The Shift from Defined
     Benefit to Defined Contribution Pension Plans: Implications for Asset Allocation and Risk
     Management.” Financial Markets Department Working Paper, Bank of Canada.

[23] Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Woolston (2011). “How Does
     Risk Selection Respond to Risk Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Pro-
     gram.” NBER Working Paper 16977.

[24] Brown, Jeffrey R. (2000). “How Should We Insure Longevity Risk In Pensions and Social
     Security.” Center for Retirement Research At Boston College.

[25] Brown, Jeffrey R. and James M. Poterba (2000). “Joint Life Annuities And Annuity Demand
     By Married Couples.” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 2000, Vol. 67(4), 527-553.

[26] Brown, Jeffrey R. (2001). “Are the Elderly Really Over-Annuitized? New Evidence on Life
     Insurance and Bequests.” In Themes in the Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise. University
     of Chicago Press.

[27] Brown, Jeffrey R. (2007). “Rational and Behaviorial Perspectives on the Role of Annuities in
     Retirement Planning.” NBER Working Paper 13573.

[28] Brown, Jeff and Amy Finkelstein (2007). “Why Is the Market for Long Term Care Insurance
     So Small?” Journal of Public Economics, 91(10): 1967-1991.

[29] Brown, Jeffrey R. and Amy Finkelstein (2008). “The Interaction of Public and Private Insur-
     ance: Medicaid and the Long-Term Insurance Market.” American Economic Review, 98(3):
     1083-1102.

[30] Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein (2009). “The Private Market for Long-Term Care
     Insurance in the U.S.: A Review of the Evidence.” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 76(1):
     5–29.

[31] Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan and Marian V. Wrobel (2008).
     “Why Don’t People Insure Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-
     Annuitization Puzzle.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98 (2), 304-309.

[32] Brown, Jeff and Amy Finkelstein (2011). “Insuring long-term care in the U.S.” Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, 25(4): 119-142.

[33] Bruegemann, Bjoern and Iourii Manovskii (2010). “Fragility: A Quantitative Analysis of the
     US Health Insurance System.” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

[34] Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012a). “Labor Force Projections to 2020: a More Slowly Growing
     Workforce.” Monthly Labor Review.




                                              52
[35] Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012b). “Unemployed persons by Age, Sex, Race, Hispanic or
     Latino Ethnicity, Marital Status, and Duration of Unemployment.” Washington, DC: U.S.
     Department of Labor.

[36] Byrne, David, Michelle Goeree, Bridget Hiedemann and Steven Stern (2009). “Formal Home
     Health Care, Informal Care, and Family Decision-Making.” International Economic Review,
     50(4): 1205-1242.

[37] Capatina, Elena (2012). “Life-Cycle Effects of Health Risks.” University of New South Wales
     Working Paper.

[38] Cawley, John, and Thomas Philipson (1999). “An Empirical Examination of Information
     Barriers to Trade in Insurance.” American Economic Review, 89(4): 827-846.

[39] Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2010). “National Health Expendi-
     tures by Type of Service and Source of Funds, CY 1960–2008.” accessed at:
     https://www.cms.gov/NationalHealthExpend Data/downloads/nhe2008.zip.

[40] Chan, Sewin and Ann H. Stevens (1999). “Employment and Retirement Following a Late-
     Career Job Loss.” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2, 211-216.

[41] Chan, Sewin and Ann H. Stevens (2001). “Job Loss and Employment Patterns of Older
     Workers.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(2): 484-521.

[42] Chandik, Mark (2008). “The Growing Life Settlement Industry:              Is Anyone
     Watching Out for Consumers?,” Testimony presented at the California Senate
     Banking, Finance and Insurance Committee on Life Settlements, available at
     http://www.sen.ca.gov/ftp/sen/committee/standing/banking/info hearings/backgrounds/2-
     20-08 life settlement background.

[43] Cole, Harold, Dirk Krueger and Soojin Kim (2013). “Analyzing the Effects of Insuring Health
     Risks: On the Tradeoff between Short Run Insurance Benefits vs. Long Run Incentive Costs.”
     Working Paper.

[44] Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav (2007). “Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice.”
     American Economic Review, 97(3), 745-788.

[45] Coile, Courtney and Kevin Milligan (2009). “How Household Portfolios Evolve After Retire-
     ment: The Effect Of Aging And Health Shocks.” Review of Income and Wealth, Vol. 55 (2),
     226-248.

[46] Congressional Budget Office (2004). “Financing Long-Term Care for the Elderly.” A
     CBO Paper, April 2004. Accessed at: http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/54xx/doc5400/04-26-
     LongTermCare.pdf.



                                              53
[47] Couch, Kenneth A. and Dana W. Placzek (2010). “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
     Revisited.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 572-89.

[48] Cutler, David M, Kaushik Ghosh, and Mary Beth Landrum (2013). “Evidence for Significant
     Compression of Morbidity in the Elderly U.S. Population.” NBER Working Paper 19268.

[49] Daily, Glenn (2004). “Lapse-supported Pricing: Is It Worth the Risks?,” Glenndaily.com
     Information Services, Inc.

[50] Daily, Glenn, Igal Hendel, and Alessandro Lizzeri (2008). “Does the Secondary Life Insurance
     Market Threaten Dynamic Insurance?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
     98 (2),151–156.

[51] Davidoff, Thomas, Jeffery R. Brown and Peter Diamond (2005). “Annuities and Individual
     Welfare.” American Economic Review, December 2005, 1573-1590.

[52] Davidoff, Thomas and Gerd Welke (2004). “Selection and Moral Hazard in the Reverse Mort-
     gage Market.” Working Paper, University of British Columbia.

[53] Decarolis, Francesco (2013). “Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income Subsidy
     Design?” Working Paper.

[54] Decarolis, Francesco, Maria Polyakova and Stephen Ryan (2012). “The Welfare Effects of
     Supply Side Regulations in Medicare Part D.” Working Paper.

[55] Delavande, Adeline and Susann Rohwedder (2010). “Individuals’ Uncertainty about Future
     Social Security Benefits and Portfolio Choice.” Rand Working Paper WR-782.

[56] Deloitte Report (2005). “The Life Settlement Market: An Actuarial Perspective on Consumer
     Economic Value.”

[57] De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French and John B. Jones (2009). “Life Expectancy and Old
     Age Savings” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 99(2), pp. 110-115.

[58] Dey, Matthew S. and Christopher J. Flinn (2005): “An Equilibrium Model of Health Insur-
     ance Provision and Wage Determination.” Econometrica, 73(2), 571-627.

[59] Doherty, Neil A. and Hal J. Singer (2002). “The Benefits of a Secondary Market for Life
     Insurance Policies.” Working Paper, Wharton Financial Institute Center, University of Penn-
     sylvania.

[60] Dominitz, Jeff and Charles Manski (2006). “Measuring Pension-Benefit Expectations Proba-
     bilistically.” Labour. Volume 20: 201–236.

[61] Duggan, Mark (2004). “Does Contracting Out Increase the Efficiency of Government Pro-
     grams? Evidence from Medicaid HMOs.” Journal of Public Economics, 88 (12), 2549-2572.


                                              54
[62] Duggan, M., P. Healey and F. Scott Morton (2008). “Providing Prescription Drug Coverage to
     the Elderly: America’s Experiment with Medicare Part D.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
     22, 69-92.

[63] Duggan, M. and F. Scott Morton (2010). “The Impact of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
     Prices and Utilization.” American Economic Review, 100, 1, 590-607.

[64] Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Jonathan Levin (2010). “Beyond Testing: Empirical Mod-
     els of Insurance Markets.” Annual Review of Economics, 2, 311-336.

[65] Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and and Paul Schrimpf (2010). “Optimal Mandates and The
     Welfare Cost of Asymmetric Information: Evidence from The U.K. Annuity Market.” Econo-
     metrica, 78(3), 1031-1092.

[66] Ericson, K. M. (2010). “Market Design when Firms Interact with Inertial Consumers: Evi-
     dence from Medicare Part D.” Working Paper.

[67] Fang, Hanming, Michael P. Keane and Dan Silverman (2008). “Sources of Advantageous
     Selection: Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market.” Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 116, No. 2, 303-350.

[68] Fang, Hanming and Edward Kung (2010). “How Does the Life Settlement Market Affect the
     Primary Life Insurance Market?” NBER Working Paper 15761.

[69] Fang, Hanming and Alessandro Gavazza (2011). “Dynamic Inefficiencies in an Employment-
     Based Health Insurance System: Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review, 101
     (7), 3047-3077.

[70] Fang, Hanming and Edward Kung (2012a). “Why Do Life Insurance Policyholders lapse?
     Loss of Bequest Motives vs. Liquidity Shocks.” NBER Working Paper No. 17899.

[71] Fang, Hanming and Edward Kung (2012b). “The Welfare Effect of Life Settlement Market:
     The Case of Income Shocks,”Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania and Duke University.

[72] Fang, Hanming and Andrew Shephard (2014). “Joint Household Labor Supply and Health
     Care Reform.” Work in Progress, University of Pennsylvania.

[73] Farber, Henry S. (2005). “What Do We Know about Job Loss in the United States? Evidence
     from the Displaced Workers Survey, 1984-2004.” Industrial Relations Section Working Paper
     No. 498. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

[74] Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba (2004). “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Poli-
     cyholder Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112,
     183-208.




                                             55
[75] Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry (2006). “Multiple Dimensions of Private Informa-
     tion: Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review,
     Vol. 96, No. 4, 938-958.

[76] Fischer, Stanley (1973). “A Life Cycle Model of Life Insurance Purchases.” International
     Economic Review, 14(1): 132-52.

[77] French, Eric (2005). “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply and Re-
     tirement Behavior.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 72 (2), 395-427.

[78] French, Eric, John B. Jones, Mariacristina De Nardi, Olesya Baker, and Phil Doctor (2006).
     “Right Before the End: Asset Decumulation at the End of Life.” Economic Perspectives,
     Third Quarter, 2-13.

[79] French, Eric and John B. Jones (2011). “The Effect of Health Insurance and SElf-Insurance
     on Retirement Behavior.” Econometrica, Vol. 79, No. 3, 993-732.

[80] French, Eric, Mariacristina De Nardi, John B. Jones and Angshuman Gooptu (2012). “Med-
     icaid and the Elderly.” Economic Perspectives, First Quarter, 17-33.

[81] Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb (2005). “Retirement and the Evolution of Pension Struc-
     ture.” Journal of Human Resources, Volume 40 (2), 281-308.

[82] Friedberg, Leora, Wei Sun, Anthony Webb, Wenliang Hou and Zhenyu Li (2014). “New
     Evidence on the Risk of Requiring Long-Term Care.” Working Paper, Center for Retirement
     Research at Boston College.

[83] Friedman, Benjamin and Mark Warshawsky (1990). “The Cost of Annuities: Implications for
     Saving Behavior and Bequests.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1), 135-154.

[84] Fries, James F. (1980). “Aging, Natural Death, and the Compression of Morbidity.” New
     England Journal of Medicine, 303, 1369-1370.

[85] Gilbert, Jersey and Ellen Schultz (1994). Consumer Reports Life Insurance Handbook, Con-
     sumer Reports Books: Yonkers, NY.

[86] Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2011). “In-
     tergenerational Redistribution in the Great Recession.” NBER Working Paper 16924.

[87] Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier and Nahid Tabatabai (2010). “What the Stock Mar-
     ket Decline Means for the Financial Securityand Retirement Choices of the Near-Retirement
     Population.” Journal of Economic Perspectives (Winter).

[88] Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier and Nahid Tabatabai (2011). “How Did the Reces-
     sion of 2007-2009 Affect the Wealth and Retirement of the Near Retirement Age Population
     in the Health and Retirement Study?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
     17547.

                                             56
 [89] Handel, Benjamin, Igal Hendel and Michael D. Whinston (2013). “Equilibria in Health Ex-
      changes: Adverse Selection vs. Reclassification Risk.” Working Paper.

 [90] Heeringa, Steven G. (1995). “Technical Description of the Asset and Health Dynamics
      (AHEAD): Survey Sample Design.” Survey Design and Analysis Unit, Institute for Social
      Research, University of Michigan.

 [91] Heidkamp, Maria, Nicole Corre, and Carl E. Van Horn (2010). “The ‘New Unemployables’:
      Older Job Seekers Struggle to Find Work during the Great Recession.” The Sloan Center on
      Aging & Work at Boston College.

 [92] Heiss, F., D. McFadden and J. Winter, (2007). “Mind the Gap! Consumer Perceptions and
      Choices of Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plans.” NBER Working Paper 13627.

 [93] Heiss, F., A. Leive, D. McFadden, J. Winter, (2012). “Plan Selection in Medicare Part D:
      Evidence from Administrative Data.” NBER Working Paper 18166.

 [94] Hendel, Igal and Alessandro Lizzeri (2003). “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts:
      Evidence from Life Insurance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, No. 1, 299-327.

 [95] Hendren, Nathan (2013). “Private Information and Insurance Rejections.” Econometrica.

 [96] Hoffman, Allison K. and Howell E. Jackson (2012). “Retiree Out-of-Pocket Health Care
      Spending.” Financial Literacy Center Working Paper WR-962-SSA.

 [97] James E. and Song X (2001). “Annuities Markets Around the World: Money’s Worth and
      Risk Intermediation.” CeRP Working Paper 16.

 [98] Johnson, Richard W., Leonard E. Burman and Deborah Kobes (2004). “Annuitized Wealth at
      Older Age: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” Final Report to the Employee
      Benefits Security Administration, U.S. Department of Labor 9142, The Urban Institute,
      Washington D.C.

 [99] Johnson, Richard W. and Janette Kawachi (2007). “Job Changes at Older Ages Effects on
      Wages, Benefits, and Other Job Attributes.” The Program on Retirement Policy, Discussion
      Paper 07-03, The Urban Institute.

[100] Johnson, Richard W. and Corina Mommaerts (2011). “Age Differences in Job Loss, Job
      Search, and Reemployment.” The Program on Retirement Policy, Discussion Paper 11-01,
      The Urban Institute.

[101] Kaiser Family Foundation (2005). Medicare Chart Book. Washington, DC: Kaiser Family
      Foundation.

[102] Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research and Educational Trust (2012). “2012 Em-
      ployer Health Benefits Survey.” accessed online at http://kff.org/private-insurance/report/.

                                               57
[103] Karni, Edi and Itzhak Zilcha (1986). “Risk Aversion in the Theory of Life Insurance: The
      Fischerian Model.” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 53, 606-620.

[104] Keane, Michael (2014). “Decision-Making, Markets and Cognitive Decline.” Chapter 5 in this
      Handbook.

[105] Kelley A.S., K. McGarry, S. Fahle, S.M. Marshall, Q. Du and J.S. Skinner (2013). “Out-of-
      Pocket Spending in the Last Five Years of Life.” Journal of General Internal Medicine, 28
      (2), 304-309.

[106] Ketcham, J., C. Lucarelli, E. Miravete and M. C. Roebuck (2010). “Sinking, Swimming, or
      Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D. Working Paper.

[107] Khwaja, Ahmed (2010). “Estimating willingness to pay for medicare using a dynamic life-
      cycle model of demand for health insurance.” 156 (1), Journal of Econometrics, 130-147.

[108] Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. Vermeulen and M. V. Wrobel (2009). “Misper-
      ception in Choosing Medicare Drug Plans.” Working Paper.

[109] Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Joe Lupton (2007). “To Leave or Not to Leave: An Empirical
      Investigation of the Distribution of Bequest Motives.” Review of Economic Studies, 74(1),
      207-235.

[110] Kolstad, J. T., and A. E. Kowalski (2012a). “Mandate-Based Health Reform and the Labor
      Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform.” NBER Working Paper No. 17933.

[111] Kolstad, J. T., and A. E. Kowalski (2012b). “Health Reform, Health Insurance, and Selec-
      tion: Estimating Selection into Health Insurance Using the Massachusetts Health Reform,”
      American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.

[112] Krebs, Tom, Moritz Kuhn and Mark L. J. Wright (2011). “Human Capital Risk, Contract
      Enforcement, and the Macroeconomy.” NBER Working Paper No. 17714.

[113] Kuziemko, Ilyana, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater (2013). “Do Insurers Risk-
      Select Against Each Other? Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for Health Reform.”
      NBER Working Paper 19198.

[114] Langwell, K. M. and J.P. Hadley (1989). “Evaluation of the Medicare Competition Demon-
      strations.” Health Care Financing Review, 11(2), 65-80.

[115] Lockwood, Lee (2011). “Bequest Motives and the Annuity Puzzle.” Review of Economic
      Dynamics, forthcoming.

[116] Lockwood, Lee (2012). “Incidental Bequests: Bequest Motives and the Choice to Self-Insure
      Late-Life Risks.” Working Paper, Northwestern University.



                                              58
[117] Lustig, Josh (2011). “Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect Com-
      petition in Privatized Medicare.” Working Paper, Boston University.

[118] Madrian, Brigitte C. (1994). “Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is
      There Evidence of Job Lock?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, No. 1, 27-54.

[119] Manton, Kenneth G., Xiliang Gu and Vicki L. Lamb (2006). “Long-Term Trends in Life
      Expectancy and Active Life Expectancy in the United States.” Population and Development
      Review, Vol. 32 (1), 81–105.

[120] Marshall, Samuel, Kathleen McGarry and Jonathan S. Skinner (2011). “The Rise of Out-of-
      Pocket Health Expenditure at the End of Life.” In Explorations in the Economics of Aging,
      edited by David A. Wise, Chapter 3. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 101-128. Also,
      http://www.nber.org/papers/w16170

[121] Meara, E., C. White and David M. Cutler (2004). “Trends in Medical Spending by Age,
      1963–2000.” Health Affairs, 23 (4), pp. 176–183.

[122] Mello, M. M., S.C. Stearns, E.C. Norton and T.C. Ricketts (2003). “Understanding Biased
      Selection in Medicare HMOs.” Health Services Research, 38(3), 961-992.

[123] MetLife Mature Market Institute (2009). “The 2009 MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home,
      Assisted Living, Adult Day Services, and Home Care Costs.”

[124] MetLife Mature Market Institute (2012). “The 2012 MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home,
      Assisted Living, Adult Day Services, and Home Care Costs.”

[125] Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark Warshawsky and Jeffrey R. Brown (1999). “New
      Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities.” American Economic Review, 89(5),
      pp. 1299–1318.

[126] Mitchell, Olivia S. and John Piggott (2014). “Economic Aspects of Occupational Pensions.”
      Chapter 9 in this Handbook.

[127] Modigliani, Franco (1986). “Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations.” Amer-
      ican Economic Review, 76(3), 297-313.

[128] Monk, Courtney and Alicia H. Munnell (2009). “The Implications of Declining Retiree Health
      Insurance.” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College Working Paper, 2009-15.

[129] Muldoon, Dan and Richard W. Kopcke (2008). “Are People Claiming Social Security Benefits
      Later?” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, Issue in Brief, No. 8-7.

[130] Munnell, Alicia H. and Annika E. Sunden (2004). “Coming up Short: The Challenge of 401(k)
      Plans.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.



                                               59
[131] Munnell, Alicia H., Dan Muldoon, and Steven A. Sass (2009). ”Recessions and Older Work-
      ers.” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.

[132] Nakajima, Makoto (2012). “Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Reverse Mort-
      gages but Were Afraid to Ask.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, First
      Quarter, 19-31.

[133] Nakajima, Makoto and Irina A. Telyukova (2013). “Reverse Mortgage Loans: A Quantitative
      Analysis.” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

[134] Norton, Edward C. (2000). Long-Term Care. Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1,
      Edited by A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse. Elsevier Science B. V.

[135] Norton, Edward C. (2014). “The Economics of Health and Long Term (Aged) Care under
      Demographic Shift.” Chapter 17, This Handbook.

[136] Norton, Edward C., Hua Wang and Sally C. Stearns (2006). “Behavioral Implications of Out-
      of-Pocket Health Care Expenditures.” Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics (SJES),
      Swiss Society of Economics and Statistics (SSES), vol. 142(V), pages 3-11.

[137] OECD (2011a). Health at Glance 2011: OECD Indicators, OECD Publishing, accessed at:
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/health glance-2011-en

[138] OECD (2011b). “Help Wanted? Providing and Paying for Long-Term Care.”

[139] Older Americans (2012):            “Key Indicators     of   Well-Being”.    accessed   at:
      http://agingstats.gov/agingstatsdotnet/main site/

[140] Pashchenko, Svetlana (2013). “Accounting for Non-Annuitization.” Journal of Public Eco-
      nomics, Vol. 98(C), 53-67.

[141] Pashchenko, Svetlana and Ponpoje Porapakkarm (2013). “Quantitative Analysis of Health
      Insurance Reform: Separating Regulation from Redistribution.” Review of Economic Dynam-
      ics, Vol. 6, Issue 3, 383–404.

[142] Pauly, Mark (1990). “The Rational Nonpurchase of Long-Term-Care Insurance.” Journal of
      Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 1, 153-168.

[143] Poterba, James M. and Andrew A. Samwick (2001). “Household Portfolio Allocation Over
      the Life Cycle.” in Aging Issues in the United States and Japan, Seiritsu Ogura, Toshiaki
      Tachibanaki and David A. Wise, editors, University of Chicago Press, pages 65-104.

[144] Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise (2011). “The Composition and Draw-
      Down of Wealth in Retirement.” NBER Working Paper 17536.




                                              60
[145] Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1976). “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
      Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
      nomics, 90 (November): 629-649.

[146] Rust, John, Phelan, Christopher (1997). “How Social Security and Medicare Affect Retire-
      ment Behavior In a World of Incomplete Markets.” Econometrica, 65(4), 781-831

[147] Shan, Hui (2011). “Reversing the Trend: The Recent Expansion of the Reverse Mortgage
      Market.” Real Estate Economics, 39 (4), 743-768.

[148] Sherris, Michael (2014). “Longevity and Morbidity Projections.” Chapter 12, This Handbook.

[149] Sheshinski, Eytan (2008). The Economic Theory of Annuities. Princeton University Press.

[150] Singer, Hal J. and Eric Stallard (2005). “Reply to ‘The Life Settlement Market: An Actuarial
      Perspective on Consumer Economic Value’,” Criterion Economics L.L.C.

[151] Sun, Wei and Anthony Webb (2011). ““How Much do Households Really Lose By Claiming
      Social Security At Age 62.” Journal of Risk and Insurance.

[152] United Nations (2010). World Population Prospects, the 2010 Revision.

[153] Vanguard Report (2008). How America Saves, 2008: A Report on Vanguard 2007 Defined
      Contribution Plan Data.

[154] Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (2001). “Aging and Housing Equity.” In Innovations
      for Financing Retirement. Pension Research Council Publications, ed. Olivia S. Mitchell,
      Zvi Bodie, P. Brett Hammond, and Stephen Zeldes, 254–81. Philadelphia: University of
      Pennsylvania Press.

[155] Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (2004). “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look.” in
      Perspectives on the Economics of Aging. ed. David A. Wise, 127-80. University of Chicago
      Press.

[156] Vidal-Melia, C. and Lejarraga-Garcia, A. (2006), “Demand for Life Annuities from Married
      Couples with a Bequest Motive.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 5(2), 197-229.

[157] Villeneuve, Bertrand (2000). “Life Insurance.” in Handbook of Insurance, chapter 27, edited
      by G. Dionne, Kluwer.

[158] Washawsky, Mark J. (2013). Retirement Income: Risks and Strategies. MIT Press.

[159] Webb, Anthony and Guan Gong (2010). “Evaluating the Advanced Life Deferred Annuity
      - An Annuity People Might Actually Buy.” Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 46,
      210-221.



                                               61
[160] Wong, Andy, Michael Sherris and Ralph Stevens (2013). “Managing Life Insurer Risk and
      Profitability: Annuity Market Development Using Natural Hedging Strategies.” Australian
      School of Business Research Paper No. 2013ACTL04, University of New South Wales.

[161] Yaari, Menahem E. (1965). “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Con-
      sumer.” Review of Economic Studies, 32(2), 137–50.

[162] Yogo, Motohiro (2007). “Portfolio Choice in Retirement: Health Risk and the Demand for
      Annuities, Housing, and Risky Assets.” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

[163] Yogo, Motohiro, Ralph S. J. Koijen and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2010). “Health and Mor-
      tality Delta: Assessing the Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice.” Working Paper,
      Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.




                                              62
6    Tables

                                  65 and Over                             85 and Over
              Year     Number (Millions)     Percent (%)       Number (Millions)      Percent (%)
              1900             3.1                4.1                   0.1                0.2
              1910             3.9                4.3                   0.2                0.2
              1920             4.9                4.7                   0.2                0.2
              1930             6.6                5.4                   0.3                0.2
              1940             9.0                6.8                   0.4                0.3
              1950            12.3                8.1                   0.6                0.4
              1960            16.2                9.0                   0.9                0.5
              1970            20.1                9.9                   1.5                0.7
              1980            25.5               11.3                   2.2                1.0
              1990            31.2               12.6                   3.1                1.2
              2000            35.0               12.4                   4.2                1.5
              2005            36.7               12.4                   4.7                1.6
              2010            40.3               13.0                   5.5                1.8
              2020*           54.8               16.1                   6.6                1.9
              2030*           72.1               19.3                   8.7                2.3
              2040*           81.2               20.0                  14.2                3.5
              2050*           88.5               20.2                  19.0                4.3

Table 1: Number and Percentage of People Age 65 and over and age 85 and over, selected years
1900-2010 and projected 2020-2050.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1900 to 1940, 1970, and 1980, U.S. Census Bureau, 1983, Table 42; 1950, U.S. Census
Bureau, 1953, Table 38; 1960, U.S. Census Bureau, 1964, Table 155; 1990, U.S. Census Bureau, 1991, 1990 Summary
Table File; 2000, U.S. Census Bureau, 2001, Census 2000 Summary File 1; U.S. Census Bureau, Table 1: Intercensal
Estimates of the Resident Population by Sex and Age for the U.S.: April 1, 2000 to July 1, 2010 (US-EST00INT-01);
U.S. Census Bureau, 2011. 2010 Census Summary File 1; U.S. Census Bureau, Table 2: Projections of the population
by selected age groups and sex for the United States: 2010 - 2050.




                                                        63
                                                   % 65 and Over (Rank)
                              Country         2010           2030          2050
                               Japan        22.6% (1)      30.8% (1)     37.8% (1)
                             Germany        20.5% (2)       28.2 (2)     32.5% (6)
                             Singapore     10.2% (51)      27.5% (3)     32.6% (4)
                               Italy        20.4% (3)      26.8% (4)     33.3% (3)
                            Hong Kong      12.9% (41)      26.3% (5)     32.6% (5)
                              Finland      17.2% (13)      25.1% (6)     25.9% (27)
                              Austria       17.6% (8)      24.8% (7)     29.4% (15)
                              Slovenia     16.4% (19)      24.6% (8)     30.2% (13)
                             Portugal       17.9% (6)      24.5% (9)     32.1% (7)
                              France       17.0% (16)      24.3% (10)    26.9% (20)
                              Belgium      17.4% (10)      24.1% (11)    26.6% (21)
                            Switzerland    17.3% (12)      24.1% (12)    26.0% (24)
                              Greece        18.3% (4)      24.0% (13)    31.3% (9)
                            Netherland     15.4% (23)      23.8% (14)    25.6% (29)
                              Croatia      17.3% (11)      23.8% (15)    28.2% (18)
                           South Korea     11.0% (49)      23.2% (16)    34.2% (2)
                                U.S.          13.0%          19.8%         21.6%
                               EU 27          17.5%          23.8%         28.7%
                               World          7.6%           11.7%         16.3%

Table 2: 16 Oldest Countries in 2030 according to the Percentage of Age 65 and over.
Source: United Nations, World Population Prospects, The 2012 Revision.




                                                      64
                                         Country          1975     2000   2025
                                          Austria            24     21     32
                                         Belgium             22     25     36
                                         Denmark             21     22     32
                                         Finland             16     22     37
                                          France             22     25     37
                                         Germany             23     23     34
                                          Greece             19     27     37
                                          Ireland            19     17     28
                                           Italy             19     26     41
                                       Luxembourg            20     21     41
                                       Netherlands           17     20     36
                                         Portugal            16     23     32
                                           Spain             16     24     35
                                          Sweden             24     26     36
                                     United Kingdom          22     24     33
                                       Switzerland           19     22     37
                                          Turkey             8       9     14
                                          Japan              12     24     43
                                      United States          16     19     29
                                     OECD Average            17     21     32

Table 3: Elderly Dependency Ratios in OECE Countries
Note: Elderly Dependency Ratio is defined as the ratio of the population aged 65 and over relative to the population
aged between 15 and 64.
Source: United Nations, Demographic Yearbook, various issues.




    Income Percentile     Healthy Male      Unhealthy Male        Healthy Female    Unhealthy Female      All
    20                    8.1               6.3                   13.4              11.7                  11.7
    40                    8.9               7.0                   14.3              12.7                  12.6
    60                    9.9               7.9                   15.4              13.8                  13.6
    80                    10.9              9.0                   16.4              15.0                  14.8

Table 4: Life Expectancy in Years, Conditional on Being Alive at Age 70.
Source: De Nardi, French and Jones (2009).




                                                        65
    Income Percentile       Healthy Male     Unhealthy Male      Healthy Female      Unhealthy Female       All
    Percent Living to Age 85:
             20                 12.3                8.2                  39.2                32.5           31.4
             40                 15.8                10.8                 44.0                37.6           36.3
             60                 20.3                14.5                 49.9                43.5           41.6
             80                 26.0                19.4                 55.8                49.7           47.5
    Percent Living to Age 95:
             20                  0.8                0.5                  7.2                  6.0            5.4
             40                  1.1                0.8                  8.7                  7.5            6.9
             60                  1.7                1.2                  10.9                 9.4            8.7
             80                  2.5                1.9                  13.8                12.3           10.9

Table 5: Percent Living to Age 85 and 95, Conditional on Being Alive at Age 70.
Source: De Nardi, French and Jones (2009).




                                        Limitations in ADLs                     Limitations in IADLs
                  Age          None          1             2        3+             No           Yes
                              98.4         0.4        0.3         0.9            95.8         4.2
              55-64 years
                              (0.07)       (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.05)         (0.12)       (0.12)
                              94.3         1.4        1.2         3.2            87.8         12.2
              65+ years
                              (0.13)       (0.06)     (0.05)      (0.09)         (0.21)       (0.21)
                              97.1         0.7        0.6         1.6            93.8         6.2
              65-74 years
                              (0.11)       (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.08)         (0.18)       (0.18)
                              93.9         1.4        1.2         3.5            86.2         13.8
              75-84 years
                              (0.21)       (0.10)     (0.09)      (0.16)         (0.31)       (0.31)
                              82.2         4.7        3.4         9.7            64.7         35.3
              85+ years
                              (0.62)       (0.33)     (0.28)      (0.49)         (0.81)       (0.81)

Table 6: Percent distributions of limitation in activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental
activities of daily living (IADLs) by age: United States, 2003-2007.
Notes: (1). Data source: National Health Interview Survey, 2003-2007. Estimates are based on household interviews
of a sample of the civilian noninstiturionalized population. (2). Table is from National Center for Health Statistics:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/health policy/ADL tables.htm




                                                           66
                                                                                     Among Users
                                  Prob of      Mean Age      Mean Years      Prob of Using Care for       Prob of Leaving   Mean Number
     Type of Care                 Ever Using   of Firs Use   in Care      >1 Year   >3 Years   >5 Years   Care Alive        of Spells
                         Men         0.27          83            1.3       0.33       0.12       0.05          0.65              1.28
     Nursing Home
                        Women        0.44          84            2.0       0.42       0.22       0.12          0.66              1.39
                         Men         0.12          82           0.58       0.16       0.04       0.01          0.90              1.18
     Assisted Living




67
                        Women        0.20          85           0.48       0.13       0.04       0.01          0.93              1.26
                         Men         0.29          79            1.9       0.52       0.22       0.09          0.67              1.45
     Home Health Care
                        Women        0.35          81            2.3       0.52       0.28       0.15          0.77              1.68
                         Men         0.40          80            2.9       0.77       0.37       0.17          0.33              1.20
     Any Care
                        Women        0.54          82            4.2       0.85       0.53       0.31          0.35              1.27

      Table 7: Care Utilization for 65-Year-Old from Robinson Model.Note: Reproduced from Brown and Finkelstein (2008), Table 1.
                                               Outpatient Primary
                          Acute Inpatient Care Care & Specialist               Pharmaceuticals         Dental Care
                                               Contacts
   Australia              Covered, 100%             Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Not covered
   Austria                Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 100%              Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 100%
   Belgium                Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 76-99%
   Canada                 Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 51-75%         Not covered
   Czech Republic         Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 1-50%
   Denmark                Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 1-50%
   Finland                Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 76-99%
   France                 Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 51-75%            Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 1-50%
   Germany                Covered, 100%             Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 76-99%
   Greece                 Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 1-50%
   Hungary                Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 1-50%
   Iceland                Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 76-99%
   Ireland                Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              …                       Not covered
   Italy                  Covered, 100%             Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 100%           Covered, 1-50%
   Japan                  Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 76-99%
   Korea                  Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 51-75%            Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 51-75%
   Luxembourg             Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 51-75%
   Mexico                 Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 100%           Covered, 100%
   Netherlands            Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 100%           Covered, 1-50%
   New Zealand            Covered, 100%             Covered, 51-75%            Covered, 76-99%         Not covered
   Norway                 Covered, 100%             Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Not covered
   Poland                 Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 100%
   Portugal               Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 1-50%          Covered, 1-50%
   Slovak Republic        Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 51-75%
   Spain                  Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 100%
   Sweden                 Covered, 76-99%           Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 51-75%         Covered, 1-50%
   Switzerland            Covered, 100%             Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Not covered
   Turkey                 Covered, 100%             Covered, 76-99%            Covered, 76-99%         Covered, 100%
   United Kingdom         Covered, 100%             Covered, 100%              Covered, 100%           Covered, 76-99%

   Source: OECD Survey on Health System Characteristics 2008-2009 and OECD estimates.




Table 8: Basic Primary Health Insurance Coverage of Selected Functions of Care, and Share of
Typical Costs Covered, 2008-2009.
Source: OECD: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888932526806.



                                 1998     1999      2000     2001       2002    2003    2004     2005     2006   2007    2008
 By Face Amount                  8.3      8.2       9.4      7.7        8.6     7.6     7.0      6.6      6.3    6.4     7.6
 By Number of Policies           6.7      7.1       7.1      7.6        9.6     6.9     7.0      6.9      6.9    6.6     7.9

Table 9: Lapstion Rates of Individual Life Insurance Policies, Calculated by Face Amount and by
Number of Policies: 1998-2008.
Source: ACLI (2009). Reproduced from Fang and Kung (2012a).


                                                                   68
                          (1)             (2)              (3)                 (4)          (5)                 (6)
                        Panel A: Without Health Controls                   Panel B: With Direct Health Controls
  Variables              All           Female            Male                  All        Female               Male
                      -4392.7∗∗∗      -6037.4∗∗∗      -1863.4∗∗∗           1937.0∗∗∗     1677.3∗∗∗           2420.9∗∗∗
  Medigap
                        (346.5)         (455.5)         (538.8)             (257.2)       (348.0)             (395.8)
                        270.0                                              -751.6∗∗∗
  Female                                  ...               ...                             ...                 ...
                        (356.2)                                             (283.3)
                       387.5∗∗∗        460.6∗∗∗          292.9              394.5∗∗∗     417.5∗∗∗             355.4∗
  Age-65
                        (138.0)         (175.5)         (228.5)             (117.2)       (144.6)             (196.8)
                          1.9            -1.8              5.6              -27.5∗∗∗      -32.0∗∗∗             -22.8
  (Age-65)ˆ2
                        (10.6)          (13.2)          (18.8)               (9.2)         (11.4)              (16.2)
                          .12             .17              .07               .47∗∗         .55∗∗                .47
  (Age-65)ˆ3
                         (.22)           (.27)             (.43)             (.21)         (.25)               (.38)
  State Dummy            Yes             Yes               Yes                 Yes          Yes                 Yes
  Year Dummy             Yes             Yes               Yes                 Yes          Yes                 Yes
  No. of Obs.           15,945          9,725           6,220               14,129         8,371               5,758
  Adjusted    R2         .073            .092              .060              .211          .196                .252

Table 10: OLS Regression Results of Total Medical Expenditure on “Medigap”Coverage in the
MCBS. Panel A: Without Health Controls; and Panel B: With Direct Health Controls.
Source: Reproduced from Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008).
Note: The dependent variable is “Total Medical Expenditure.”All regressions are weighted by the cross section
sample weights. Health controls included in Panel B are described in detail in the Data Appendix under the category
“Health.”A total of 71 health indicators are included. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are in
parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.




            Self-reported Health Status            Excellent       Very Good     Good    Fair        Poor
            Monthly Capitation Payment ($)         601.0           619.5         646.6   708.0       796.3
            Monthly Health Expenditure ($)         266.0           347.8         575.4   923.7       2029.4
            Monthly Overpayment ($)                335.0           271.3         71.2    -215.7      -1233.1

Table 11: Capitation Payment and Health Expenditure by Health Status in Los Angeles County.
Source: Aizawa and Kim (2013)




                                                           69
 1218                                               BYRNE ET AL.


                                                          TABLE 5
                           CHARACTERISTICS OF CARE PROVISION FOR FAMILIES OF VARIOUS SIZES


                                         No Children                         Number of Children1
 Type of Family                      Single     Married         1      2          3          4       5     Total

 Percentage of all families            17.8         3.7        20.8   27.8       16.9        9.0     3.9   100
 Percent of families:
 Receiving care                         5.6        38.1        26.3   24.7       25.7      26.1     22.9    22.3
 Receiving formal care2               100           9.8        21.8   12.9       12.2       8.2      3.1    17.8
 Receiving informal care2                          98.0        88.3   93.5       96.8     100      100      89.9
   Receiving formal and                             7.8        10.2    6.5        9.0       8.2      3.1     7.7
     informal care2
 Percent of families where:
 Children help pay for care3                                   11.6   12.5        5.3       0        0       8.7
 Spouse provides informal care4                   100          48.9   62.9       63.6      63.5     68.8    62.6
 Children provide informal care4                               54.0   40.1       43.7      42.4     40.6    41.7
   Multiple children provide                                           9.7       16.7      19.4     23.1    14.4
     informal care5
   Children and spouse provide                                  2.9    3.0        7.3        5.9     9.4     4.6
     informal care4
 Average hours per week:
   Informal care provided                          26.8        25.8   25.8       24.3      27.1     34.4    26.2
     by spouse6
   Informal care provided                                      21.3   23.7       27.5      21.9     16.8    23.5
     by children7

 NOTES:
  1. Includes families with single and married respondents.
  2. As share of families with respondents receiving any care.
  3. As share of families with respondents receiving formal care.
  4. As share of families with respondents receiving informal care.
  5. As share of families with children providing informal care.
  6. Average over families with spouse providing informal care.
  7. Average over families with children providing informal care.



Table
  Among 12: families
             Characteristics
                     providing of some
                                   Care type
                                         Provision  forthe
                                             of care,    Families  of Various
                                                           provision            Sizes.
                                                                      of informal   care depends positively
  and the
Source:     provisionfrom
         Reproduced    of formal
                           Table 5 care depends
                                   in Byrne,      negatively
                                             Goeree,          onand
                                                     Hiedemann,   theStern
                                                                      number    of adult children.
                                                                            (2009)
     Among elderly individuals receiving informal care, 63% receive care from their spouse, 42%
  receive care from their children, and 5% receive care from both their spouse and at least one of
  their children. Conditional on the receipt of informal care from at least one family member, the
  likelihood that the spouse and at least one adult child share informal caregiving responsibilities
  ranges from 3% of those with one child to 9% of those with five children. A more common
  type of shared caregiving involves two or more adult children. Among families with at least
  one informal care provider and at least two adult children, 14% include multiple caregivers
  among the younger generation. Not surprisingly, the likelihood that siblings share caregiving
  responsibilities depends positively on family size. Conditional on the receipt of informal care
  from at least one family member, 10% of elderly individuals with two children receive care
  from both children, whereas 17%, 19%, and 23% of elderly individuals with three, four, and
                                                                             19
  five children, respectively, receive care from more    70 than one child.
     Among families where elderly individuals receive formal home health care, 9% of elderly
  parents receive financial contributions for this care from their children. These results are con-
  sistent with other papers in the literature that show that financial contributions among family
7   Figures




Figure 1: Percentage Distribution of Sources of Income for Married Couples and Non-Married
Persons Age 65 and Over: 1962-2010 (from Older Americans 2012, Indicator 8).




                                           71
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19




                                                         0
                                                             200
                                                                   400
                                                                         600
                                                                               800
                                                                                     1000
                                                                                            1200
                                                                                                   1400
                                                                                                          1600
                                                                                                                 1800
                                                    70
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    72
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    74
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    76
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    78
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    80
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    82
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    84
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    86
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    88
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19




72
                                                    90
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    92
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    94
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    96
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  19
                                                    98
                                           1/




     Figure 2: S&P 500 Index: 1970-2012.
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                                                                                        S&P500 (1970‐2012)




                                                    00
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                    02
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                    04
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                    06
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                    08
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                    10
                                           1/
                                             5/
                                                  20
                                                    12
       and fewer mortgage applications are two factors in these shifts.

       “Denver and Dallas again set new highs. All the other cities remain below their peaks. Boston and
       Charlotte are the two MSAs closest to their peaks with only 8-9% left to go. Las Vegas is still down
       47.1% from its peak level.”




       Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices and CoreLogic


       The chart above shows the index levels for the 10-City and 20-City Composite Indices. As of August
       2013, average home   prices3:across
                          Figure           the United
                                      S&P/Case        States
                                                  Shiller    are back
                                                          Home    PricetoIndices:
                                                                          their mid-2004 levels. Measured from
                                                                                   1987-2013.
       their June/July 2006 peaks, the peak-to-current decline for both Composites is approximately 20-21%.
       The recovery from the March 2012 lows is 22.1% and 22.7% for the 10-City and 20-City Composites.




S&P Dow Jones Indices




                                                         73
      800,000



      700,000



      600,000



      500,000



      400,000



      300,000



      200,000



      100,000



           0
                1975   1980    1985       1990                1995            2000          2005


                                  Total     Defined Benefit          Defined Contribution




Figure   4:       Number      of   Pension   Plans,   by              Type             of   Plan,   1975-2009.
Source: Author’s calculation from Form 5500 database.




                                                 74
      100%



       90%



       80%



       70%



       60%



       50%



       40%



       30%



       20%



       10%



       0%
             1975
                    1976
                           1977
                                  1978
                                         1979
                                                1980
                                                       1981
                                                              1982
                                                                     1983
                                                                            1984
                                                                                   1985
                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                 1987
                                                                                                        1988
                                                                                                               1989
                                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                                                    1992
                                                                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                                                         1995
                                                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                                                     1999
                                                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009




                                                                                                               %DB plans                          %DC plans




Figure 5:     Percentage of DB/DC Plans among                                                                                                                                               Total                       Pension                            Plans,   1975-2009.
Source: Author’s calculation from Form 5500 database.




                                                                                                                                              75
     100%



      90%



      80%



      70%



      60%



      50%



      40%



      30%



      20%



      10%



      0%
            1975
                   1976
                          1977
                                 1978
                                        1979
                                               1980
                                                      1981
                                                             1982
                                                                    1983
                                                                           1984
                                                                                  1985
                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                1987
                                                                                                       1988
                                                                                                              1989
                                                                                                                     1990
                                                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                                                        1995
                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                                      1997
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                                                                                    1999
                                                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009




                                                                                                              %DB plans                          %DC plans




Figure 6: Percentage Share of Assets in U.S. DB and DC Pension Plans:                                                                                                                                                                                     1975-2009.
Source: US Flow of Funds Account data.




                                                                                                                                             76
 Behavioral Implications of Out-of-Pocket Health Care Expenditures                                                                  


                                                                Figure 1: Out-of Pocket Expenditures (Means) by Age and Type
   Mean Monthly Out-of-Pocket Expenditures (1998$)




                                                     600
                                                                    Total         Long-Term Care
                                                                    Others        expup/expdn


                                                     400




                                                     200




                                                       0

                                                           65            70         75           80         85         90      95
                                                                                            Age (Years)



Figure 7: Out-of-Pocket Health Care Expenditure (Means) by Age and Type of Expenditures.
  The second
Source: Norton,graph
                Wang shows   that(2006,
                      and Sterns  the expenditure
                                        Figure 1). risk relative to income also increases
 with age (see Figure 2). Furthermore, out-of-pocket health care expenditures are
 a substantial fraction of income for many elderly persons. By age 81, more than
 10 percent of elderly persons spend half of their income on health care. By age
 90, more than 25 percent do. When individuals face this level of financial risk,
 it is bound to affect personal finance decisions.
     For elderly persons, out-of-pocket health care expenditures are important
 because health expenditures are the largest expenditure risk most elderly face,
 so out-of-pocket health care spending necessarily influences all other personal
 finance as well as choices between certain types of health care services. Consump-
 tion, savings, bequests, inter-vivos transfers,
                                          77     and decisions about formal versus
 informal care all depend on whether someone is likely to incur large medical
 bills. One reason that people do not follow the simple life-cycle model, which
                                                                                                                  N / W / S


                                                                    Figure 2: Total Out-of Pocket Expenditures/Income by Age
   Mean Monthly Total Out-of-Pocket Expenditures/Income




                                                          2
                                                                     25th percentile        50th percentile
                                                                     75th percentile        90th percentile
                                                1.5



                                                          1



                                                          .5



                                                          0

                                                               65        70            75         80          85           90          95
                                                                                             Age (Years)



Figure 8: Total Out-of-Pocket Health Care Expenditures/Income at Different Percentiles, by Age.
Source: Norton, Wang and Sterns (2006, Figure 2).
   4. Discussion

   For most Americans, the major source of expenditure risk is from long-term
   care expenditures, particularly late in life. Hospital, physician, and pharmaceu-
   tical expenditures, although quite large in total, are generally well insured in the
   United States. Individuals generally spend little out-of-pocket on these other
   types of health care. These facts have four behavioral implications. First, the risk
   of high out-of-pocket expenditures should affects savings over the life cycle. Our
   results shed more light on the model of H, S, and Z (1995),
   which showed that because Medicaid provides a safety net for long-term care
                                             78
   insurance, some persons will save less than   they would without the means-tested
   insurance. They predict that persons with relatively small amounts of wealth will
   intentionally under-save because it is optimal to consume more now and let Med-
                                                     Shlomo Benartzi, Alessandro Previtero, and Richard H. Thaler   145




      Figure 1
      The Distribution of Life Expectancy for a 65-year Old

                                        100%
                                                                                                        Men
                                        90%                                                             Women
                                        80%
       Probability of living to age x




                                        70%
                                        60%
                                        50%
                                        40%
                                        30%
                                        20%
                                        10%
                                         0%
                                               65   70        75         80         85         90         95        100
                                                                              Age

      Source: Authors’ own calculations based on life expectancy data from the Social Security Administration,
Figure(Bell and Miller, 2005, Table 6, pages 60–61).
       9: The   Distribution of Life Expectancy for a 65-year Old.
      Note: The chart displays the probability of 65-year old men and women living to age x.
Note: The chart displays the probability of 65-year old men and women living to age x. Reproduced
from Benartzi, Previtero and Thaler (2011), which is based on the life expectancy data from2 Bell and
      at the same time, so an annuity strictly dominates the investment alternative. Who
Miller (2005): http://www.ssa.gov/oact/NOTES/pdf studies/study120.pdf, Table 6, pages 60-61).
      says there is no such thing as a free lunch?
            This strong result relies on several underlying assumptions: the absence of a
      bequest motive, complete annuity markets at actuarially fair prices, and specific
      utility functions (additive separability and expected utility maximization). However,
      subsequent research has produced more general results. For example, Davidoff,
      Brown, and Diamond (2005) show that even with incomplete annuity markets,
      consumers will generally want to annuitize a substantial portion of their wealth.
      Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999) have shown that the fees and
      expenses associated with annuities are not large enough to explain the lack of
      annuitization. Some have suggested that the absence of inflation-protected annui-
      ties in the market may be part of the answer, but such contracts have been available
      for years in the United Kingdom and are not widely taken.
            Perhaps the most telling argument   79 is made by Brown (2007). He notes that
      the idea that some combination of fees, inflation, and adverse selection can explain
      the low take-up rate of annuities is belied by the behavior of Social Security partici-
         Millions




       350



       300



       250



       200



       150



       100



        50



         0
                    1   4   7   10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61 64 67 70 73 76 79 82




Figure 10: Variance of Total Health Care Expenditures, by Age.
Note: Author’s calculation based on Medical Expenditure Panel Survey data (2009).




                                                                     80
  NOTE: Tests found no statistical difference from estimate for the previous year shown (p<.05). No statistical tests are conducted for
  years prior to 1999.
  SOURCE: Kaiser/HRET Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits, 1999-2012; KPMG Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health
  Benefits, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1998; The Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA), 1988.




Figure 11: Among All Large Firms (200 or More Workers) Offering Health Benefits to Active
Workers, Percentage of Firms Offering Retiree Health Benefits, 1988-2012.




                                                                         81
               2.5


                 2


               1.5


                 1


               0.5


                 0
                 1997     1999     2001    2003 2005         2007     2009    2011
                                              Year

Percentage
        Figureof
               12: Older
                   Percentage (age≥65)          Homeowners
                              of Older (age 65) Homeowners with Reverse with    Reverse Mortgages
                                                                        Mortgages.
        Source: American Housing Survey, Various Waves. Reproduced from Nakajima and Telyukova
Housing(2013).
          Survey, Various Waves.


rse Mortgage Loans: An Overview
he most popular reverse mortgage is administered by the Federal Housing A
is part of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
ket for reverse mortgages has been shrinking.2 The government-administer
called a home equity conversion mortgage
                                     82    (HECM). According to Shan (201
ent over 90% of all reverse mortgages originated in the U.S. market.3
                             6
                                                             QF2 I (p2 )




                   Q1 + 2g                                     Q2 (p2 )




                                                                  -
                                   p∗2                            p2



Figure 13: Equilibrium Life Insurance Premium Profile in the Second Period as a Function of
Mortality Rates.
Note: Adapted from Hendel and Lizzeri (2003).




                                            83
