NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BELT AND SUSPENDERS AND MORE:
THE INCREMENTAL IMPACT OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY SUBSIDIES IN
THE PRESENCE OF EXISTING POLICY INSTRUMENTS
Sébastien Houde
Joseph E. Aldy
Working Paper 20541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20541
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We first would like to thank Hasan Nazar, who worked on this project during his master’s of public
policy studies and as a research assistant at Harvard. We thank Chris Cloutier, Brandon Hurlbut, Lani
MacRae, Susanne Rivera, and Toby Swope for assistance with the DOE SEEARP data. We would
also like to thank Lucas Davis, in addition to numerous seminar participants at Harvard, the Stanford
Institute of Theoretical Economics, and the AERE summer conference in Banff. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sébastien Houde and Joseph E. Aldy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Belt and Suspenders and More: The Incremental Impact of Energy Efficiency Subsidies in
the Presence of Existing Policy Instruments
Sébastien Houde and Joseph E. Aldy
NBER Working Paper No. 20541
October 2014
JEL No. H31,Q4,Q48,Q58
ABSTRACT
The effectiveness of investment subsidies depends on the existing array of regulatory and information
mandates, especially in the energy efficiency space. Some consumers respond to information disclosure
by purchasing energy-efficient durables (and thus may increase the inframarginal take-up of a subsequent
subsidy), while other consumers may locate at the lower bound of a minimum efficiency standard
(and a given subsidy may be insufficient to change their investment toward a more energy-efficient
option). We investigate the incremental impact of energy efficiency rebates in the context of regulatory
and information mandates by evaluating the State Energy Efficient Appliance Rebate Program (SEEARP)
implemented through the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The design of the program
- Federal funds allocated to states on a per capita basis with significant discretion in state program
design and implementation - facilitates our empirical analysis. Using transaction-level data on
appliance sales, we show that most program participants were inframarginal due to important shortterm intertemporal substitutions where consumers delayed their purchases by a few weeks. We find
evidence that some consumers accelerated the replacement of their old appliances by a few years,
but overall the impact of the program on long-term energy demand is likely to be very small. Our
estimated measures of cost-effectiveness are an order of magnitude higher than estimated for other
energy efficiency programs in the literature. We also show that designing subsidies that reflect, in
part, underlying attribute-based regulatory mandates can result in perverse effects, such as upgrading
to larger, less energy-efficient models.
Sébastien Houde
2222 Symons Hall
University of Maryland
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
College Park, MD 20742
shoude@umd.edu
Joseph E. Aldy
Harvard Kennedy School
Taubman 382, Mailbox 57
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joseph_aldy@hks.harvard.edu

2

1. Introduction
Over the past 40 years, policymakers have implemented an array of instruments – regulatory
mandates, information campaigns, and technology subsidies – to promote energy efficiency. For
energy-consuming durables, it is quite common that an individual consumer purchases a product
designed under an energy efficiency standard, marketed subject to government-required information
disclosure, and eligible for a subsidy. For example, an individual buying a Toyota Prius in 2006
contributed to Toyota’s compliance with Department of Transportation Corporate Average Fuel
Economy standards, likely learned of the fuel savings of the hybrid from the vehicle’s Environmental
Protection Agency fuel economy label, and benefited from a Federal tax credit administered by
the Internal Revenue Service. Likewise, appliances such as refrigerators, dishwashers, and clothes
washers are subject to Federal minimum energy efficiency standards, information disclosure on
typical annual energy usage, and occasionally various kinds of local, state, and Federal rebates
and tax credits. Given scarce resources and the existing overlay of policy instruments, what is the
incremental impact of energy efficiency subsidies on energy outcomes?
We focus on the incremental impact on subsidies, in lieu of the incremental impact of standards or
the incremental impact of information, for three reasons. First, efficiency standards for automobiles
and appliances have been a part of Federal law for decades. Likewise, information disclosure
programs for automobiles and appliances also date to the mid-1970s. Subsidy instruments, such
as tax credits and rebates, have frequently been “turned on” for short periods of time and then
“turned off” (e.g., through the one-time 2009 economic stimulus bill, occasional tax extender bills,
and occasional utility rebate programs). Thus, subsidies, in practice, appear to be the marginal
policy lever in the energy efficiency space. Second, subsidies are the marginal policy lever on the
extensive margin, which facilitates our analysis. Third, state governments and utilities (subject
to state regulation) may implement such subsidies to an even greater extent in the future. In
2010, utility consumer-funded energy efficiency programs amounted to about $5 billion and such
expenditures could double by 2025 (Barbose, Goldda, Hoffa, and Billingsley 2013). Appliance
rebates have traditionally been a significant component of such programs. The Environmental
Protection Agency has recently proposed regulating greenhouse gas emissions in the power sector,
through a framework implemented by the states (EPA 2014a). In its proposed regulation and
regulatory impact analysis, the EPA notes that rebates for high-efficiency appliances could represent
one approach for reducing power sector emissions (EPA 2014a,b). Our findings could inform how

3

federal, state, and local program managers could tailor their energy efficiency programs to promote
cost-effectiveness and maximize their net social benefit.
To address the question of the impact of subsidies on energy outcome, we evaluate the State
Energy Efficient Appliance Rebate Program (SEEARP) implemented through the 2009 American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The program, informally known as the “Cash for Appliances”
program (“C4A”), delivered $300 million to state governments so that they could provide rebates
to consumers purchasing residential appliances that met or exceeded the ENERGY STAR (ES)
certification requirement. Using transaction-level data, we estimate the energy savings for the
three major appliance categories that attracted the most funds: refrigerators, clothes washers, and
dishwashers. We find that the program did not have a meaningful impact on aggregate electricity
consumption. For example, the average energy savings for refrigerator rebate programs was a
statistically significant, but economically minuscule 0.08%. This reflects the very high rate of freeriding behavior by individuals claiming the rebates. We estimate that the ratio of “switchers”
(marginal rebate claimants) to “freeriders” (inframarginal rebate claimants) is 1:10, 1:12, and 3:8,
for refrigerators, clothes washers, and dishwashers, respectively. As a result, the cost per kilowatthour saved is on the order of about $0.25 to $1.50, depending on assumptions and appliance
category. The low end of this range is four times the average cost-effectiveness of utility-sponsored
energy efficiency programs (Arimura, Li, Newell, and Palmer 2012).
Several reasons explain these results. First, some consumers responded to the program by simply
delaying their purchases until their state’s rebate program opened. Second, the design of the rebate
program – in particular the eligibility premised on the ES program, which is in turn a function of
minimum energy efficiency standards – influenced the behavioral response to rebates. The minimum
efficiency standards vary by size and style for a given category of appliance, which results in ES
certification and hence SEEARP eligibility varying as a function of product attributes. For example,
a consumer may buy an ES-certified refrigerator with a bottom-mounted freezer and through-thedoor ice service that requires more electricity annually than a non-certified top-mounted freezer
with an icemaker but without through-the-door ice service. For some appliances, this appears to
be particularly problematic – we observe significant changes in ES market shares – but the overall
impact on electricity consumption is quite modest. Finally, we also find some evidence that the
generous rebates may have induced a small income effect that led consumers to purchase larger
appliances.

4

The design and implementation of this program facilitate our empirical analysis. First, the
Federal government allocated funds to the states on a per capita basis; thus the “size” of this
stimulus program, at the state level, is exogenous of the state’s economic condition in 2009 and
2010. Second, the states had significant discretion in the design of their programs, in terms of
start dates, eligible appliance categories, rebate amounts, and other characteristics. We combine
this rich source of variation with unique micro-data on individual appliance sales from a major,
national retailer matched with demographic information. Our main estimators rely on a differencein-differences strategy, and include an extensive set of controls to account for pre-existing time
trends, intertemporal substitution, and sorting into the program.
Our results can inform the emerging empirical literature on the use of multiple policy instruments to address a single societal objective. Several recent papers have highlighted the potential
interactive impacts of overlapping greenhouse gas mitigation policies, such as a cap-and-trade program and renewable portfolio standards (Goulder and Stavins 2011; Levinson 2012). In the context
of biofuels policy, scholars have also illustrated the potential welfare losses and unintentional incentives associated with the historically complicated overlay of policies to support ethanol, including
the ethanol blenders tax credit, the Clean Air Act oxygenate mandate, an import tariff, and some
state-specific ethanol mandates (de Gorter and Just 2010). While this previous work focuses on
multiple instruments faced by firms, and in many cases the unique impacts of policies overlaying
cap-and-trade, our research highlights the impact of a fiscal instrument (appliance rebates) in the
presence of information and minimum standards all focused on individual consumer behavior.
Our findings add to the growing body of evidence suggesting that energy efficiency subsidies
tend to have a high cost to society due to various unintended consequences. Davis (2008) shows
that subsidizing energy-efficient clothes washers induce people to use them more. Davis, Fuchs, and
Gertler (2013) find that a large-scale rebate program in Mexico for energy-efficient air conditioners
(ACs) and refrigerators may have actually increased (ACs) or led to modest reduction (refrigerators) in electricity consumption. The fact that consumers may have replaced an old non-functioning
appliance, have been prone to a rebound effect, or have upgraded to an appliance with more features
could explain these results. Boomhower and Davis (2014) also find that for the same program, a
large proportion of the program participants (>65%) would have purchased an appliance in the
absence of rebates. This estimate of “freeriders” is on par with other recent studies in the United

5

States. For instance, Alberini, Gans, and Towe (2014) find evidence that rebate programs in Maryland for energy-efficient heat pumps had a similarly high proportion of inframarginal participants
(50%-89%). Our paper represents one of the first ex post nationwide analyses of the impacts of
clean energy spending on energy efficiency outcomes. Like the above studies (Boomhower and Davis
2014; Alberini, Gans, and Towe 2014), we show that the econometric estimates of the program are
much less favorable than engineering estimates. This reinforces the role of using credible research
designs to estimate the returns to energy efficiency programs (Allcott and Greenstone 2012).
In addition, this analysis contributes to the literature on the effectiveness of Recovery Act
programs. Several papers have also looked at a similar program: Cash for Clunkers.1 Our results are
consistent with the findings of Mian and Sufi (2012); Li, Linn, and Spiller (2013); Hoekstra, Puller,
and West (2014). These three studies all found significant intertemporal shifting as a large share
of the participants took advantage of the rebates by pulling forward their car purchase decision
by a few months. We also show that C4A had a high proportion of inframarginal participants
(73%-92%), and this is partly attributable to short-term intertemporal substitution. We find some
evidence, for two out of three of the appliance categories that we study, that consumers pulled
forward their appliance purchase decision by a few years. However, a large number of consumers
also delayed their purchases by a few weeks until the start of their state’s C4A program.
One important difference between C4A and Cash for Clunkers is that the latter program was
implemented uniformly across the United States, which makes finding a valid counterfactual quite
challenging. Mian and Sufi (2012)’s empirical strategy exploits variation in the share of clunkers
in different cities’ pre-program implementation; Li, Linn, and Spiller (2013)’s strategy relies on
car sales from Canada; and Hoekstra, Puller, and West (2014) exploit a sharp discontinuity in the
eligibly criteria for clunkers. Under C4A, states designed their own rebate programs. We therefore
exploit variation in the timing of the programs, rebate amount, and appliance coverage across states
to estimate the various impacts of the rebates.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the appliance efficiency policy landscape. Section 3 presents a framework for evaluating multiple, overlapping energy efficiency
policy instruments. Section 4 presents the data. Section 5 presents our empirical strategy and main
1Technically,

Cash for Clunkers was not part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Nonetheless, Cash for Clunkers was intended to stimulate investment in new, energy-efficient vehicles and thus was
similar to various Recovery Act clean energy programs (Aldy 2013).

6

results. Section 6 investigates whether the program induces an income effect and upgrading. Section
7 presents a policy analysis with counterfactual scenarios. Conclusions follow.

2. Appliance Efficiency Policy Landscape
Since the oil shocks of the 1970s, local, state, and federal governments have employed an array of
policy instruments to promote the energy efficiency of appliances (and energy efficiency more generally). The 1975 Energy Policy and Conservation Act established a national energy conservation
program, including EnergyGuide labels for residential appliances. These labels provide a common
set of information on all appliances within a product category, including typical annual energy use
and operating cost and a comparison to the range of operating costs of similar models. The Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) implements the EnergyGuide label program and undertakes occasional
revisions of the program, including expansion to new products, updates of energy use and cost
information, and modifications of the label format.
The 1987 National Appliance Energy Conservation Act created minimum efficiency standards
for appliances. The act established the initial Federal standards and delegated authority to the
Department of Energy (DOE) to administer and periodically update the standards. These national
standards preempt state efficiency standards. For example, refrigerators have been subject to
California standards promulgated in 1978, 1980, and 1987 and national standards promulgated in
1990, 1993, and 2001.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) launched in 1992 the ENERGY STAR (ES) program, a voluntary initiative for appliance manufacturers (and others) to demonstrate the energy
efficiency of their products.2 An appliance model can earn the ES label, a simple brand-like logo,
if its efficiency exceeds by a certain percentage the minimum standard for that appliance category.
For most appliances, the certification is binary, i.e., a product either meets the requirement, or does
not.3 A number of appliance rebate programs (including the SEEARP discussed below) employ
the ES certification requirement as the basis for appliance eligibility.

2The
3The

ES program is now operated jointly by EPA and DOE.
EPA has recently experimented with a multi-tiered system.

7

State and local governments as well as utilities also implement a wide array of efficiency policies. These include tax credits, tax deductions, and rebates;4 mandates to utilities to improve
the efficiency and conservation by its customer base through so-called Energy Efficiency Resource
Standards;5 rebates to customers for reductions in electricity consumption (Ito 2012); and normmotivated information provision (Allcott 2011).
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 created the State Energy Efficient Appliance Rebate Program
(SEEARP) to provide guidance in the design of and federal support for state rebate programs. In
2009, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act made the initial appropriation to SEEARP,
in what became informally known as “Cash for Appliances.”
The 2005 act stipulates that SEEARP allocate federal funds to state programs proportional
to each state’s share of the national population. In addition, SEEARP requires states to use
ES certification or more stringent but similar criteria for rebate eligibility.6 Table 1 summarizes
the eligibility criteria used for the three appliance categories that we study. Most states allocated
rebates for products that just met the ES certification, although for clothes washers and dishwashers
several states adopted more stringent efficiency criteria.
Under SEEARP, states have sovereignty over the design of several elements of their rebate
programs. As a result, the C4A program gave rise to a collection of 56 different programs7 that
differed in the rebate amounts offered, appliances covered, eligibility criteria, timing and duration,
and mechanisms to claim the rebates.
4Examples

of state and local governments (and quasi-governmental entities) providing ES-based appliance
rebates and tax benefits include the following. The New Jersey Office of Clean Energy offers rebates for EScertified refrigerators and clothes washers. Oregon Trust, a non-profit created by the Oregon state legislature
and funded through utility-assessed consumer charges, implements rebates for ES-certified clothes washers,
refrigerators, and freezers. The city of Fort Collins (Colorado) offers clothes washer and dishwasher rebates
based on ES ratings. The state of Missouri implements a “Show-Me Green Sales Tax Holiday” that exempts
ES-rated appliances from the state sales tax for one week each year.
5American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (2012) notes that 24 states representing approximately two-thirds of U.S. electricity sales have implemented long-term energy efficiency resource standards.
6The Energy Policy Act of 2005 was amended in 2007 to allow eligibility criteria more stringent than the
ES requirements. These more stringent requirements must, however, be based on a formula similar to the
one used to determine ES eligibility.
7The District of Columbia and territories also received funds, but we focus on the 50 states in our empirical
analysis.

8

Consumers could claim a rebate, typically through online and mail options, by providing proof
of purchase and residency. Some states established a reservation system where consumers could
reserve rebates prior to going to the store. Most states did not offer rebates for online purchases.
Rebates were limited to one for each appliance category, but several states allowed households to
claim multiple rebates. New York offered rebates for bundled purchases (i.e., multiple appliances
purchased at once). Alaska offered additional incentives to rural residents. Kansas, Ohio, Oregon,
and Montana employed means-tested eligibility criteria for their rebate programs. In most states,
however, all households were eligible to claim rebates for qualifying appliances. Several states
provided additional incentives if the old appliance was hauled away and recycled.
The states offered economically significant rebates, on average 12%-15% of sales prices for refrigerators, dishwashers, and clothes washers, and these varied greatly among states. Most states
offered a fixed rebate amount for a qualifying purchase, but four states, Florida, Illinois, North
Carolina, and Oregon, offered ad valorem rebates (e.g., 20% of the price paid (FL), or 70% (OR)).8
States also varied in the timing of the implementation of their rebate programs. On July 14,
2009, DOE issued a press release announcing the program and allocation of funds to the states.
State governments began to draft design and implementation plans for C4A, which they submitted
to DOE for review and approval. According to Google Trends, consumers first started to search
for the program in June 2009. In August 2009, search queries rapidly increased and appear to be
correlated with ABC News’s national story comparing the program with Cash for Clunkers (August
20, 2009). States began advertising their programs in November and December 2009. The first
program started the second week of December 2009 in Kansas. By April 2010, more than 80% of
the states had launched their C4A programs (Figure 2). The programs lasted 26 weeks on average,
although program duration was quite heterogeneous. Programs in Iowa, Illinois, Massachusetts,
and Texas exhausted all rebate funds in only one day,9 while Alaska’s program lasted 91 weeks.

8In

some cases, the rebates claimed were extremely generous; the maximum rebates often exceed several
thousand dollars (Table 2). These numbers are outliers and should be put in the context of the Great
Recession. Program administrators were directed to distribute the stimulus funds quickly, which may have
led them to distribute unclaimed funds to bundled purchases.
9Programs in Illinois, Massachusetts, and Texas, however, reopened for a second phase that lasted longer.

9

Several states offered the rebates in different phases, where the program closed temporarily between
phases.10

3. The Simple Economics of Energy Efficiency Rebates
The previous section describes the extensive, overlapping, and complicated set of policy instruments
focused on residential energy efficiency. We now present a simple economic framework for evaluating
this policy space, with a focus on minimum efficiency standards, certification, and rebates for
energy-efficient appliances. This will motivate our empirical analysis of the incremental impact of
the SEEARP.
Consider that energy efficiency is simply measured as the absolute amount of energy saved.
The Federal minimum energy efficiency standards and ES certification are examples of attributebased regulation (Ito and Sallee 2014) where the maximum amount of energy a given appliance
model can consume is a function of size and other attributes. In the size/energy efficiency space,
a minimum efficiency standard (MEF) and ES requirement can be represented by two downward
sloping parallel lines (Figure 1), where only bundles above the minimum standard are allowed to
be present on the market, and certified products are all bundles above the ES requirement. If each
consumer values both size and efficiency, a consumer’s optimal bundle corresponds to the point
where the indifference curve (U) is tangent to the budget constraint (W). Regulations requiring
information disclosure about energy efficiency, such as EnergyGuide, aim to induce movements
along the efficiency dimension. Minimum standards, the ES certification, and subsidies, however,
may induce movements in both the size and efficiency dimensions. Their impact on energy savings
is thus ambiguous.
To illustrate, consider Panel A of Figure 1, which depicts the case where the appliance model
purchased in equilibrium just meets the ES requirement, as is often the case in several markets
(Houde 2014). Offering a rebate R for purchasing an ES product may first induce the so-called
freerider problem, a well-known source of economic inefficiency in this context (Joskow and Marron
1992). Because program administrators cannot restrict the access to a rebate program, consumers
that would have purchased an ES product absent rebates can simply claim the rebate and make
10States

that interrupted their programs are Arizona, California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, North Carolina, New Jersey, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, Vermont,
and Washington.

10

the exact same purchase. It is also possible that the rebate induces a small income effect, which
can be represented by an outward movement of the budget constraint. As a result, a consumer
may purchase a more efficient, but also larger appliance (Panel B). Depending on consumers’
preferences over size and efficiency, it is possible that the income effect induces the purchase of a
larger (smaller), but less (more) efficient appliance. Only in the case where firms offer products
that bunch exclusively at the ES requirement will the income effect unambiguously lead to more
efficient purchases (Panel C).
Even for consumers that could not afford ES products in the first place, offering a rebate R does
not ensure that a more efficient appliance will be purchased. Panel D illustrates the case where
the rebate leads to the adoption of a more efficient and larger appliance. It is, however, easy to
construct an example (Panel E) where the rebate has a perverse effect and leads to the adoption of
a less efficient product. In this example, this perverse effect can be ruled out only if the minimum
standard and ES requirement are set independently of size and solely lie in the energy efficiency
space (Panel F). More generally, rebates are at risk to be perverse when energy efficiency and the
attributes used to set the regulation are inversely correlated. In such case, rebates become implicit
subsidies for specific attributes other than energy efficiency.

4. Data and Preliminary Evidence
The DOE required state program administrators to collect detailed data on their programs. The
DOE compiled these data and provided us a dataset that includes all rebate claims, approximately
1.8 million made in the 50 U.S. states. For each rebate claim, we observe the characteristics of the
products purchased, such as the manufacturer model number, brand, and price paid. In addition,
we observe the amount of the rebate, the dates of the purchase and rebate application, and zip code
of the household. Some states also collected information about the appliance that was replaced,
whether the old appliance was hauled away, and the retailer where the purchase was made.
One limitation of the DOE data is that they only contain information about C4A participants
and do not provide information to construct a valid counterfactual of participants’ behavior in the
absence of rebates. Thus, for our primary analyses, we rely on transaction-level data that were
provided by a large retailer with non-marginal market shares (>5%) in the appliance market. The
retailer has brick-and-mortar stores in every state and an online store. The data cover the period
starting from January 2008 to November 2012. For each transaction, we observe the manufacturer

11

model number of the product purchased, the location of the store, the price paid, taxes, and a
unique household identifier. For a large number of households, consumer-specific demographic data,
including income, education level, housing type, age of head of the household, political orientation,
home ownership, and family size, are matched to appliance purchase data by household identifier.
Demographic information is collected by a third party (Acxiom) and the match is performed by the
retailer. About half the transactions (ranging over 44%-49% across the three appliance categories
we focus on) have a complete match with all the demographic information that we use. We do
not observe the exact location of each household, but we know the location of the store where the
household purchased its appliance(s); we assume that households lived in the same state where they
made their purchase(s). In addition to the prices paid, we also observe the manufacturers’ suggested
retail prices. The retailer has a national price policy. Retail prices are thus set at the national level
and vary idiosyncratically across stores. For each appliance, we observe attribute information such
as expected electricity consumption, size, the ES certification, and numerous other features.
A possible limitation of our analysis is that the retailer might not be fully representative of
the appliance market. We can address this concern using the DOE data, which recorded the
retailer where each participant made a purchase.11 Table A.1 compares prices, rebates claimed,
and the energy consumption and the size of the products purchased under C4A at our retailer
versus all other retailers observed in the DOE data. We found that on average prices tend to be
slightly higher, especially for refrigerators, at our retailer relatively to other retailers. Except for
refrigerators, there are no statistically significant differences in size. For energy consumption, there
is no clear pattern. Overall, we found that the differences are modest, and find good support for
external validity.
We collected information about state programs – including appliances covered, rebate amount,
eligibility criteria, and start and end dates – from each state’s program website. We also conducted
interviews with program administrators in several states to learn more about the implementation
of their programs.
Table 2 provides summary statistics of the program. Refrigerators, clothes washers, and dishwashers were the most common products covered by the programs. These three appliances attracted

11Not

all states recorded this information.

12

85% of the claims, and 65% of the funds distributed nationwide. For our analysis, we focus on instore purchases of these three appliances.12 Kansas, Oregon, Alaska, and Iowa offered the most
generous rebates. Rebate amounts in other states were, nevertheless, economically significant.13
The ES program covers all three appliance categories evaluated in our study. Over January-June
2009, national ES market shares were 46% for refrigerators, 53% for clothes washers, and 75% for
dishwashers (Table 3). These national averages mask state-level variation – in some states the
number of ES models offered is higher, and in others it is lower. Figure 2 plots the first evidence
of the impact of rebates on market shares. Each panel plots the nationwide ES market share for
an appliance category and the number of state rebate programs active at different points in time.
All ES-certified appliance models as of January 2010 are included in the market shares.14 For
refrigerators and clothes washers, market shares appear to peak at the time when most rebate
programs were enacted. The patterns suggest potentially short-lived impacts.

5. Energy Savings
5.1. Empirical Strategy
We model the decision to replace an energy-intensive durable as a two-step decision where consumers
first decide when to replace and then what new model to purchase. The market for a durable consists
of a population of consumers that can make a purchase at different points in time t over a time
horizon starting at t = 0 and ending at t = T . The market share of a particular product j over
the entire time horizon T is then the (weighted) sum of the market shares at different times t.
In particular, if we define the market share of product j over T by Mj , by the law of iterated
expectations we have:
(1)

Mj =

X

σj|t (Ωt ) · δt (It ),

t
12We

also looked at electric water heaters to investigate whether the behavioral response to rebates for a
less popular product was similar to the most popular ones. We found similar results (Appendix). Additional
results can be requested from the authors.
13Figure A.1 in the Appendix plots the average price paid along with the average rebate amount claimed
across states for these different appliances.
14Note that for dishwashers, the certification requirement changed in August 2009, July 2011, and January
2012. For clothes washers, the certification requirement changed in July 2009 and January 2011. For
refrigerators, the requirement did not change during the 2009-2012 time period.

13

where σj|t (Ωt ) represents the market share of product j conditional on the fact that consumers
make a purchase at time t, and δt (It ) is the fraction of consumers that decide to replace their
durable at time t. Ωt represents the characteristics of the products and consumers present on the
market at time t. Similarly, It represents the information set and the characteristics that consumers
have at t, which both determine whether consumers make a purchase at this particular time. This
may include expectations about current and future prices, product availability, expected remaining
lifetime of their durable, the cost of going to the store, and, crucially, rebates.
Because rebates enter both Ωt and It , they impact decisions on two margins. First, consumers
who want to take advantage of a rebate program can do so by waiting for the start of the program
or pulling forward their decision to replace their durable during the program window. Second,
when the rebate program is active, consumers can substitute and purchase rebate-eligible products.
Rebates then lead to energy savings via two mechanisms. First, consumers who pull forward their
purchases accelerate the replacement of older and less efficient appliances. Note that consumers
waiting for the start of a program have the opposite effect and contribute to an overall increase in
energy demand by holding on to their old appliances longer.15 Second, consumers may substitute
toward more energy-efficient products.
In this framework, the average energy consumption of the products purchased over a time horizon
T is given by:
(2)

E[e|R] =

X
j

Mj ej =

T
XX

σj|t (Ωj ) · δt (It ) · ej =

T
X

δt (It ) · ēt ,

t=0

j t=0

where ej is the energy consumption of product j, and j σj|t (Ωt ) · ej = ēt is the average energy
consumption purchased at time t, and the rebate amount R enters Ωt and It , for each t.16
P

The energy savings associated with a program offering a rebate amount r is the quantity E[e|R =
r] − E[e|R = 0], where E[e|R = r] is the average energy consumption purchased over the entire
time horizon for which rebates impacted consumers’ decisions, and E[e|R = 0] is the counterfactual
quantity where rebates do not impact decisions. The main challenge in estimating the quantity
15In

the present context, the C4A program was first mentioned in the new media in the summer of 2009
and most programs started less than a year after. Thus, the effect of delayed replacement is likely limited.
16Throughout the paper, we refer to the energy consumption of an appliance based on the expected energy
consumption estimated for that model’s EnergyGuide label. Thus, our analysis abstracts from potential
rebound effects, which are likely to be modest for refrigerators, but possibly larger for dishwashers and
clothes washers.

14

E[e|R = r] is to define the appropriate time horizon over which a rebate program had an impact.
To obtain an internally valid estimate of E[e|R = r] − E[e|R = 0], we need to estimate E[e|R = r]
over a time horizon where the distribution of consumer characteristics is exactly the same as for
E[e|R = 0].
We distinguish among four distinct time periods of a rebate program: the pre-announcement
period, the period between the announcement and the start of a rebate program (the pre-rebate
period), the rebate period, and the post-rebate period. Rebates enter consumers’ information set,
It , following the announcement of the program, which leads consumers to substitute intertemporally. The quantity E[e|R = r] needs to be estimated from the beginning of the pre-rebate period
to the end of the post-rebate period. The pre-rebate period should begin at the exact time the consumer who first learned about rebates decided to wait for the start of the program. Presumably,
this may have happened following the announcement of the program. Similarly, the end of the
post-rebate period should be defined as the purchase date that the last consumer who decided to
pull forward his purchase would have chosen if rebates had not been offered. These two consumers
are not observed. Our strategy to define the beginning of the pre-rebate period and the end of
the post-rebate period will then consist of conducting sensitivity analysis. If we were to define
the pre-period and post-period accurately, the overall size of the market over which E[e|R = r]
is estimated should remain constant because an increase in sales in the rebate period should be
canceled by the decreases in the pre-rebate and post-rebate periods.17 Therefore, the impact of a
rebate program on sales over the entire time horizon for which rebates impacted consumers should
be zero. In essence, our empirical strategy then consists of looking at two outcome variables: total
t (It )
sales and the energy consumption purchased by each household, and estimate the quantities ∂δ∂R
t
and ∂ē
∂R at different points in time. The effect of rebates on total sales will inform us about the
extent of the intertemporal substitution and help us determine how long the effects of the program
lasted.
To determine the causal effect of rebates on each of these two outcome variables, we rely on
difference-in-differences (DD) estimators that exploit variation in program coverage and rebate
amount across appliance categories, time, and states. The effect of rebates on weekly sales for a
given appliance type is estimated with the following model:
(3)

log(saless,t ) = αsy + γt +

T
X

ρl · DP eriods,lt · Rs + s,t

l=t
17This

is only true if we assume that the rebate program induces consumers to replace an existing appliance. Note that a dozen states required the recycling of an existing appliance in order to receive a rebate
for a new appliance.

15

where DP eriods,lt is a dummy variable that takes the value one if week t falls in the period l of a
rebate program. The rebate amount offered in state s is given by Rs , and corresponds to the rebate
amount reported on the program websites.18 For programs that provided ad valorem rebates, we
compute an average rebate amount by multiplying the percentage incentive by the average price
specific to each appliance category. By interacting DP eriods,lt and Rs , ρl measures the effect
of a rebate in a particular period of the program. For instance, we can estimate the impact of
rebates in the first week where rebates are offered, the week just before the start, and the week
just after the end. The DD estimator is implemented by adding two sets of fixed effects: αsy and
γt , which are respectively state-year and week-year fixed effects. The week-year fixed effects take
out the effects of promotions and advertising campaigns implemented by the retailer, seasonality,
and other shocks that impact the market of each appliance type. The fact that the retailer has
a national price policy implies that the week-year fixed effects capture the effect of the retailer’s
national pricing strategy. The state-year fixed effects control for pre-existing time trends in different
states and state-specific unobservables that may be correlated with the design and implementation
of rebate programs. They also control for rebate programs offered by state governments and/or
energy utilities, which may vary from year to year and have been found to impact the ES market
shares for some appliances (Datta and Gulati 2009). The dummy variables DP eriods,lt are not
perfectly correlated with week-year fixed effects because only a subset of states implemented rebate
programs for a particular appliance category and the timing of the programs varied across states.
For the estimation of Equation 3, we use weighted least squares to account for the fact that larger
states should count more in the identification of the coefficients ρl . Annual appliance category sales
in each state are used as weights.
We use a similar specification to estimate the effect of rebates on effective energy consumption
purchased by individual households. We use the log of the estimated annual electricity consumption
(kWh/y) of the product purchased19 by each household i as the dependent variable:
(4)

log(kW hs,t,i ) = αsy + γt +

T
X

λl · T ws,lt · Rs + βXi + s,t,i

l=t

We also add Xi a vector of household-specific demographics that includes income, education, age of
the head of the household, family size, political orientation, type of housing, and a home ownership
dummy.
18In

the base specifications, we assume that the marginal impact of rebates is the same across all states.
We do not account for differences in eligibility criteria, mechanisms to claim rebates, or other factors that
may have impacted the behavioral response to the rebates. We address heterogeneity later in this section.
19We use the estimate reported by the manufacturers. Therefore, we do not account for household-specific
consumption patterns.

16

The main threat to internal validity in our empirical strategy is that the features of state rebate
programs could be correlated with the impacts of the Great Recession in each state. Although the
use of state-year fixed effects alleviates this concern, we cannot completely rule out this source of
endogeneity. We, however, consider that this is not a major issue. As discussed earlier, the allocation of funds to each state was predetermined by the Energy Policy Act of 2005, and was therefore
exogenous to the economic conditions. States had the sovereignty to determine several other features of their programs, which could have been influenced by the local economic conditions at that
time. Through our interviews with the various program administrators, however, we concluded
that it is unlikely that the program features adopted in each state were systematically correlated
with the Great Recession. For all state program administrators, C4A represented their first experience with a large-scale rebate program. Moreover, there was no precedent at the federal level.
We argue that the inexperience of the state program administrators, the absence of past examples,
and the difficulty to forecast the effects of the recession as it was unfolding make the features of
each state program idiosyncratic. The relative timing of a state’s initial plan submission, DOE
feedback, negotiation over modifications, and final plan approval also appeared to be idiosyncratic.
Furthermore, Equation 4 includes demographics, which allows us to control for changes in consumer
demographics that could have been caused by the recession and that program administrators may
have tried to address. For instance, program administrators in states where low-income households
were hit hard by the recession may have decided to offer more generous rebates to attract these
consumers to appliance stores. By controlling for income, however, we are estimating the effect
of a rebate on the energy efficiency purchased for individuals with similar income. In sum, our
estimates λl exclude the changes in demographics induced by rebates.
Under the log-specification, the coefficients ρl and λl correspond respectively to the percentage
change in sales and energy consumption at different periods of a rebate program relative to their
pre-announcement levels.20 The overall percentage change in energy consumption associated with
a rebate program can be estimated by weighting and averaging the estimates λl over the different
periods, where we employ period-specific sales in each period. This can be done directly in the
estimation framework by defining a dummy variable that covers the entire rebate period, in addition
to the pre-rebate and post-rebate periods. In particular, suppose that DallP eriods,lt is a dummy
variable that identifies the pre-rebate period, the rebate period, and the post-rebate period, by
estimating the model:
(5)

20In

log(kW hs,t,i ) = νs + γt + λ · DallP eriods,lt · Rs + βXj + s,t,i

all specifications, we omit the dummy variable that identifies the pre-announcement period.

17

where the coefficient λ is a weighted average of the dynamic effects of rebates, and an estimate of
the overall energy savings relative to the pre-announcement level. In this specification, we rely on
state fixed effects instead of state-year fixed effects because some programs ran for more than one
year.21 The coefficient λ should be interpreted as a reduced-form estimate of the average impact
of a program that does not distinguish between, but accounts for, consumers that substituted over
time and between products. Note that by working with data disaggregated at the household level,
periods with the highest sales will have more observations and thus have more weight to identify
λ, which allows the effect of intertemporal substitution to be accounted for.
We will present the estimate of λ for various definitions of the dummy DallP eriod, which vary
in terms of start dates of the pre-rebate and end dates of the post-rebate periods, along with similar
estimates of the effect of rebates on total sales. In specifications where we define the length of the
pre-rebate and post-rebate periods so that we can still detect a significant impact of rebates on
total sales, we will know that the total market size over which E[e|R = r] is computed will not
be constant relative to the counterfactual scenario. For these specifications, the coefficient λ will
then overestimate the impact of rebates, because marginal consumers will be over-represented in
the population of consumers.

5.2. Results
Tables 4-6 present the results. We estimated the regression models separately for the three appliance
categories. To estimate the impact of rebates on electricity consumption purchased, we use the
log of the annual electricity consumption purchased by each consumer as the dependent variable.
Our primary sample includes only transactions that were successfully matched with demographic
information. Specifications that estimate the impact of rebates on sales use the log of the weekly
sales in each state, and use all observed sales. For all specifications, standard errors are clustered at
the state level. The dummy variable that identifies the pre-announcement period is always omitted.
Focusing on sales, we observe that rebate programs had a large impact mostly in the first three
weeks of the programs, and especially in the first week (Specification IV). In the week preceding the
start of the programs, however, sales tend to decrease. For refrigerators, we observe a statistically
significant reduction of 3.9%. The 15% increase in sales observed in the first week of the rebate
programs is then partly offset by a decrease in sales in the week just prior. For clothes washers,
sales decrease by 5.7% in the week prior to the start of the programs, which offset as much as 40%
21In

the Appendix, we show that for our main specifications, using state fixed effects instead of state-year
fixed effects has little impact on the results.

18

of the increase in sales of the first week of the rebate programs. For dishwashers, the reduction in
the week prior is not statistically significant.
In the week just after the end of the rebate programs, the impact on sales is not statistically
significant for all three appliance categories. However, for refrigerators and dishwashers, we detect
a decrease in sales several weeks (more than 10) after the program ended, which suggests that
the program may have had a small impact on long-term sales.22 Our results are partly consistent
with the findings of Mian and Sufi (2012) who found that the Cash for Clunkers program led to a
significant decrease in sales in the post-rebate period. In the present case, we, however, also found
evidence of an important short-term intertemporal substitution where consumers waited one or two
weeks to replace their current appliance. The next results show that the share of consumers who
pulled forward their purchase decisions appears to be modest, representing about 1%-2% of total
sales.
Specifications I, II, and III in Tables 4-6 present different estimates of the effects of the rebate
programs averaging over the pre-rebate, rebate, and post-rebate periods. For the first estimate
(Specification I), the duration of a pre-rebate program is defined as the two months preceding the
start of a program, and the post-rebate period consists of two weeks following the effective end
of a program. The second specification (Specification II) defines the pre-rebate period as the four
months preceding the start of a program, and the post-rebate as the two months following the end
of a program. The third estimate (Specification III) defines the pre-rebate period from the date that
“Cash for Appliances” was first mentioned in the news media (July 2009) to the start of a program,
and the post-rebate period consists of three months after the effective end date of a program.
For states that temporally interrupted their program, the period between two rebate periods is
attributed to the post-rebate period, and the second rebate period is counted as the continuation
of the first rebate period. The durations of the pre-rebate period and post-rebate period were chosen
to capture the short-term and long-term substitution effects. Longer or shorter periods could have
been used. Accounting for the intertemporal substitution, the rebate programs had a statistically
significant impact on refrigerator sales in all three specifications. For dishwashers, the impact on
sales can be detected in the first two specifications. For clothes washers, the effect is significant in
the second specification only. For each of the three appliance categories, the statistically significant
sales increases ranged from 1%-2% above the counterfactual. Altogether, the estimates of rebates
22These

results are robust to the way we define the last period of the post-rebate period. For instance, if
we define a dummy variable that identifies weeks 10 to 15 of the post-rebate period, and a dummy variable
that identifies all the weeks after the 15th week, we still detect statistically significant decreases in sales
between weeks 10 and 15 and after week 15 for both refrigerators and dishwashers, but not for clothes
washers.

19

on sales suggest that the effects of the rebates were short-lived, and some consumers who took
advantage of the rebates would have still replaced their appliances in the year that the rebates were
offered. The overall stimulus effect of the program was then modest: it leveraged little incremental
private investment, although it did provide a means for transferring resources to households who
participated in the program. It is beyond the scope of this paper to assess the marginal impact of
these transfers on non-appliance consumption and subsequent measures of economic activity.
Turning to the average electricity consumption purchased, for all three appliance categories
the impact of rebates on electricity consumption tends to be quite small when we account for
intertemporal substitution (Specifications I, II, and III). For refrigerators, the reduction is statistically significant but economically small (about 0.085%, or less than 1 kWh/year) for two of the
model specifications. For dishwashers and clothes washers, however, there are no statistically significant reductions when evaluating the rebate programs over all time periods. For clothes washers,
electricity consumption purchased fell a statistically significant 5% in week one and a statistically
significant 2% in weeks two and three. Statistically significant increases in electricity consumption
purchased in several of the weeks in each of the pre- and post-rebate periods illustrate the cumulative zero impact of rebates on clothes washers’ electricity consumption. Interestingly, rebates
spurred a 25% increase in sales in the first week of the dishwasher programs, but a statistically
insignificant 0.4% decline in electricity consumption. This likely reflects the small difference in
electricity consumption between ES-certified and non-ES models (less than 10%) and, as we show
next, that consumers substituted to slightly larger models during the rebate period. For clothes
washers, the ES requirement translates into a larger difference in electricity consumption between
ES-certified and non-ES models.
Figure 3 presents non-parametric estimates of the dynamic effects of rebates on electricity consumption and ES market shares. Panels on the left plot the normalized average electricity consumption purchased as a function of time before and after the start of each rebate program. The figure
shows a smoothed time-varying average that was estimated by regressing normalized electricity
consumption on flexible regression splines. The normalized electricity consumption is the residual
of a regression of electricity consumption purchased by each household on state and week-year fixed
effects. The figure is consistent with the previous regression estimates. For dishwashers and refrigerators, the rebates had very small effects on electricity consumption, no greater than 2 kWh/yr
savings even in the first week of the program. For clothes washers, there is a more substantial
short-term effect, on the order of 10 kWh/yr, that rapidly fades off.
Panels on the right of Figure 3 show similar plots where we have employed the normalized
ES market share as the dependent variable. The figure shows that rebate programs increased ES

20

market shares for all three appliance categories by 3%-6%. Again, there is evidence that the effects
were short-lived, and that consumers delayed their purchases to take advantage of the rebates, but
it is not clear whether consumers pulled forward their purchases. The fact that the increase in ES
market shares did not deliver energy savings for some appliances is a cautionary tale for the design
of rebate programs.

5.3. Robustness Tests
Our empirical strategy exploits variations across time and regions to isolate the effects of rebates.
The time fixed effects are then crucial for controlling the effects of the retailer’s pricing and advertising strategies. One concern is that the retailer implemented different strategies in each state,
and that idiosyncratic promotions and marketing efforts are correlated with the rebate programs.23
Our empirical strategy cannot rule out these unobservables. We, however, find that the week-year
fixed effects do well in controlling for the retailer’s strategies. In the Appendix (Figure A.2), we
compare the ES market shares with normalized market shares, which are the residuals of a regression of market shares on week-year and state fixed effects. If these fixed effects were to capture
most of the variations that are not attributable to rebates, we should expect that the normalized
market shares in states that did not offer rebates for a given appliance category would be tightly
concentrated around zero. This is exactly what we observe.
In the Appendix, we also present alternative specifications. First, we estimate the effect of
rebates on electricity consumption purchased using the whole universe of transactions and not controlling for demographics. Doing so has little impact on the estimates, suggesting that transactions
that were successfully matched (44%-49%) with demographic information are representative of the
whole dataset. We then perform the estimation using only transactions matched with demographic
information, but we do not control for demographics in the estimation. Again, this has little impact
on the estimates. Changes in demographics are therefore not an important source of endogeneity.
For the third specification test, we excluded five states from the analysis: Florida, Iowa, Illinois,
North Carolina, and Oregon. Iowa was excluded because the DOE data revealed that several claims
differed drastically from the program guidelines. We found 375 instances of rebate claims covering
90% of the appliance cost and exceeding $1,000. Other states were excluded because they offered
ad valorem rebates. For these states, using the average rebate amount then leads to measurement
error. Performing the estimation without these five states leads to qualitatively similar results

23

Please keep in mind that this national retailer employed a national pricing strategy for appliances during
the study period.

21

for all three appliance categories. Finally, the last robustness test takes the level of electricity
consumption purchased as the dependent variable. Results are also replicated closely.

5.4. Heterogeneity by State
One important feature of the legislation establishing SEEARP is that it provides sovereignty to
states over the design of their rebate programs. Our empirical strategy has so far exploited variation in coverage, timing, and rebate amount across states to estimate the average treatment effect
of a rebate on sales and electricity consumption, where the average was taken over all state programs. State programs under C4A, however, differed with respect to other dimensions, such as the
mechanisms to claim rebates, eligibility criteria, reservation system, additional incentives for hauling away the old appliances, and expected program length. In this section, we seek to investigate
heterogeneity in the effects of rebate programs across states.
Our empirical strategy is similar as before. We rely on a DD estimator to estimate a treatment
effect in each state. In this specification, we use variation over time to control for state-specific
effects, and variations in rebate coverage across states to control for time-specific effects. Variation
in rebate amounts is not a source of identification anymore given that it is confounded with other
program features. Our identification then relies on the difference in the timing of the program and
the fact that only a subset of states offers rebates for particular appliance categories. The model
that we estimate is:

(6)

log(kW hs,t,i ) = νs + µt +

T
X

λl,s · T ws,lt · Dstates + βXi + s,t,i

l=t

Figure 4 presents the estimation results graphically by illustrating the effects of rebate programs
on energy consumption. Each estimate represents a percentage change in electricity consumption
purchased relative to the pre-announcement period. We present two estimates for each state. The
first estimate reflects the effect of rebate programs during the rebate period only. The second
estimate accounts for the effect of intertemporal substitution. For this second estimate, the time
horizon considered includes two months of the pre-rebate period and two weeks of the post-rebate
period.
Overall, these findings mirror the previous results: the largest energy consumption reductions are
observed for clothes washers, and accounting for intertemporal substitution reduces the magnitude
of the estimated energy savings. For each appliance category, a few states have large reductions,
but most states have small, statistically insignificant reductions. Energy consumption appears

22

to increase under some state rebate programs, but these estimates tend to have large confidence
intervals.
We also investigate how program design could explain the variation among states by regressing
the mean estimate for each state on a vector of program characteristics, such as the average rebate
amount, program duration, whether the rebates were ad valorem or not, whether rebates could be
claimed online, the existence of a reservation system, incentive or requirement for hauling away the
old appliance, and the eligibility criteria. The results are presented in the Appendix (Table A.8).
More generous rebates tend to lead to larger energy savings for all appliances, except refrigerators,
where the effect is not statistically significant. Offering an ad valorem rebate has the opposite
effect. Having an eligibility criterion stricter than ES contributed to larger savings for dishwashers,
but not for clothes washers. Recycling incentives also had an impact for dishwashers, but not for
clothes washers. We do not find statistically significant effects for other program features.

5.5. Switchers, Freeriders, and Non-takers
A unique feature of our data is that we observe the number of rebate participants shopping at
our retailer in a number of states. This allows us to quantify the take-up rate, and distinguish
among different types of participants. We define as takers the consumers who claimed a rebate.
They fall into two categories: (1) switchers – the consumers who substituted away from a non-ES
product, and purchased an ES product because of the existence of rebates; and (2) freeriders –
the consumers who purchased an ES product and claimed a rebate, but would have bought an ES
product in the absence of the rebate program. We define the non-takers as the consumers who made
a purchase during the rebate period, but did not claim a rebate. Non-takers either purchased a
non-ES product, or purchased a certified product, but did not claim a rebate. These last consumers
may have been unaware of the rebates, found that the transaction costs to claim rebates were too
high, or were simply ineligible under the state program (e.g., for those states that employed means
testing for rebate eligibility).
We integrate our national retailer data with the DOE data for the 13 states that identify the
retailer in their SEEARP reporting. For these states, the proportion of takers is simply the total
number of rebate claims divided by total sales at our retailer. To estimate the switchers’ share of
rebate claims, we employ a state-specific estimator where our dependent variable is the log of total
sales of ES products:

(7)

log(SalesESs,t ) = νs + µt +

T
X
l=t

λl · T ws,lt · Dstates + s,t

23

As before, the index s denotes state and t denotes week. We use this model to estimate product
sales with rebates and separately to estimate product sales without rebates by setting the dummies
T ws,lt to zero. The difference between the predicted sales with and without rebates yields the
estimated number of switchers. This approach allows us to estimate the number of switchers for
each week that rebates were offered accounting for the intertemporal substitution in the pre-rebate
and the post-rebate periods. We simply estimate the number of freeriders as the difference between
the total number of rebate claims and the estimated number of switchers.24
Table 7 reports the estimates for all states for which the retailer’s and DOE’s data were successfully matched. The second and eighth columns are the DD estimates of the effect of rebates on
the sales of ES products. The estimates of the second column correspond to the percentage change
in sales during the rebate period only. In the eighth column, the effect of rebates is measured over
the rebate period, two months of the pre-rebate period, and two weeks of the post-rebate period.
The other columns report the proportions of switchers, freeriders, non-takers who bought an ES
product, and non-takers who bought a non-ES product among the whole population of consumers.
The first important result to note is that the proportion of switchers tends to be small relative
to the proportion of freeriders. Focusing on the estimates for the rebate period only and the U.S.
average, the ratio of switchers to freeriders is 1:4, 2:5, and 13:3 for refrigerators, clothes washers,
and dishwashers, respectively. If we account for the effect of intertemporal substitution, these
ratios fall substantially to 1:10, 1:12, and 3:8. These estimates imply that among the program
participants, 91% (refrigerators), 92% (clothes washers), and 73% (dishwashers) of the participants
were freeriders.
The second important result is that there are large variations across states. During the rebate
period only, rebates had a large impact on ES market share. This is especially true in Florida, which
had a generous but short-lived program. In Massachusetts, Ohio, Oklahoma, and South Carolina,
the effects tend also to be large for all three appliance categories. Some estimates, however, are
small and imprecisely estimated, and others are even negative (Virginia). Once we include the prerebate period and post-rebate period, the effects are much smaller, consistent with our previous
results.
A third important result is that the fraction of non-takers is large. This suggests that the
transaction costs of claiming a rebate deterred some consumers. The share of consumers that bought
non-ES appliances varies between 10% and 30% of the market. The fact that these consumers did
24Note

that under this approach, it is possible to obtain a negative proportion of freeriders if we overestimate the number of switchers.

24

not purchase an ES product even in the presence of the generous subsidies implies that financial
incentives may not be the best way to change their behavior.

6. Income Effect and Upgrading
We now investigate the impact rebates had on the type of product that consumers purchased.
In particular, we test if rebates induced an income effect and led consumers to purchase higher
quality appliances. Our empirical strategy relies again on a DD estimator, except that our outcome
variables are various product attributes, such as appliance size, style, and other add-ons.
Table 8 presents the results for models with size as the outcome variable.25 We present two
specifications for each appliance category. In the first specification, we consider all transactions
and find that during the rebate program, especially in the first week, the average appliance size
increases modestly. We can attribute this increase to two factors: ES products are larger on
average due to the certification requirement and an income effect. To isolate the income effect,
the second specification conditions on a purchase of an ES product. That is, we test if the rebates
influence the type of ES appliance models purchased. If the income effect is important, it should be
reflected in the average characteristics of ES models purchased. Conditioning on an ES purchase,
we still find small increases in the size of ES products purchased, which provides evidence of a small
income effect induced by the rebates. These increases are less than 1%. Note that these estimates
correspond to an intent-to-treat, as not all consumers that purchased an ES product claimed a
rebate. By matching the DOE and retailer’s data for a subset of states, we find that in the first
week of the rebate programs, 23% and 33% of the consumers who purchased an ES refrigerator
or clothes washer, respectively, claimed a C4A rebate. This suggests that the magnitude of the
income effect on size is on the order of 2% to 3%.
Table 8 presents similar regressions where the outcome variable is a binary categorical variable
that describes the style of the appliance. For refrigerators, we distinguish between top-freezer (1)
and other styles (0 if bottom-freezer or side-by-side). For clothes washers, we distinguish between
top-load (1) and front-load (0). According to industry experts, top-freezer and top-load models tend
to be perceived as lower quality by consumers. More importantly, the ES requirements vary across
these different appliance styles. For refrigerators, manufacturers tend to certify more bottom-freezer
25We

present only results for refrigerators and clothes washers for which we observe the overall volume
measured in cubic feet. For dishwashers, size is a categorical variable that takes four different values. Using an
ordered probit, we found qualitatively similar results for dishwashers. Figure A.3 in the Appendix provides
similar graphical evidence. Using a non-paramatric estimator, we show that the size of the appliances
purchased increased slightly in the initial weeks of the rebate programs, but dropped just before the start.

25

and side-by-side refrigerators, and for clothes washers, ES models tend to be front-load (Table 3).
These manufacturers’ decisions may reflect both a lower opportunity cost to meet the certification
requirement for these appliance styles and a desire to bundle the ES certification with higher quality
products. We find that the market share of top-freezer and top-load models decreases significantly
during the rebate programs. However, we don’t find evidence that this decrease is attributable to
an income effect – when we condition on ES purchases (second specification), the effects are close
to zero and not significant. In sum, it appears that the rebates do not induce consumers to seek
higher quality along this dimension. On the other hand, the ES requirements distort choice by
favoring particular appliance styles.
As a proxy for overall quality, we employ manufacturer suggested retail price (MSRP) – set
when the product entered the market – as an outcome variable (Table 9). The MSRP we use,
therefore, does not vary over time. We find that during the first week of the rebate programs,
the average price increases for all three appliance categories. Once we condition on a purchase of
an ES product, the effects are mixed. For dishwashers, we still detect a significant price increase.
Note that the proportion of takers in the first week for dishwashers is 34%. The upgrade due to a
possible income effect is thus economically significant. For clothes washers, the estimates are close
to zero throughout the rebate period. For refrigerators, we find a price decrease during the rebate
period, suggesting that ES models purchased were of lower overall quality during the rebate period.
Overall, we found mixed evidence that rebates led to an important income effect. It appears
that some consumers who took advantage of the generous rebate programs upgraded to larger
appliances. Moreover, we only find robust evidence that rebates led consumers to purchase higher
quality models for dishwashers. For refrigerators, we observe the opposite effect, and no effect for
clothes washers. On the other hand, our results clearly show the nature of the ES certification
requirement also induced consumers to choose different appliance styles.

7. Policy Analysis
7.1. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
How does the cost-effectiveness of C4A compare to other energy-efficiency programs? To investigate this question, we propose a simple approach to measure cost-effectiveness. First, we assume
that freeriders do not contribute to energy savings. We then consider that for marginal consumers
the savings correspond to the difference in the average (non-sales weighted) electricity consumption
between the eligible models and non-eligible models offered on the market. To illustrate, if the eligibility criterion is the ES certification, the average savings for the whole population of participants

26

(kW hSaved ) is given by:
(8)

kW hSaved = (1 − Pf ree ) · (kW h/y ES − kW h/y N onES ) · Lif etime

where Pf ree is the proportion of freeriders among the population of consumers that claimed a
rebate, and kW h/y ES − kW h/y N onES is the difference in average annual electricity consumption
between ES-certified and non-ES-certified models offered. This difference is then multiplied by the
average lifetime of the appliance. For all of our calculations, we assume a 15-year lifetime. For
all three appliances, we compute the electricity consumption of the model offered using data from
NPD Group, a market research company. The NPD data are point of sales from a large sample of
appliance retailers, including the one for which we collected data. The NPD data have been used
in several recent studies of the appliance market (Houde 2014; Spurlock 2013; Ashenfelter, Hosken,
and Weinberg 2013). They provide monthly sales at the model level from the year 2001 to 2011.
For our policy analysis, we impute the choice set for the years 2010-2011 using sales recorded by
NPD.
We also present cost-effectiveness estimates adjusted for the effect of accelerated replacement. In
constructing our adjustments, we have made assumptions biased toward showing how accelerated
replacement could most improve cost-effectiveness. We first assume that all switchers replaced their
old appliances five years earlier than they would have in the absence of the program. We selected
five years after inspecting the manufacturing year for a subset of refrigerators that were scrapped
under C4A.26 For these replaced refrigerators, we found that the average manufacturing year was
2001 and the average electricity consumption was 639 kWh/y. Again, assuming that the average
life expectancy of a refrigerator is 15 years27 implies that marginal consumers (switchers) may have
pulled forward their replacement decision by five years under C4A, on average.

26To

identify the manufacturing year of the refrigerators replaced, we matched the DOE data with data
from the California Energy Commission, which provides historical attribute data for refrigerators dating
back to 1978. Our matching procedure can only recover detailed attribute information for a subset of
refrigerators that were replaced under C4A (approximately 10,000) because not all states recorded the
manufacturer appliance numbers of the replaced appliances. There were also some inconsistencies in the way
the manufacturer numbers for replaced appliances were recorded in the C4A database. For clothes washers
and dishwashers, we could not recover attribute information on the replaced appliances, because we do not
have historical attribute data.
27The DOE assumes a lifetime of 18 years in its regulatory impact analysis of minimum efficiency standards
for refrigerators. According to a study of the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB 2007), the
average life expectancy of refrigerators is 13 years.

27

We then compute the total amount of energy saved by taking the difference in electricity consumption of an ES-rated appliance purchased in 2010 and an appliance purchased 10 years before
(in 2001). We then sum this difference over 5 years. For the remaining, 10 years of the appliance
lifetime, the average savings are simply the difference between an ES and non ES-rated appliance
purchased in 2010.
For clothes washers and dishwashers, we adjust for accelerated replacement under the same
assumptions: C4A marginal consumers replaced clothes washers and dishwashers that were about 10
years old and the average lifetime of an appliance is 15 years.28 The average electricity consumption
of a clothes washer or a dishwasher purchased in 2001 is 793 kWh/y and 457 kWh/y, respectively.
Table 10 compares our cost-effectiveness measure for different proportions of freeriders, including
our preferred estimates.29 At the average rebate amount offered for all three appliance categories,
the C4A did not perform well. The dollar amount spent for each kWh saved is $1.46 for refrigerators,
$0.44 for clothes washers, and $0.61 for dishwashers. This well exceeds the cost found for other
utility-funded programs, which is $0.06, on average (Arimura, Li, Newell, and Palmer 2012). Table
10 also shows that C4A would have cost more than $0.13 per kWh saved for refrigerators and
dishwashers even if there is zero freeriding. Due to the much larger difference between ES and
non-ES clothes washers’ energy consumption, lower-freeriding proportions of 50% or less would
have delivered cost-effectiveness on par with other utility-funded programs.
Even after adjusting for accelerated replacement, the cost-effectiveness estimates remain high
(Table A.10). The adjustment reduces the cost of each kWh saved by about a factor of two at best,
with cost-effectiveness under accelerated replacement ranging from $0.25 to $0.98 per kWh.
Would it have been possible to achieve better cost-effectiveness using alternative eligibility criteria? One limitation of ES-based rebates is that they provide an implicit subsidy for other attributes.
To avoid these perverse incentives, we consider criteria solely based on electricity consumption. In
other words, we construct a rebate that is not a function of the existing information (ENERGY
STAR) and regulatory (minimum efficiency standards) programs. For instance, we consider offering
rebates only for products in the lower 5th, 10th, or 20th percentiles of electricity consumption. Of
course, products that consume less electricity in absolute terms tend be smaller, and may have
28According

to NAHB (2007), the average life expectancy of clothes washers and dishwashers is 10 years
and 9 years, respectively. Thus, our assumptions are biased toward estimating greater energy savings and
lower cost per kWh saved from C4A.
29Our preferred estimates of the proportion of freeriders are from Table 7 (columns 9 and 10). The ratio of
the proportions of switchers and freeriders in the overall population implies that the proportion of freeriders
among program participants is 91%, 92%, and 73% for refrigerators, clothes washers, and dishwashers.

28

fewer features. Eligible products are thus most likely inferior in the non-energy dimension, which
is at the source of welfare losses. The cost-effectiveness metric does not account for these losses.
The estimates reported in Table 10 should then be interpreted as an upper bound for the potential
benefits of using a particular criterion. We find that using non-attribute based rebates improves
the cost-effectiveness for refrigerators and dishwashers, only. However, the cost per unit energy
saved is still high for these two appliance categories. For instance, the cost is above $0.20 for each
kWh saved if the proportion of freeriders is 75%.

7.2. Comparison with Other Estimates
The DOE contracted the consulting group D&R International to evaluate the impact of the C4A
program. According to D&R, C4A had a large impact and led to important energy savings (D&R,
2013). Their estimate of the overall savings is 2 trillion BTU per year, and the major appliances
contributed to savings of 815 billion of BTU per year.
To put these aggregate energy savings in perspective, D&R estimated average annual savings
per rebate claim of 116 kWh/y, 257 kWh/y, and 57 kWh/y for refrigerators, clothes washers, and
dishwashers, respectively.30 We cannot reconcile these large energy savings with our estimated
free-riding behavior. If we were to use Equation 8 to impute the proportion of freeriders using the
same assumptions as above, we would find that the D&R estimates imply that the proportions of
freeriders would fall below 0% for all three appliance categories. (I.e., the proportions of switchers
would exceed 100%.) Even after accounting for the effect of accelerated replacement, these estimates
appear to be overly optimistic. For example, assuming that all refrigerator rebate claimants were
switchers and they each scrapped a 10-year-old refrigerator and purchased an ES refrigerator five
years earlier than they would have in the absence of the program, then the proportion of switchers
would still exceed 100%. Under these same assumptions, the proportion of freeriders would have
to be no more than 25%-30% for clothes washers and dishwashers, respectively, well below the 92%
and 73% estimated free-riding rates in our analysis. These differences illustrate the importance of
explicitly accounting for free-riding behavior, including through intertemporal substitution beyond
the time horizon of program operation, in assessing the impact of energy efficiency subsidies on
investment decisions and energy outcomes.

30Table

A.9 reports their estimates for the three appliances that we study.

29

8. Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate the incremental impact of an energy-efficient appliance rebate program,
Cash for Appliances, in light of existing standards and information disclosure programs. We present
a collection of estimators that suggest that the energy savings associated with the program are
most likely very small. Our national estimators suggest energy savings of less than 1 kWh/year
for refrigerators, and fairly precise statistical zero effects for clothes washers and dishwashers. The
state-specific estimators illustrate statistically significant but relatively small (e.g., a few percentage
points) declines in electricity consumption for the states with the greatest energy savings
The modest energy savings reflect several factors. First, consumers substituted over time to take
advantage of the rebates: some consumers who took advantage of the rebates by purchasing energyefficient appliances would have made a similar purchase a few weeks earlier if the rebates had not
been offered. We find evidence that some other consumers may have accelerated the replacement
of their old appliances by a few years. Even after making a generous adjustment for the effect of
accelerated replacement, however, the overall impact of the program on long-term energy demand
is likely to remain modest.
Second, the reliance on ES certification, which itself relies on attribute-based minimum standards, appeared to undermine the energy-saving objective of the rebate programs. The ES requirement and minimum efficiency standards define energy efficiency as a function of size, style, and
other features. As a result, we find that rebates for ES products act as an implicit subsidy for some
attributes. Moreover, we also find that the generous rebates induced a small income effect, and led
consumers, at least some, to purchase larger appliances.
Third, program administrators could not identify switchers from freeriders. By making all ES
purchases eligible for a rebate within a given program, many consumers who already planned to
buy an ES-rated appliance could claim the rebate without a change in behavior. Indeed, it may
reflect the relative success of energy labels and ES labeling that ES-rated appliances constituted
about one-half to three-quarters of market share in the months leading up to the implementation
of C4A for our three appliance categories. These larger market shares, however, also risk creating a
substantial number of inframarginal rebate claimants, which undermines the cost-effectiveness and
efficacy of C4A.
We estimate freeriding rates of 73% to 92% across our three appliance categories. As a result, our
measures of cost-effectiveness, ranging from $0.44 to $1.46 per kWh saved, are an order of magnitude
greater than the $0.06 per kWh average cost-effectiveness estimated for utility-sponsored energy

30

efficiency programs. Even after generous assumptions about accelerated replacement, the cost per
kWh saved of C4A remains 4 to 16 times greater than this average in the literature.
While our empirical analysis focused on the implementation of a 2009 Recovery Act program,
it has implications for energy efficiency policies in an array of contexts. First, energy-efficient
appliance rebate programs are a common element of state, local, and utility energy programs and an
emerging element of U.S. climate change policy. The Northeast and Mid-Atlantic states that operate
the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a utility-sector carbon dioxide cap-and-trade program,
direct some of the revenues generated through the quarterly auctions of emission allowances to
energy-efficient appliance rebate programs. As noted above, the Environmental Protection Agency
has also identified energy-efficient appliance rebate programs as one policy option in implementing
power sector greenhouse gas emission performance standards. Second, the energy policy space is
characterized by a mix of overlapping policy instruments. This analysis illustrates the potential
for the presence of multiple pre-existing instruments to undermine the cost-effectiveness of a new
(marginal) policy instrument. Instrument design that fails to account for this complicated policy
space may risk higher costs and/or lower efficacy.

References
Alberini, A., W. Gans, and C. Towe (2014): “Free Riding, Upsizing, and Energy Efficiency
Incentives in Maryland Homes,” The Energy Journal, Forthcoming.
Aldy, J. E. (2013): “Policy Monitor. A Preliminary Assessment of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act’s Clean Energy Package,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
pp. 136–155.
Allcott, H. (2011): “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” Journal of Public Economics,
95(9), 1082–1095.
Allcott, H., and M. Greenstone (2012): “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 26(1), 3–28.
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (2012): “State Energy Efficiency
Resource Standards,” Discussion paper, Washington, DC.
Arimura, T. H., S. Li, R. G. Newell, and K. Palmer (2012): “Cost-Effectiveness of Electricity Energy Efficiency Programs,” The Energy Journal, 33(2), 63–99.
Ashenfelter, O. C., D. S. Hosken, and M. C. Weinberg (2013): “The Price Effects of
a Large Merger of Manufacturers: A Case Study of Maytag-Whirlpool,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1), 239–261.

31

Barbose, G. L., C. A. Goldda, M. Hoffa, and M. Billingsley (2013): “The Future of
Utility Customer-Funded Energy Efficiency Programs in the United States: Projected Spending
and Savings to 2025,” Working paper LBNL-5803E, Berkeley, CA.
Boomhower, J., and L. W. Davis (2014): “A Credible Approach for Measuring Inframarginal
Participation in Energy Efficiency Programs,” Journal of Public Economics, 113(0), 67–79.
Datta, S., and S. Gulati (2009): “Utility Rebates for Energy Star Appliances: Are They
Effective?,” Working paper, University of British Columbia.
Davis, L., A. Fuchs, and P. Gertler (2013): “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a Large-Scale
Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico,” WP-230R, Energy Institute at Haas.
Davis, L. W. (2008): “Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water: Evidence
from a Field Trial,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2), 530–546.
de Gorter, H., and D. R. Just (2010): “The Social Costs and Benefits of Biofuels: The
Intersection of Environmental, Energy and Agricultural Policy,” Applied Economic Perspectives
and Policy, 32(1), 4–32.
EPA (2014a): “Carbon Pollution Emission Guidelines for Existing Stationary Sources: Electric
Utility Generating Units,” Discussion paper, Washington, DC.
(2014b): “Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Proposed Carbon Pollution Guidelines for
Existing Power Plants and Emission Standards for Modified and Reconstructed Power Plants,”
Discussion paper, Washington, DC.
Goulder, L. H., and R. N. Stavins (2011): “Challenges from State-Federal Interactions in US
Climate Change Policy,” American Economic Review, 101(3), 252–257.
Hoekstra, M., S. L. Puller, and J. West (2014): “Cash for Corollas: When Stimulus Reduces
Spending,” Working paper 20349, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Houde, S. (2014): “Bunching with the Stars: How Firms Respond to Environmental Certification,”
Working paper, University of Maryland.
Ito, K. (2012): “Does Conservation Targeting Work? Evidence from a Statewide Electricity
Rebate Program in California,” Working paper, Energy Institute at Haas.
Ito, K., and J. M. Sallee (2014): “The Economics of Attribute-Based Regulation: Theory and
Evidence from Fuel-Economy Standards,” Working paper.
Joskow, P. L., and D. B. Marron (1992): “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence
from Utility Conservation Programs,” The Energy Journal, pp. 41–74.

32

Levinson, A. (2012): Belts and Suspenders: Interactions among Climate Policy Regulationspp.
127–140. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Li, S., J. Linn, and E. Spiller (2013): “Evaluating Cash-for-Clunkers: Program Effects on Auto
Sales and the Environment,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 65(2), 175–
193.
Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2012): “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 Cash for
Clunkers Program,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1107–1142.
NAHB (2007): “Study of Life Expectancy of Home Components,” Report, National Association
of Home Builders and Bank of America Home Equity.
Spurlock, C. A. (2013): “Appliance Efficiency Standards and Price Discrimination,” Working
paper, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

33

9. Figures and Tables

(a) ES Adopter

(b) Income Effect

(c) Products Bunching at ES

(d) Complier

(e) Perverse Rebate

(f) Comparative Statics: Non-AttributeBased Standard

Figure 1. The Simple Economics of Energy Efficiency Rebates

2011w1

2012w1

Market Share ENERGY STAR (%)
25
50
75
100

2013w1

10
20
30
40
Nb of Active Rebate Programs
0

0

10
20
30
40
Nb of Active Rebate Programs
0

2009w1

2010w1

2011w1

2012w1

Weeks

Weeks

(a) Refrigerators

(b) Clothes Washers
50

2010w1

Nb of Programs

Market Share ENERGY STAR (%)
25
50
75
100

Market Share Energy Star (%)

0

10
20
30
40
Nb of Active Rebate Programs

Nb of Programs

0

2009w1

Market Share Energy Star (%)

Nb of Programs

0

Market Share ENERGY STAR (%)
25
50
75
100

Market Share Energy Star (%)

50

50

34

2009w1

2010w1

2011w1

2012w1

2013w1

Weeks

(c) Dishwashers

Figure 2. ENERGY STAR National Market Shares vs. Number of Active
Rebate Programs
Each panel shows the weekly ES market share at the national level and the number of active
state rebate programs. Appliance models that were ES certified as of January 1, 2010 are
included in the ES market share for the whole time horizon.

2013w1

Normalized Market Share ENERGY STAR (%)
−2
0
2
4
6

35

Before Rebate Program
During Rebate Program
After Rebate Program

−40

Before Rebate Program
During Rebate Program
After Rebate Program

−40

40

Before Rebate Program
During Rebate Program
After Rebate Program

−40

(e) Dishwashers: kWh/y

−20
0
20
Weeks Since Rebate Program Started/Ended

(d) Clothes Washers: ES market share
Normalized Market Share ENERGY STAR (%)
−2
0
2
4

(c) Clothes Washers: kWh/y

40

(b) Refrigerators: ES market share
Normalized Market Share ENERGY STAR (%)
−5
0
5
10

(a) Refrigerators: kWh/y

−20
0
20
Weeks Since Rebate Program Started/Ended

−20
0
20
Weeks Since Rebate Program Started/Ended

40

(f) Dishwashers: ES market share

Figure 3. Electricity Consumption Purchased and ENERGY STAR Market
Share Since Program Start/End Date
The figure shows the normalized electricity consumption purchased (kWh/y) and normalized
ES market share fitted with a flexible regression spline on a variable that counts the number
of weeks since a rebate program started/ended in each state. The figure presents the fitted
spline and the 95% confidence interval. The positive part of the X-axis measures both the
time since a rebate program started and the time since a program ended. The figure shows
that the rebate programs had marginal impact for refrigerators and dishwashers; even in
the first week of the programs electricity consumption dropped by less than 2 kWh/y. For
clothes washers, electricity consumption decreased by about 12 kWh/y in the first week.

IA

ID

MA IA
AZ
AZ
ID
GA KS
MN VA FL
KS
GA
FL
COWV
COWV
MN
MD
AK
CA
KY
VT
NC
WAUS
US CA MS IL MD
SD
SC TX NM RI OH
IL
NE DE
MI OR
OR LA NJ NC KYWA
MA
AL HI
AR CT WI MI
NV NY AR
VT NV
MT
MOSC TX NM RI OH
MO
SD
OK
HI
MT AL
NE DE
Rebate Period Only
OK

Pre-Rebate Period (2 months), Rebate Period, and Post-Rebate Period (2 weeks)

ND
ND

-4

% Change kWh/y Purchased
-2
0
2

36

% Change kWh/y Purchased
-15
-10
-5
0

5

(a) Refrigerators
MN

MA

GA
DE MN
CT
MD
OR MI GA NV
VA UT
CT OR
LA MO
NJ VA UT AK
US
CA
NY
IL
WYMD US CO TX
NC WA KS
WI
AL SC
MS
NY
WV
CA
MOWV MT
FL
IA
ID WI LA
NMOH
SD
AR KY NMOH NC WA KS
SC AR KY
VT AZ
MA AL
NE OK
AZ SD
IL IA VT
Rebate Period Only
FL
OK
Pre-Rebate Period (2 months), Rebate Period, and Post-Rebate Period (2 weeks)

NE

IA
MS

NE

WY SC
MN
SC AL
MN
NY CO ID DE NJ IL
AZ SD
IL
AL
TX NC OR US WI KY VA RI WA MI MT WV MO OH FL
KS AK
CA AZ SD NV
CA
NV
AK
LA
GA

IA

MA
NE

Rebate Period Only
Pre-Rebate Period (2 months), Rebate Period, and Post-Rebate Period (2 weeks)

MA

-6

% Change kWh/y Purchased
-4
-2
0

2

(b) Clothes Washers

(c) Dishwashers

Figure 4. Impact of Rebates on kWh/y Purchased by State
Each panel shows the average percentage change in electricity consumption purchased
(kWh/y). For each state, two estimates are shown: the change during the rebate period
only, and the change during the period that includes two months before the rebate period,
the rebate period, and two weeks after the rebate period.

37

Table 1. Rebates and Eligibility Criteria for Each State
Refrigerators

Clothes Washers

Dishwashers

Rebate

Criteria

Rebate

Criteria

Rebate

Criteria

AK

300-600

ES rural/non-rural

300-600

ES

300-600

ES rural/non-rural

AL

150

ES

100

ES

75

ES

AR

275

ES

225

ES

-

AZ

200-300

ES

125-200

ES & Above ES

75-125

ES & Above ES

CA

200

ES

100

Above ES

100

Above ES

CO

50-100

ES

75

ES

50

Above ES

CT

50

ES

100

Above ES

-

DE

100

ES

75

ES

75

ES

FL

20%

ES

20%

ES

20%

ES

ES & Above ES

50-99

ES & Above ES

GA

50

ES

50-99

HI

250

ES

-

IA

200-500

ES

200

ES

200-250

ES & Above ES

ID

75

ES

75

ES

50

ES

IL

15%

ES

15%

ES

15%

ES

IN

-

-

-

-

KS

700

ES

800

Above ES

400

KY

50

ES

100

ES

50

ES

LA

250

ES

100

ES

150

ES

MA

200

ES & Above ES

175

ES

250

ES & Above ES

MD

50

ES & Above ES

100

ES

-

50

ES

25-50

-

Above ES

ME

-

MI

50-100

ES & Above ES

-

MN

100

ES

200

ES

150

ES

MO

250

ES

125

ES

125

ES
ES & Above ES

ES & Above ES

MS

75

ES

100-150

ES & Above ES

75-100

MT

100

ES

100

ES

50

ES

NC

15%

ES

100

ES

75 or 15%

ES

ND

150

ES

-

NE

200

ES

100-200

ES & Above ES

150

Above ES

NJ

75-100

35

ES

25-50

ES & Above ES

NM

200

ES

200

ES

-

NV

200

ES

NY

75-105

-

150

ES

100

ES

75-100

ES & Above ES

165

ES
ES

OH

100

ES

150

ES

100

OK

200

ES

200

ES

-

OR

70%

ES

70%

ES

70%

ES

RI

150

ES

-

150

ES

SC

50

ES

100

ES

50

ES

SD

150

ES

100

ES

75

ES

TX

175-315

ES

100-225

ES & Above ES

85-185

ES
ES & Above ES

UT

-

75

ES

VA

60

ES

75-350

ES & Above ES

50-275

VT

75

ES

150

ES

-

WA

75

ES

150

ES

75

WI

75

ES

100

ES

25

ES

WV

100

ES

50-75

Above ES

50-75

ES & Above ES

WY

-

100

ES

50

ES

ES

Notes: Criteria using ENERGY STAR have the acronym ES. Above ES means that a criteria
more stringent than ES was used. Alaska offered different rebate amounts for rural and non-rural
residents.

38

Table 2. Summary Statistics: Cash for Appliances
Product

# of States

#

Offering Re-

Claims

of

bates

Amount

Average

Average

Max

Distributed

Price

Rebate

Rebate

($M)

Paid ($)

Claimed

Claimed

($)

($)

Air Conditioners

30

70,781

25.6

4,511

361

3,812

Boilers

18

7,678

4.0

5,516

518

4,036

Clothes Washers

43

580,863

62.1

698

107

1,034

Dishwashers

37

316,117

26.6

543

84

47,751

Electric Water Heaters

25

3,267

1.0

1,636

307

1,816

Freezers

26

24,312

2.5

579

103

1,500

Furnaces

34

76,469

30.9

5,772

404

3,227
1,742

Gas/Propane Water Heaters

30

15,766

2.1

703

130

Gas/Propane Water Heaters (Tankless)

31

11,140

3.0

2,266

267

1,223

Heat Pumps

26

47,470

23.6

6,403

497

4,400

Refrigerators

44

613,561

78.8

1,112

128

7,085

Solar Water Heaters

15

634

0.8

7,961

1,308

2,500

1,768,058

260.9

Total

Notes: Data collected by program administrators and provided to the Department of Energy. Excludes U.S. territories.

39

Table 3. Summary Statistics: Retailer’s Choice Set
Appliances
Refrigerators

Clothes Washers

Dishwashers

ES Market Share Pre-Announcement Period (January-July 2009)
Mean

46%

53%

75%

SD (across states)

8%

10%

12%

Number of Models Offered in 2010-2011
ES

1,405

440

741

Non-ES

1,360

189

86

Average Electricity Consumption (kWh/year), 2010-2011 Models
ES

499

196

312

Non-ES

547

442

339

Average Size, 2010-2011 Models
ES

27.9

3.6

2.0

Non-ES

26.5

3.3

1.4

Average Price ($), 2010-2011 Models
ES

1,645

952

707

Non-ES

1,894

648

570

Style, 2010-2011 Models
% Top-freezer

% Top-load

ES

18

30

-

Non-ES

27

63

-

Notes: Summary statistics for number of models, electricity consumption, size,
price, and style are non-sales weighted. The metric “size” is measured in cubic
feet for clothes washers and refrigerators. For dishwashers, size is defined with
a categorical variable, where 1 = standard, 2 = tall, 3 = giant, and 4 = super
capacity. The price corresponds to the retail price.

40

Table 4. The Effect of Rebates on Sales and kWh: Refrigerators
Dep. Variable

log(sales)
I

II

log(kWh)

III

IV

I

II

III

IV

All Periods
Rebate × Dall: 2 Months Before,

0.0092∗

During, and 2 Weeks After

(0.0036)

-0.00082∗∗
(0.00027)

Rebate × Dall: 4 Months Before,

0.021∗∗∗

During, and 2 Months After

(0.0041)

-0.00084∗∗
(0.00025)

Rebate × Dall: Since Announce-

0.0093∗

-0.00037

ment to 3 Months After

(0.0045)

(0.00029)

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1

0.14

∗

-0.0024

(0.061)
Rebate × Weeks 2-3

0.07

Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+

(0.0013)

∗

-0.00011

(0.027)

(0.0021)

-0.019

-0.00051

(0.018)

(0.0006)

-0.026

-0.0013

(0.020)

(0.0011)

-0.0091

-0.0017

(0.017)

(0.0011)

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before

∗

-0.053

0.0015

(0.022)
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before

-0.037

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before

-0.043

(0.0009)

∗∗

0.0012

(0.013)

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before

(0.0011)

∗

0.00091

(0.017)

(0.0009)

-0.042

∗∗

0.0019

(0.013)

(0.0011)

-0.0012

-0.00012

(0.010)

(0.0007)

Rebate × 1 Week After

-0.0086

0.0002

(0.024)

(0.0011)

Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After

0.00092

-0.0015

(0.018)

(0.0010)

Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before
Post-Rebate Period

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After

-0.034

0.00012

(0.020)

(0.0010)

-0.024

0.00067

(0.023)

(0.0008)

-0.049

∗∗

0.000084

(0.017)
Constant

-

-

-

-

(0.0007)
6.26∗∗∗

6.26∗∗∗

6.26∗∗∗

6.27∗∗∗

(0.0042)

(0.0041)

(0.0041)

(0.0042)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

State-Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Obs.

12,450

12,450

12,450

12,450

>4M

>4M

>4M

>4M

R2

0.984

0.984

0.984

0.987

0.068

0.068

0.068

0.069

Demographics

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered
at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001). All specifications have week-year fixed effects.

41

Table 5. The Effect of Rebates on Sales and kWh: Clothes Washers
Dep. Variable

log(sales)
I

II

log(kWh)

III

IV

I

II

III

IV

All Periods
Rebate × Dall: 2 Months Before,

0.0048

During, and 2 Weeks After

(0.0045)

-0.0022
(0.0016)

Rebate × Dall: 4 Months Before,

0.011∗

-0.0029

During, and 2 Months After

(0.0046)

(0.0021)

Rebate × Dall: Since Announce-

0.0024

-0.0013

ment to 3 Months After

(0.0051)

(0.0017)

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3
Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+

0.14∗

-0.054∗∗∗

(0.061)

(0.0077)

0.07∗

-0.018∗

(0.033)

(0.0074)

0.0048

-0.0012

(0.015)

(0.0032)

0.0024

0.0013

(0.016)

(0.0034)

0.0061

0.0011

(0.012)

(0.0032)

-0.063∗∗

0.0062∗

(0.018)

(0.0028)

-0.03

0.0047

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

(0.015)

(0.0040)

-0.015

0.0042∗∗

(0.014)

(0.0015)

-0.016

0.0038

(0.011)

(0.0026)

0.0055

-0.00031

(0.009)

(0.0013)

-0.02

0.0038

(0.019)

(0.0040)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After
Constant

-

-

-

-0.0017

0.0019

(0.013)

(0.0038)

-0.014

0.0043∗

(0.017)

(0.0018)

0.0013

0.0043

(0.016)

(0.0025)

-0.013

0.0073∗

(0.016)

(0.0028)

-

5.36∗∗∗

5.36∗∗∗

5.36∗∗∗

5.36∗∗∗

(0.011)

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.012)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

State-Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Obs.

12,100

12,100

12,100

12,100

>3M

>3M

>3M

>3M

R2

0.988

0.988

0.988

0.990

0.131

0.131

0.131

0.132

Demographics

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered
at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001). All specifications have week-year fixed effects.

42

Table 6. The Effect of Rebates on Sales and kWh: Dishwashers
Dep. Variable

log(sales)
I

II

log(kWh)

III

IV

I

II

III

IV

All Periods
Rebate × Dall: 2 Months Before,

0.010∗

During, and 2 Weeks After

(0.0041)

-0.00077
(0.00042)

Rebate × Dall: 4 Months Before,

0.015∗∗

-0.00052

During, and 2 Months After

(0.0057)

(0.00039)

Rebate × Dall: Since Announce-

0.0044

-0.00044

ment to 3 Months After

(0.0057)

(0.00036)

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3

0.25∗

-0.0041

(0.099)

(0.0029)

0.07

-0.0018

(0.037)

(0.0007)

Rebate × Weeks 4-6

-0.01

-0.00067

(0.016)

(0.0007)

Rebate × Weeks 7-9

-0.0081

-0.0011

(0.016)

(0.0007)

Rebate × Weeks 10+

-0.01

-0.0009

(0.011)

(0.0006)

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before

-0.063

-0.0001

(0.036)

(0.0011)

-0.052∗

0.00032

(0.022)

(0.0007)

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before

-0.036

-0.00024

(0.022)

(0.0006)

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before

-0.035∗

-3.9E-06

(0.014)

(0.0005)

Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

-0.0083

0.00016

(0.009)

(0.0006)

0.0052

-0.0062

(0.037)

(0.0034)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After

0.0014

-0.0016

(0.026)

(0.0009)

-0.039∗

-0.00057

(0.019)

(0.0007)

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After

-0.029

-9.3E-05

(0.023)

(0.0007)

Rebate × 10+ Weeks After

-0.051∗∗

0.00036

(0.016)

(0.0005)

Constant

-

-

-

-

5.84∗∗∗

5.84∗∗∗

5.84∗∗∗

5.84∗∗∗

(0.0015)

(0.0016)

(0.0015)

(0.0016)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

State-Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Obs.

12,600

12,600

12,600

12,600

>2M

>2M

>2M

>2M

R2

0.982

0.982

0.982

0.984

0.402

0.402

0.402

0.403

Demographics

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered
at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001). All specifications have week-year fixed effects.

43

Table 7. Switchers, Freeriders, and Non-Takers
Rebate Period

Rebate, Pre-Rebate (2 months),
& Post-Rebate (2 weeks) Periods

DD

s.e.

Pswitcher

Pf ree

PN T −ES

PN T −N onES

DD

s.e.

Pswitcher

Pf ree

PN T −ES

PN T −N onES

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

28

-0.4

0.6

-1

10

62

29
26

Refrigerators
CA

-1.4

1.5

-2

11

63

FL

71.7

3.3

62

11

13

15

4.1

1.1

11

62

1

MA

16.6

2.9

22

27

30

21

3.8

1.0

31

19

22

28

MO

-1.7

1.3

-3

3

63

37

-0.9

0.5

-2

3

65

35

NY

13.7

3.1

8

19

48

25

7.6

1.2

5

22

46

27

OH

28.0

3.0

17

1

57

26

9.4

1.2

8

9

55

27
30

OK

27.7

1.6

30

18

29

23

4.1

0.7

12

36

22

SC

23.0

6.0

8

22

38

32

9.8

2.6

7

23

36

34

TX

0.9

1.1

2

13

55

31

2.2

0.4

7

8

55

31

VA

-18.0

4.9

-8

13

65

30

-11.7

1.9

-6

10

65

30

VT

16.4

2.4

10

25

37

28

3.1

1.0

3

12

58

28

US

3

32

36

29

1

10

60

29

Clothes Washers
CA

4.6

3.8

3

14

57

25

3.1

1.0

3

15

56

26

FL

67.6

3.1

66

4

24

6

-0.1

0.8

0

70

5

26

MA

28.3

3.2

35

40

15

9

4.4

0.9

34

41

4

21

MO

4.8

3.0

4

13

54

29

-1.9

0.8

-2

19

53

30

NY

9.0

4.2

5

28

42

25

3.8

1.0

3

30

41

25

OH

11.4

2.5

10

14

50

26

2.5

0.6

4

20

49

27

OK

29.8

1.8

32

20

30

19

5.0

0.6

17

35

24

25

SC

32.5

3.8

21

24

33

22

12.8

1.1

18

27

27

28

TX

6.5

2.2

7

1

60

31

2.8

0.7

5

3

61

31

UT

-10.7

5.1

-6

27

57

22

-2.2

1.3

-2

23

60

19

VA

-3.0

1.8

-5

10

67

28

-2.2

0.5

-4

9

67

28

VT

8.0

2.4

8

51

20

22

0.5

0.7

1

58

18

23

WY

6.0

3.8

5

19

56

21

2.7

0.9

3

21

56

20

6

15

53

26

1

12

59

27

US
Dishwashers
CA

1.3

2.2

2

3

76

19

1.6

0.8

4

1

76

19

FL

99.8

3.9

135

-61

16

11

1.9

1.0

8

66

12

14

MA

35.8

2.2

109

11

-28

8

6.1

0.6

82

38

-33

13

MO

6.5

1.7

12

18

55

16

0.6

0.6

1

28

55

16

NY

-0.3

1.2

-1

2

84

15

0.0

0.4

0

1

84

15

OH

15.7

2.1

22

8

56

14

5.2

0.7

10

19

56

15

SC

27.2

5.1

22

30

32

16

3.7

1.8

6

46

32

16

TX

11.0

1.7

24

-4

63

16

5.1

0.6

20

0

64

16

VA

-7.9

1.6

-23

29

80

14

-4.9

0.6

-20

26

80

14

WY

11.2

4.4

9

9

67

15

6.4

1.3

6

12

67

15

13

3

68

16

3

8

73

16

US

Notes: The second and eighth columns (DD) correspond to the estimated percentage changes in ES market share. The estimates
are state-specific and are obtained using a difference-in-differences estimator similar to the one presented in Section 5. Pswitcher
is the fraction of switchers for the whole population of consumers that made a purchase during the rebate period (fourth column),
or during the rebate period, pre- and post-rebate period (Column 10). Similarly, Pf ree is the proportion of freeriders, PN T −ES
is the proportion of non-takers that purchased an ES product, PN T −N onES is the proportion of non-takers that purchased a
non-ES product. Note that Pswitcher + Pf ree + PN T −ES + PN T −N onES ≈ 100.

44

Table 8. The Effect of Rebates on Size and Style
Refrigerators

Clothes Washers

Refrigerators

Dependent Variable: log(Volume Cu. Ft.)

Clothe Washers

Dep. Var.:

Dep. Var.:

1=Top Freezer, 0=other

1=Top Load, 0=other

All

ES Only

All

ES Only

All

ES Only

All

0.0076∗

0.0061∗

0.0084∗∗∗

0.0066∗

-0.051∗∗∗

-0.0065

-0.11∗∗∗

-0.017

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.003)

(0.013)

(0.006)

(0.015)

(0.010)

0.0068

0.004

0.0019∗

0.002

-0.029∗

-0.0054

-0.046∗

-0.021

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.013)

(0.008)

(0.018)

(0.011)

0.00081

0.0026∗

0.00068

0.0064

-0.013∗∗∗

-0.00032

-0.015

-0.0013

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.011)

(0.014)

0.0014

-0.0006

0.00052

0.0042∗

-0.014∗

0.0059

-0.024∗

-0.013

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.002)

(0.006)

(0.003)

(0.011)

(0.011)

ES Only

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3
Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9

0.0014

0.000092

0.00063

0.012∗∗

-0.030∗∗∗

0.002

-0.012

0.017

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.004)

(0.007)

(0.002)

(0.007)

(0.009)

Rebate × 1 Week Before

0.0012

0.0042∗

-0.0015∗∗∗

-0.0008

-0.0098

-0.0058

-0.0075

-0.020∗

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.008)

Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before

-0.0017

0.0035

-0.00032

0.00087

-0.00067

-0.0052

-0.018∗∗∗

-0.019∗∗∗

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before

-0.00068

0.0056∗∗∗

-0.00024

-0.00047

-0.0063∗

-0.0075∗

-0.021∗∗

-0.018∗∗

Rebate × Weeks 10+
Pre-Rebate Period

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.007)

(0.006)

0.001

0.0052∗∗∗

0.0000097

0.0016

-0.017∗∗∗

-0.0082∗∗

-0.016∗∗

-0.014∗∗∗

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.005)

(0.004)

-0.00052

0.0038∗∗∗

0.00014

0.000085

-0.010∗∗∗

-0.0031

-0.029∗∗∗

-0.021∗∗∗

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.006)

(0.005)

Rebate × 1 Week After

0.0014

0.0017

-0.00067

0.014∗∗∗

-0.029∗∗

-0.0084

-0.016

0.020∗∗

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.009)

(0.005)

(0.013)

(0.007)

Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After

0.00063

0.0031

0.00044

0.014∗∗∗

-0.026∗∗∗

-0.0084∗∗

-0.015

0.016

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.000)

(0.002)

(0.006)

(0.003)

(0.012)

(0.010)

0.00069

0.001

-0.000046

0.014∗∗∗

-0.021∗

-0.004

-0.0064

0.021∗∗

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.003)

(0.009)

(0.004)

(0.007)

(0.008)

-0.024∗∗∗

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before
Post-Rebate Period

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After

0.0018

-0.0004

0.0004

0.013∗∗∗

-0.0014

-0.017

0.013

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.000)

(0.003)

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.009)

(0.008)

0.0016

0.00071

-0.00033

0.020∗∗∗

-0.033∗∗∗

-0.0092∗∗

0.0074

0.040∗∗∗

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.003)

(0.006)

(0.003)

(0.006)

(0.004)

State-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Week-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

45

Table 9. The Effect of Rebates on MSRP
Refrigerators

Clothes Washers

Dishwashers

Dependent Variable: MSRP
All

ES Only

All

ES Only

All

ES Only

Rebate Period
40.4∗

-29.7

39.9∗∗∗

7.37

45.0∗∗∗

36.3∗∗

(17.9)

(21.9)

(6.6)

(9.2)

(12.0)

(11.7)

Rebate × Weeks 2-3

-3.85

-56.8∗∗∗

12.1∗

0.77

11.6

4.32

(9.1)

(15.4)

(5.1)

(3.5)

(5.9)

(5.0)

Rebate × Weeks 4-6

-13.7

-49.0∗∗∗

2.17

-0.78

1.78

-2.45

(9.4)

(12.8)

(2.7)

(1.9)

(2.7)

(2.9)

Rebate × Weeks 7-9

-7.28

-59.9∗∗∗

1.89

2.18

0.31

-1.67

(6.7)

(14.8)

(2.0)

(2.1)

(3.0)

(4.2)

Rebate × Weeks 10+

21.9∗

-63.9∗∗∗

1.38

-0.34

-2

-1.15

(8.4)

(16.9)

(3.0)

(1.6)

(2.4)

(2.4)

-8.96

-32.5

-6.66∗∗

1.03

-3.69

-6.78

(13.4)

(20.0)

(2.2)

(3.5)

(3.9)

(4.0)

Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before

-27.9∗∗∗

-40.4∗∗

-1.43

1.5

-3.36

-5.87

(6.3)

(11.7)

(2.1)

(3.4)

(4.0)

(4.2)

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before

-22.1∗∗∗

-31.6∗

-4.64∗∗∗

-2.63∗

0.17

-6.04∗

Rebate × Week 1

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before

(6.2)

(12.6)

(1.1)

(1.1)

(2.5)

(2.6)

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before

2.89

-11.3

-2.84

-1.31

-2.73

-9.67∗∗

(6.0)

(10.6)

(2.0)

(1.8)

(2.8)

(2.8)

Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

-7.85∗∗∗

-7.43

-1.22

-2.38∗

2.85

-6.08∗∗∗

(1.5)

(4.1)

(1.2)

(1.1)

(1.5)

(1.5)

9.63

-60.5∗∗∗

-6.37

-7.75

11.8

12.6

(7.5)

(13.1)

(5.4)

(5.1)

(11.8)

(9.7)

6.42

-51.0∗

0.71

-0.92

5.58

6.01

(12.2)

(21.0)

(2.8)

(1.9)

(8.2)

(6.8)

0.22

-67.1∗∗∗

-1.99

-2.9

-2.41

-1.82

(11.0)

(14.9)

(2.6)

(2.5)

(5.7)

(5.2)

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After

5.95

-69.9∗∗∗

-0.62

-1.21

-3.76

-1.02

(5.4)

(19.2)

(1.8)

(1.8)

(5.3)

(4.3)

Rebate × 10+ Weeks After

32.8∗∗∗

-57.4∗∗∗

-2.52

-2.91

-4.4

1.39

(4.3)

(15.1)

(2.5)

(2.2)

(4.3)

(4.0)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After

State-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Week-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

46

Table 10. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
kWh/y

Price

Size

($)

Rebate

Cost-Effectiveness ($/kWh saved)

($)

Proportion of Freeriders
Preferred

0%

25%

50%

75%

90%

Estimate
Refrigerators
91%
ES

478

1243

27.1

Non-ES

543

1665

27.3

Top 5%

342

818

19.7

Bottom 95%

525

1544

27.1

Top 10%

367

725

20.4

Bottom 90%

532

1577

27.3

Top 20%

403

1055

21.8

Bottom 80%

545

1594

27.6

128

1.46

0.13

0.18

0.26

0.53

1.31

128

0.52

0.05

0.06

0.09

0.19

0.47

128

0.57

0.05

0.07

0.10

0.21

0.52

128

0.67

0.06

0.08

0.12

0.24

0.60

Clothes Washers
92%
ES

163

757

4.2

Non-ES

364

428

3.1

Top 5%

99

714

4.1

Bottom 95%

214

685

3.9

Top 10%

103

804

4.1

Bottom 90%

219

675

3.9

Top 20%

115

780

4.2

Bottom 80%

236

662

3.8

ES

279

699

-

Non-ES

313

480

-

107

0.44

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.14

0.35

107

0.78

0.06

0.08

0.12

0.25

0.62

107

0.77

0.06

0.08

0.12

0.25

0.61

107

0.74

0.06

0.08

0.12

0.24

0.59

Dishwashers
73%

Top 5%

186

996

-

Bottom 95%

294

618

-

Top 10%

214

868

-

Bottom 90%

297

613

Top 20%

247

786

-

Bottom 80%

304

593

-

84

0.61

0.16

0.22

0.33

0.66

1.65

84

0.19

0.05

0.07

0.10

0.21

0.52

84

0.25

0.07

0.09

0.13

0.27

0.67

84

0.36

0.10

0.13

0.20

0.39

0.98

Notes: The rebate amount for each appliance category is the non-weighted average of the
rebate amount offered by each state. The preferred proportion of freeriders is obtained
from Table 7, columns 10 and 11. For refrigerators and clothes washers, size is measured
in cubic feet. For dishwashers, we report the proportion of models that are classified as
tall. For all appliances, we assume a lifetime of 15 years.

47

1,500

Online Appendix

Price

WY

WI

WV

WA
WA

VT

WA

VT
VT

VA
VA
VA

TX

UT
UT

UT

TX
TX

TN
TN
TN

RI

SD
SD

SD

SC
SC

SC

RI
RI

PA
PA
PA

OK

OR

OK

OR

OK

OR

NY

OH

NV

NJ

NM

NE

NH

ND

NH

NC

MT

MS

MO

MI

MN

ME

MD

LA

KY

MA

KS

IL

IN

IA

ID

HI

FL

GA

DE

CT

DC

CO

AZ

CA

AL

AR

AK

0

Mean Rebate Amount/Price ($)
500
1,000

Rebate

(a) Refrigerators
Mean Rebate Amount/Price ($)
200
400
600
800

Price

WI

WY
WY

OH
OH

WV

NY
NY

WI

NV
NV

WV

NJ

NM

NJ

NM

NE

ND

NC

MT

MS

MO

MN

MI

ME

MD

MA

LA

KY

KS

IL

IN

ID

IA

HI

GA

FL

DE

CT

DC

CO

AZ

CA

AL

AR

AK

0

Rebate

800

(b) Clothes Washers
Price

NH

NE

ND

NC

MT

MS

MO

MN

MI

ME

MD

MA

LA

KY

KS

IL

IN

ID

IA

HI

GA

FL

DE

CT

DC

CO

AZ

CA

AL

AR

AK

0

Mean Rebate Amount/Price ($)
200
400
600

Rebate

(c) Dishwashers

Figure A.1. Average Price vs. Rebate Amount
Each panel shows the average price of the appliance purchased (in white) and the average
rebate amount claimed (in red). States with no average price but a positive rebate amount
are states where program managers did not collect price information. States where both
price and rebate information are missing did not offer rebates for this particular appliance.

48
States Without Rebates
100

100

States Without Rebates
Market Share

Market Share

−20

−20

ENERGY STAR Market Share (%)
0
20
40
60
80

Normalized Market Share

ENERGY STAR Market Share (%)
0
20
40
60
80

Normalized Market Share

2009w26

2010w1

2010w26

2011w1

2009w1

2009w26

(a) Refrigerators

2010w1

2010w26

(b) Clothes Washers

ENERGY STAR Market Share (%)
0
20
40
60
80

100

States Without Rebates

Market Share
Normalized Market Share

−20

2009w1

2009w1

2009w26

2010w1

2010w26

2011w1

(c) Dishwashers

Figure A.2. ES Market Shares vs. Normalized Market Shares, States Without Rebates
Each panel shows the weekly ES market share for all states that did not offer rebates and
the corresponding normalized market shares. Normalized market shares are the residuals of
a regression of market shares on state and week-year fixed effects. The figure shows that,
for states without rebates, the fixed effects capture most of the variations in market shares.

2011w1

49

(a) Refrigerators

(b) Clothes Washers

(c) Dishwashers

Figure A.3. Size Purchased Since Program Start/End Date
The figure shows the normalized size purchased fitted with a flexible regression spline on a
variable that counts the number of weeks since the rebate program started/ended in each
state. The figure presents the fitted spline and the 95% confidence interval. For refrigerators,
size is the adjusted volume, which is the total volume of the refrigerator in cubic feet plus the
volume of freezer multiplied by an adjustment factor. For clothes washers, size is measured
in cubic feet. For dishwashers, size is a categorical variable that takes four values, where 1
= small, 2 = medium, 3 = tall, and 4 = very tall.

50

Table A.1. External Validity
Retailer

Other Retailers

t-statistics

Refrigerators
Price

1154

1083

25.17

Rebate

180

135

98.84

kWh

480

456

60.92

Size

22

20

14.46
24.41

Clothes Washers
Price

699

674

Rebate

114

113

4.66

kWh

160

175

-48.92

Size

4

4

0.63

Dishwashers
Price

554

543

7.64

Rebate

116

85

86.97

kWh

160

174

-1.54

Size

4

4

0.05

Notes: Using the DOE data alone, this table compares the average price, rebate amount, kWh purchased, and size of the appliances purchased at our
retailer (retailer from which we collected transaction level data) versus all other retailers. Note that
some states did not record the retailer where the
purchase was made.

51

Table A.2. Robustness Tests: State Fixed Effects
Refrigerators
Dep. Var.

Clothes Washers

Dishwashers

log(sales)

log(kWh)

log(sales)

log(kWh)

log(sales)

log(kWh)

0.15∗

-0.0032∗

0.14∗

-0.056∗∗∗

0.27∗

-0.0039

(0.061)

(0.0014)

(0.065)

(0.0077)

(0.100)

(0.0031)

0.078∗

-0.00058

0.072∗

-0.018∗

0.081∗

-0.0012

(0.029)

(0.0024)

(0.035)

(0.0076)

(0.039)

(0.0007)
-0.00014

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3
Rebate × Weeks 4-6

-0.0035

-0.001

0.011

-0.0025

0.0081

(0.010)

(0.0007)

(0.006)

(0.0028)

(0.009)

(0.0006)

-0.011

-0.0018∗

0.0078

0.0018

0.0064

-0.00064

(0.014)

(0.0008)

(0.007)

(0.0040)

(0.014)

(0.0007)

0.0026

-0.0025∗∗

0.0085

-0.00036

0.0082

0.000019

(0.010)

(0.0009)

(0.006)

(0.0020)

(0.007)

(0.0005)

Rebate × 1 Week Before

-0.039∗

0.00088

-0.057∗∗∗

0.0057

-0.043

0.00014

(0.017)

(0.0009)

(0.015)

(0.0032)

(0.028)

(0.0012)

Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before

-0.024∗

0.00061

-0.024

0.0048

-0.033

0.00042

(0.011)

(0.0010)

(0.012)

(0.0040)

(0.017)

(0.0007)

-0.030∗

0.00038

-0.0098

0.0048∗

-0.018

-0.00012

(0.012)

(0.0006)

(0.008)

(0.0020)

(0.015)

(0.0006)

-0.029∗

0.0014

-0.011

0.0041

-0.017

-0.000042

(0.011)

(0.0009)

(0.008)

(0.0032)

(0.009)

(0.0006)

0.0054

-0.00036

0.0068

0.0011

0.00081

0.00044

(0.010)

(0.0004)

(0.006)

(0.0018)

(0.007)

(0.0007)

Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+
Pre-Rebate Period

Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before
Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After

0.013

-0.0011

-0.0084

-0.00014

0.035

-0.0064

(0.018)

(0.0009)

(0.014)

(0.0036)

(0.033)

(0.0038)

0.023

-0.0026∗∗

0.01

-0.0024

0.031

-0.00093

(0.014)

(0.0010)

(0.009)

(0.0037)

(0.026)

(0.0010)

-0.012

-0.0013

-0.0019

0.00052

-0.0066

0.00031

(0.012)

(0.0008)

(0.010)

(0.0026)

(0.011)

(0.0007)

-0.0008

-0.0006

0.011

-0.00059

0.0094

0.00047

(0.014)

(0.0007)

(0.009)

(0.0034)

(0.019)

(0.0006)

-0.015

-0.0018∗

0.0059

0.0029

0.0015

0.00075

(0.011)

(0.0007)

(0.008)

(0.0032)

(0.011)

(0.0006)

-

6.27∗∗∗

-

5.36∗∗∗

-

5.84∗∗∗

Constant

(0.0042)

(0.0120)

(0.0016)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Week-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.984

0.068

0.989

0.131

0.982

0.402

R2

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

52

Table A.3. Robustness Tests: Refrigerators
I

II

III

IV

V

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

kWh

Rebate × Week 1

-0.0032∗

-0.0031∗

-0.0035∗

-0.0058∗∗

-1.56∗

(0.0014)

(0.0015)

(0.0013)

(0.0020)

(0.72)

Rebate × Weeks 2-3

-0.00058

-0.00074

-0.00061

-0.00093

-0.47

(0.0024)

(0.0024)

(0.0016)

(0.0030)

(1.24)

-0.0010

-0.0011

-0.00063

-0.0020∗

-0.63

(0.00074)

(0.00074)

(0.00060)

(0.00094)

(0.42)

Rebate × Weeks 7-9

-0.0018∗

-0.0018∗

-0.00090

-0.0019

-1.01∗∗

(0.00077)

(0.00079)

(0.00067)

(0.0011)

(0.37)

Rebate × Weeks 10+

-0.0025∗∗

-0.0026∗∗

-0.0019∗∗

-0.0042∗∗∗

-1.29∗

(0.00089)

(0.00086)

(0.00069)

(0.0011)

(0.52)

0.00088

0.00079

-0.00024

0.00060

0.17

(0.00091)

(0.00094)

(0.00054)

(0.0012)

(0.51)

0.00061

0.00038

-0.00066

0.00059

0.14

(0.0010)

(0.0010)

(0.00094)

(0.0013)

(0.54)

Dep. Var.
Rebate Period

Rebate × Weeks 4-6

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

0.00038

0.00033

-0.00040

0.00022

0.0036

(0.00062)

(0.00061)

(0.00043)

(0.00094)

(0.31)

0.0014

0.0013

-0.00035

0.0021∗

0.52

(0.00092)

(0.00092)

(0.00075)

(0.00098)

(0.44)

-0.00036

-0.00047

-0.00076

-0.00014

-0.27

(0.00043)

(0.00044)

(0.00039)

(0.00065)

(0.20)

-0.0011

-0.0011

-0.0022∗

-0.0014

-0.60

(0.00092)

(0.00093)

(0.0010)

(0.0010)

(0.47)

-0.0026∗∗

-0.0025∗∗

-0.0015∗

-0.0032∗

-1.44∗

(0.00095)

(0.00091)

(0.00067)

(0.0012)

(0.56)

-0.0013

-0.0015

-0.0016

-0.0023∗∗

-0.81

(0.00078)

(0.00081)

(0.00097)

(0.00085)

(0.43)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After

-0.00060

-0.00060

-0.0021∗

-0.0012

-0.46

(0.00069)

(0.00070)

(0.00096)

(0.0011)

(0.41)

-0.0018∗

-0.0019∗

-0.0012

-0.0024∗

-1.09∗

(0.00070)

(0.00071)

(0.00064)

(0.00095)

(0.44)

6.27∗∗∗

6.26∗∗∗

6.26∗∗∗

6.27∗∗∗

534.7∗∗∗

(0.0042)

(0.0021)

(0.0019)

(0.0037)

(2.19)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After
Constant

Week FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

No

No

Yes

Yes

Sample

All

Only with

Only with

Only with

Only with

Demo.

Demo.

Demo.,

Demo.

no

Yes

IA,

FL,

IL,

NC

and

OR
Nb Obs.

>7M

>4M

>4M

>4M

>4M

R2

0.068

0.054

0.049

0.071

0.070

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standards errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

53

Table A.4. Robustness Tests: Clothes Washers

Dep. Var.

I

II

III

IV

V

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

kWh

-0.056∗∗∗

-0.058∗∗∗

-0.057∗∗∗

-0.058∗∗∗

-11.7∗∗∗

(0.0077)

(0.0085)

(0.0085)

(0.0098)

(1.67)

-0.018∗

-0.018∗

-0.015

-0.022∗

-3.58∗

(0.0076)

(0.0078)

(0.0075)

(0.0090)

(1.66)

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3
Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+

-0.0025

-0.0028

-0.0023

-0.0053

-0.34

(0.0028)

(0.0028)

(0.0020)

(0.0030)

(0.71)

0.0018

0.0014

-0.0012

-0.0022

0.92

(0.0040)

(0.0043)

(0.0028)

(0.0048)

(0.98)

-0.00036

-0.00014

-0.0017

-0.0030

0.10

(0.0020)

(0.0020)

(0.0016)

(0.0042)

(0.52)

0.0057

0.0070∗

0.0037

0.0034

1.31

(0.0032)

(0.0033)

(0.0027)

(0.0029)

(0.74)

0.0048

0.0054

0.0028

0.0029

1.10

(0.0040)

(0.0041)

(0.0026)

(0.0032)

(0.95)

0.0048∗

0.0053∗

0.0026

0.0041

1.20∗

(0.0020)

(0.0020)

(0.0017)

(0.0026)

(0.53)

0.0041

0.0042

0.0031

0.0017

1.09

(0.0032)

(0.0032)

(0.0023)

(0.0036)

(0.80)

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

0.0011

0.0014

0.00054

0.000050

0.52

(0.0018)

(0.0018)

(0.0018)

(0.0024)

(0.53)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After

-0.00014

0.00027

0.0020

-0.00021

0.16

(0.0036)

(0.0039)

(0.0031)

(0.0037)

(0.80)

-0.0024

-0.0022

-0.0039

-0.0049

-0.35

(0.0037)

(0.0042)

(0.0041)

(0.0045)

(0.74)

0.00052

0.0012

-0.00023

0.0013

0.20

(0.0026)

(0.0027)

(0.0020)

(0.0033)

(0.61)

-0.00059

-0.00084

-0.0032

-0.00043

-0.22

(0.0034)

(0.0034)

(0.0028)

(0.0041)

(0.76)

0.0029

0.0029

0.0014

0.0037

0.79

(0.0032)

(0.0031)

(0.0026)

(0.0042)

(0.78)

5.36∗∗∗

5.43∗∗∗

5.44∗∗∗

5.36∗∗∗

233.2∗∗∗

(0.012)

(0.0073)

(0.0067)

(0.0095)

(2.98)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Constant

Week FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sample

All

Only with

Only with

Only with

Only with

Demo.

Demo.

Demo.,

Demo.

no

IA,

FL,

IL,

NC

and

OR
# Obs.

>7M

>3M

>3M

>3M

>3M

R2

0.131

0.102

0.098

0.131

0.123

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

54

Table A.5. Robustness Tests: Dishwashers

Dep. Var.

I

II

III

IV

V

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

kWh

Rebate Period
Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3
Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+

-0.0039

-0.0041

-0.0039

-0.0056

-1.17

(0.0031)

(0.0032)

(0.0031)

(0.0041)

(0.94)

-0.0012

-0.0013

-0.0013

-0.0014

-0.36

(0.00073)

(0.00075)

(0.00077)

(0.0011)

(0.22)

-0.00014

-0.00017

-0.00012

0.00014

-0.035

(0.00062)

(0.00060)

(0.00059)

(0.00088)

(0.19)

-0.00064

-0.00068

-0.00087

-0.0015

-0.21

(0.00069)

(0.00072)

(0.00060)

(0.00096)

(0.21)

0.000019

-0.00000045

-0.00029

-0.00025

0.0019

(0.00045)

(0.00045)

(0.00051)

(0.00086)

(0.14)

0.00014

0.00010

0.000046

0.0016

0.076

(0.0012)

(0.0012)

(0.00090)

(0.0012)

(0.36)

0.00042

0.00044

0.00063

0.0011

0.13

(0.00070)

(0.00069)

(0.00071)

(0.00096)

(0.22)
-0.014

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

-0.00012

-0.00019

0.00043

0.00021

(0.00058)

(0.00059)

(0.00070)

(0.00090)

(0.18)

-0.000042

-0.000073

0.00021

-0.000084

-0.0039

(0.00058)

(0.00059)

(0.00054)

(0.00091)

(0.18)

0.00044

0.00041

0.00053

0.0012

0.15

(0.00065)

(0.00064)

(0.00062)

(0.00079)

(0.21)

-0.0064

-0.0064

-0.0055

-0.0086∗

-1.91

(0.0038)

(0.0039)

(0.0036)

(0.0038)

(1.13)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After
Constant

-0.00093

-0.0010

-0.00096

-0.0014

-0.27

(0.0010)

(0.0010)

(0.00077)

(0.0014)

(0.31)

0.00031

0.00028

-0.000048

0.00014

0.089

(0.00066)

(0.00065)

(0.00067)

(0.00092)

(0.20)

0.00047

0.00044

-0.000050

0.00058

0.15

(0.00055)

(0.00055)

(0.00059)

(0.00081)

(0.17)

0.00075

0.00074

0.00050

0.00090

0.22

(0.00063)

(0.00063)

(0.00086)

(0.00083)

(0.19)

5.84∗∗∗

5.83∗∗∗

5.83∗∗∗

5.84∗∗∗

343.8∗∗∗

(0.0016)

(0.0014)

(0.0014)

(0.0023)

(0.50)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Week FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

No

No

Yes

Yes

Sample

All

Only with

Only with

Only with

Only with

Demo.

Demo.

Demo.,

Demo.

no

Yes

IA,

FL,

IL,

NC

and

OR
# Obs.

>5M

>2M

>2M

>2M

>2M

R2

0.402

0.398

0.374

0.408

0.420

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

55

Table A.6. The Effect of Rebates on Sales and kWh: Electric Water Heaters
Dep. Var.

log(sales)
I

II

log(kWh)

III

IV

I

II

III

IV

All Periods
Rebate × Dall: 2 Months Before,

0.0079

During, and 2 Weeks After

(0.0079)

-0.0080∗∗
(0.0026)

Rebate × Dall: 4 Months Before,

0.012

-0.0077∗∗∗

During, and 2 Months After

(0.0068)

(0.0021)

Rebate × Dall: Since Announce-

0.015

-0.0052∗∗

ment to 3 Months After

(0.0087)

(0.0016)

Rebate Period
0.067∗

Rebate × Week 1
Rebate × Weeks 2-3
Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+

-0.085∗∗

(0.032)

(0.026)

0.037

-0.030∗∗

(0.020)

(0.0094)

0.015

-0.011

(0.015)

(0.0059)

0.0028

0.0015

(0.011)

(0.0062)

0.0026

-0.0024

(0.014)

(0.0040)

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

0.022

0.0025

(0.015)

(0.0064)

0.0027

-0.00024

(0.016)

(0.0040)

0.022

0.0023

(0.013)

(0.0035)

0.015

0.0030

(0.018)

(0.0030)

0.026∗

-0.00038

(0.011)

(0.00064)

-0.027

0.0026

(0.020)

(0.0052)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After
Rebate × 10+ Weeks After
Constant

-

-

-

-0.027

-0.0033

(0.023)

(0.0065)

-0.00014

0.000095

(0.016)

(0.0036)

-0.011

0.0035

(0.015)

(0.0038)

-0.0070

0.0054

(0.012)

(0.0030)

-

8.45∗∗∗

8.45∗∗∗

8.45∗∗∗

8.46∗∗∗

(0.0042)

(0.0043)

(0.0044)

(0.0043)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Week-Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics
R2

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.935

0.935

0.935

0.935

0.063

0.063

0.063

0.067

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

56

Table A.7. Robustness Tests: Electric Water Heaters
I

II

III

IV

V

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

log(kWh)

kWh

Rebate × Week 1

-0.085∗∗

-0.085∗∗

-0.064∗∗

-0.090∗∗∗

-261.5∗∗

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.018)

(0.025)

(78.5)

Rebate × Weeks 2-3

-0.030∗∗

-0.031∗∗

-0.027∗∗

-0.034∗∗∗

-93.3∗∗

(0.0094)

(0.0095)

(0.0086)

(0.0093)

(29.1)
-34.2
(18.3)

Dep. Var.
Rebate Period

Rebate × Weeks 4-6
Rebate × Weeks 7-9
Rebate × Weeks 10+

-0.011

-0.011

-0.0085

-0.014∗

(0.0059)

(0.0060)

(0.0052)

(0.0056)

0.0015

0.0017

-0.0024

-0.0015

4.74

(0.0062)

(0.0064)

(0.0045)

(0.0064)

(19.0)

-0.0024

-0.0021

0.000017

-0.0035

-6.98

(0.0040)

(0.0040)

(0.0032)

(0.0043)

(12.1)

0.0025

0.0027

0.0041

0.00078

7.18
(19.6)

Pre-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week Before
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks Before
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks Before
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks Before
Rebate × 10+ Weeks Before

(0.0064)

(0.0064)

(0.0042)

(0.0081)

-0.00024

-0.00043

0.0018

-0.0022

-1.49

(0.0040)

(0.0040)

(0.0028)

(0.0049)

(12.2)

0.0023

0.0022

0.0018

0.0013

6.73

(0.0035)

(0.0036)

(0.0027)

(0.0039)

(10.2)

0.0030

0.0029

0.0017

0.0040

9.10

(0.0030)

(0.0031)

(0.0018)

(0.0034)

(9.80)

-0.00038

-0.00032

-0.00070

-0.00073

-1.76

(0.00064)

(0.00065)

(0.00051)

(0.00073)

(2.34)

Post-Rebate Period
Rebate × 1 Week After
Rebate × 2-3 Weeks After
Rebate × 4-6 Weeks After
Rebate × 7-9 Weeks After

0.0026

0.0026

0.00028

-0.0012

7.67

(0.0052)

(0.0052)

(0.0042)

(0.0055)

(16.3)

-0.0033

-0.0032

-0.00043

-0.0053

-10.1

(0.0065)

(0.0066)

(0.0032)

(0.0071)

(20.3)

0.000095

0.00042

0.0033

-0.0034

0.77

(0.0036)

(0.0036)

(0.0032)

(0.0040)

(11.0)

0.0035

0.0039

0.0053

-0.000031

11.6

(0.0038)

(0.0038)

(0.0029)

(0.0031)

(11.4)

0.0054

0.0056

0.0067∗

0.0051

16.7

(0.0030)

(0.0030)

(0.0030)

(0.0034)

(9.04)

8.46∗∗∗

8.45∗∗∗

8.45∗∗∗

8.46∗∗∗

4716.0∗∗∗

(0.0043)

(0.0028)

(0.0026)

(0.0048)

(12.9)

State FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Rebate × 10+ Weeks After
Constant

Week FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographics

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sample

All

Only with

Only with

Only with

Only with

Demo.

Demo.

Demo.,

Demo.

no

IA,

FL,

IL,

NC

and

OR
R2

0.067

0.061

0.051

0.066

0.065

Notes: The dummy variable for the pre-announcement period is omitted. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state level.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

57

Table A.8. Impact of Program Characteristics on Energy Savings
Dependent Variable: Percentage Energy Savings in Each State
Rebate Amount ($)

Duration (weeks)

Advalorem=1

Online=1

Reservation System=1

Recycling Requirement=1

Recycling Incentive=1

Eligibility Criteria=2

Eligibility Criteria=3

Eligibility Criteria=4

# Obs.
R2

Refrigerators

Clothes Washers

Dishwashers

-0.0037

0.024∗∗∗

0.0010∗

(0.0019)

(0.0041)

(0.00038)

0.0020

-0.0039

0.00025

(0.0015)

(0.0042)

(0.00028)

1.60

-2.74

-0.36∗

(0.84)

(2.03)

(0.13)

-0.036

1.16

-0.021

(0.55)

(1.20)

(0.083)

-0.21

-1.18

0.050

(0.52)

(1.19)

(0.081)

-0.30

0.053

0.24∗

(0.57)

(1.36)

(0.091)

0.56

-0.082

0.010

(0.76)

(1.76)

(0.11)

1.34

-1.81

0.41

(0.95)

(3.73)

(0.22)

1.32

-1.37

0.41

(1.20)

(3.94)

(0.23)

0.64

-1.69

0.55∗

(1.45)

(3.98)

(0.24)

42

42

36

0.332

0.611

0.621

Notes: The dependent variable is the average energy savings in each state measured in
percentage. A positive sign means that a “feature” increases savings. For instance, increasing the rebate amount for clothes washers from $0 to $100 increases savings by 2.4%.
The savings were estimated over the rebate period, two months before the start of the
rebate period, and two weeks after the end of the rebate period. The dummy “advalorem” takes the value one when ad valorem rebates are offered. The dummy “online”
takes the value one if rebates could be claimed online. The dummy “reservation system”
is zero if consumers had to buy then apply, and takes the value one if reservations were allowed. The eligibility criteria are coded as follows: (1) ES (omitted), (2) ES baseline with
marginal rebate increases for higher efficiency, (3) more efficient than ES, and (4) more
efficient than ES baseline with marginal rebate increases for higher efficiency. Standard
errors in parentheses.

∗

(p < 0.05),

∗∗

(p < 0.01),

∗∗∗

(p < 0.001)

58

Table A.9. DOE’s C4A Energy Savings Estimates
kWh/y saved

kW h/y ES − kW h/y N on−ES

kW h/y ES − kW h/y N on−ES

% Freeriders

% Freeriders

(D&R)

(NPD, non-sales weighted)

adjustment: 5-year

No Accelerated

5-year Accelerated

Accelerated Replacement

Replacement

Replacement

Refrigerator

116

65

97

< 0%

< 0%

Washer

257

201

344

< 0%

25%

Dishwasher

57

34

82

< 0%

30%

Notes: Sources: Department of Energy (DOE), D&R International (2013), and NPD Marketing Group. The difference in
average electricity consumption between ES and non-ES models (kW h/y ES − kW h/y N on−ES ) is the difference observed
in the choice set of the NPD data for the years 2010-2011 (Table 10). The adjustment for the accelerated replacement uses
the sales-weighted average electricity consumption purchased in the year 2001 observed in the NPD data. For refrigerators,
the 2001 average is obtained directly from the DOE data that provide information on the appliances replaced.

59

Table A.10. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis with Adjustment for Accelerated
Replacement
kWh/y

Price

Size

($)

Rebate

Cost-Effectiveness ($/kWh saved)

($)

Proportion of Freeriders
Preferred

0%

25%

50%

75%

90%

Estimate
Refrigerators
91%
ES

478

1243

27.1

Non-ES

543

1665

27.3

Top 5%

342

818

19.7

Bottom 95%

525

1544

27.1

Top 10%

367

725

20.4

Bottom 90%

532

1577

27.3

Top 20%

403

1055

21.8

Bottom 80%

545

1594

27.6

128

0.98

0.09

0.12

0.18

0.35

0.88

128

0.43

0.04

0.05

0.08

0.15

0.39

128

0.47

0.04

0.06

0.09

0.17

0.43

128

0.55

0.05

0.07

0.10

0.20

0.49

Clothes Washers
92%
ES

163

757

4.2

Non-ES

364

428

3.1

Top 5%

99

714

4.1

Bottom 95%

214

685

3.9

Top 10%

103

804

4.1

Bottom 90%

219

675

3.9

Top 20%

115

780

4.2

Bottom 80%

236

662

3.8

ES

279

699

-

Non-ES

313

480

-

107

0.26

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.08

0.21

107

0.29

0.02

0.03

0.05

0.09

0.23

107

0.29

0.02

0.03

0.05

0.09

0.23

107

0.29

0.02

0.03

0.05

0.09

0.23

Dishwashers
73%

Top 5%

186

996

-

Bottom 95%

294

618

-

Top 10%

214

868

-

Bottom 90%

297

613

-

Top 20%

247

786

-

Bottom 80%

304

593

-

84

0.25

0.07

0.09

0.14

0.27

0.68

84

0.13

0.03

0.05

0.07

0.14

0.34

84

0.15

0.00

0.05

0.08

0.16

0.41

84

0.19

0.00

0.07

0.10

0.21

0.52

Notes: The rebate amount for each appliance category is the non-weighted average of the
rebate amount offered by each state. The preferred proportion of freeriders is obtained
from Table 7, columns 10 and 11. For refrigerators and clothes washers, size is measured
in cubic feet. For dishwashers, we report the proportion of models that are classifies as
tall. For all appliances, we assume a lifetime of 15 years.

