                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MONETARY POLICY IN OPEN ECONOMIES:
           PRACTICAL PERSPECTIVES FOR PRAGMATIC CENTRAL BANKERS

                                              Richard Clarida

                                          Working Paper 20545
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20545


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2014




Paper prepared for the Hoover Institution Conference on Monetary Policy for the 21st Century. I would
like to thank the conference organizers, participants, and especially my discussant Maurice Obstfeld
as well as Ken Judd for insightful suggestions for future work. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20545.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Richard Clarida. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Policy in Open Economies: Practical Perspectives for Pragmatic Central Bankers
Richard Clarida
NBER Working Paper No. 20545
October 2014
JEL No. E52,E58,F3

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reviews and interprets some of the key policy implications that flow from a class of DSGE
models for optimal monetary policy in the open economy. The framework suggests that good macroeconomic
outcomes in open economies are possible by focusing inflation targeting that is implemented by a
Taylor type rule, a rule that in equilibrium is reflected in the exchange rate as an asset price. Optimal
monetary policy will not be able deliver a stationary (‘stable’) nominal exchange rate – let alone a
fixed exchange rate or one that remains inside a target zone because, absent a commitment device,
optimal monetary can’t deliver a stationary domestic price level. Another feature in the data for inflation
targeting countries that is consistent with monetary policy via Taylor type rule is that it will tend push
the nominal exchange rate in the opposite direction from PPP in response to an ‘inflation’ shock –
the ‘bad news god news’ result of Clarida –Waldman (2008;2014). This is so even though in the long
run of these models the nominal exchange rate must in expectation obey PPP.


Richard Clarida
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
Room 1111, IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rhc2@columbia.edu
   Monetary Policy in Open Economies: Practical Perspectives for
                    Pragmatic Central Bankers

                                     Richard H. Clarida*

                       C. Lowell Harriss Professor of Economics
                            Columbia University and NBER
                                  rhc2@columbia.edu

                                         May 19, 2014



Introduction

        The theory and practice of conducting monetary policy in the global economy has

evolved and, along many dimensions, converged over the past twenty years. In the fifteen years

before the world financial crisis, this was evident in the widespread adoption of inflation

targeting, flexible exchange rates, and of policy implementation well understood and evaluated

within a Taylor Rule framework. Empirical research suggest that the apparent convergence to a

Taylor Rule framework did in fact occur during this period (Clarida and Gertler (1996); Clarida,

Gali, Gertler (1998;2000); Clarida (1999;2001;2009); Lubik and Schorfheide (2003); Engel and West

(2006); Molodtsova and Papell (2009)). We believe this convergence was no coincidence. In fact,

building on the research program introduced in Taylor (1982;1993) and advanced by Obstfeld

and Rogoff (1996;2000) and Svensson (2000),          a number of papers (Clarida, Gali, Gertler

(2001;2002); Obstfeld (2002); Corsetti and Pesenti (2005); Gali Monacelli (2005)); Engel (2009);

Woodford (2010); Devereux and Hnatkovska            (2011)) among others show that, in dynamic

stochastic   general equilibrium models with nominal rigidities, flexible exchange rates and

inflation targeting produce desirable macroeconomic outcomes in open economies.            Indeed

under certain conditions and in particular models, inflation targeting implemented by a Taylor

rule in a regime of flexible exchange rates characterizes the optimal monetary policy for a central



                                                2
bank seeking to maximize a well specified social welfare function in an open economy             This

paper reviews several of the most relevant findings from this literature, findings that until now

have been and likely will, in the future be, of practical interest to pragmatic central bankers

conducting monetary policy in the global economy of the 21st century. The focus will be on

implications from this research that, in our opinion, are most likely in the decades ahead to be

robust in practical, real‐world application, not just in the particular theoretical models from

which they were originally derived.

        The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section II we review the set‐up of the open

economy DSGE model introduced in Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2001;2002), Gali Monacelli (2005)) and

Gali (2008) and extended by, among others, Engel (2009)); Woodford (2010), and Devereux and

Hnatkovska (2011). We provide intuition for the ‘isomorphism result’ tightly linking optimal

monetary policy in open and closed economies that is a property of a class of models discussed in

Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2001;2002) . In Section III we solve for optimal monetary policy and

highlight several key and we believe robust implications of the above cited DSGE literature for

open economy monetary policy operating away from the zero lower bound. We are motivated

by a belief that as the world’s major central banks begin to normalize policy rates and escape

(finally!) from the zero bound, the Taylor Rule framework will re‐emerge as the preferred de

facto if not de jure construct for conducting, evaluating,       and ultimately for    communicating

monetary policy , with the crucial understanding that….

        The neutral real interest rate, a key input to Taylor rule analysis, appears in practice to be

        time varying (Laubach and Williams (2001)), and this time variation is likely to be more

        important in the future than in the past for calibrating monetary policy.       In particular,

        the neutral real interest rate in the open economy will in general be a function of global

        as well local factors such as the rate of potential growth….




                                                  3
‐   The exchange rate is an asset price will reflect expectations of the future time path of the

    policy rate as summarized by the policy rule and thus the expected future time path of

    inflation and output under the policy rule. One important empirical implication of

    monetary policy by Taylor rule in the open economy is that ‘bad news about inflation can be

    good news for the nominal exchange rate’ (Clarida and Waldman 2008); see also the

    discussion in Krugman, Obstfeld, Melitz (2011) even though with inflation targeting, bad

    news about inflation must in expectation be bad news for the long run level of the

    nominal exchange rate. Moreover, …..




‐   In the absence of a commitment device that binds central banker and their successors, optimal

    monetary policy in the open economy can at most achieve a stationary rate of inflation

    not a stationary price level. In other words, price level targeting is not in general time

    consistent in the class of DSGE models cited above, a direct consequence of Clarida, Gali,

    Gertler (1999); Woodford (2003); and the isomorphism result in Clarida, Gali, Gertler

    (2001;2002) and Gali‐ Monacelli (2005). As a result, even if the equilibrium terms of trade

    are stationary, the equilibrium nominal exchange rate under an optimal policy will

    resemble a random walk. Technically it will possess a unit root but in fact will be co

    integrated with the price level. In other words…




‐   A regime of fixed exchange rates is a ‘mirage’ (Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996)) in the sense that in

    these economies it is not time consistent in the presence of nominal rigidities for the

    policymaker who is maximizing household welfare to promise fix the exchange rate .

    Moreover, in general, while PPP may be expected to hold in the long run……




                                              4
    ‐   The persistence of PPP deviations will in general depend directly on the policy rule in

        economies in which inflation ‘inertia’ is endogenous. Theoretically (Clarida Waldman

        (2008;2014), the greater is the relative weight the policy maker places on output

        stabilization relative to inflation stabilization, the greater will be the equilibrium half‐life

        of PPP deviations. Clarida and Waldman (2008) report an empirical announcement

        effect study (Table 1) that documents the bad news good news correlation in high

        frequency data for G10 countries over the 2001‐2005 period. Clarida – Waldman (2014)

        update the original announcement effect study to span 2001‐2013 period and show

        (Table 2) that the ‘bad news good news’ effect remains a robust feature of the data on

        days when there are inflation announcements..

    In Section IV we present an analysis based on Clarida and Waldman (2014) who use a small

open economy version of the Gali ‐ Monacelli (2005) model with a hybrid Phillips curve to

generalize and extend the findings of Clarida – Waldman (2008) with regards to the ‘bad news

good news’ result as well as the endogenous persistence of PPP deviations under optimal

monetary policy. Section V concludes.

II. A Model

        Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2001;2002) and Gali – Monacelli (2005) study a class of DSGE

models with nominal rigidities that can be used to analyze optimal monetary policy in open

economies and the role of the nominal exchange rate in the transmission mechanism. These

models have been fruitfully extended in subsequent work by Engel (2009); Woodford (2010); and

Devereux and Hnatkovska (2011) among others.               Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2001) and Gali‐

Monacelli (2005) are models of small open economies while Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2002) is a

general equilibrium two country model. Focusing on the ‘home’ economy, the basic set up of

these models is as follows.




                                                  5
           The home economy produces a tradable consumption good from a CES continuum of

differentiated intermediate inputs, each of which is produced with a linear technology over a CES

bundle of differentiated varieties of labor. The elasticity of substitution among intermediate

inputs is ξ > 1 and the elasticity of substitution among varieties of labor is η t > 1, with η   t   a

stationary stochastic process. Nominal wages are flexible and each worker earns the same wage

W(t), but the nominal price of each input can only be re set at random discrete intervals as in

Calvo (1983). As in Woodford (2003), there will be a welfare cost to domestic inflation with this

Calvo pricing assumption, because inflation will change the relative prices of inputs and thus

cause final output to be inefficiently produced. This welfare cost will be decreasing in ξ.

           Households have Cobb‐Douglass preferences over a consumption index Ct comprised of

the home produced final good and a differentiated consumption good produced abroad. A key

parameter is γ which is the share of home spending on the foreign good. The larger is γ, the more

open is the home economy. The law of one price holds and there is producer currency pricing.

The relative price of the foreign produced consumption good in terms of the home produced

consumption good, the terms of trade, is denoted by St = Et(P*t /Pt) where Et is the nominal

exchange rate and Pt and P*t are producer currency prices of goods for export in home and

foreign.

           Utility takes the standard form

                                                  Ct1 Nt 1
                           U (Ct )  V ( Nt )         
                                                  1 1 

Where 1/σ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption, and N t is labor supply.

We will focus on the benchmark case with σ ≥ 1 but derive many of our results for the general σ >

0 case as well.




                                                         6
Households maximizes a discounted sum of expected utility with a discount rate β subject to a

sequence of budget constraints




                    Pt cpi Ct  Et {M t ,t 1 Dt 1}  Wt N t  D t Tt  t



where M   t,t+1   is a nominal stochastic discount factor, D            t   is the distribution paid on securities

brought into date t, Tt is lump sum tax collection, and Гt is the distribution of profits earned by

producers of intermediate inputs.

        Firms will set prices as a mark up over marginal cost. Given the linear technology, real

marginal cost is just the real product wage scaled by productivity MCt = (1 – τ){W t /P t }At‐1                               In

our open economy this can be written as MCt = (1 – τ)k‐1{W t /P cpi t }SγtAt‐1 where Pt
                                                                                                            cpi
                                                                                                                   k 1Pt St is

the CPI, Pt is the price of the consumption good produced at home, τ is a wage tax or subsidy,

and k =(1‐γ)(1‐γ)γγ. The first order condition for labor supply implies Wt / P
                                                                                              cpi
                                                                                                    t    (1   tw ) Nt  C t

where 1 + μtw = ηt /{ηt – 1} is a wage mark up. They key thing to note is the distinction between

the real product wage Wt/Pt that is relevant for the labor demand and the real CPI wage that is

relevant for labor supply. Unlike in the closed economy, these differ in the open economy

because of the terms of trade. This is crucial for understanding the open economy Phillips curve

to be derived below. Substituting for the real CPI wage we obtain a structural equation for real

marginal cost in the open economy            MCt  (1   )(1   w t ) N  t Ct S t k 1 A 1t .

        Price setting by intermediate goods producers is staggered as in Calvo (1983), resulting in

an open economy Phillips curve for domestic inflation as a function of the deviation of log real

marginal cost from its steady state level of log(ξ/(ξ‐1)) with 1+μp = ξ/(ξ‐1) the desired markup

over    nominal        marginal       cost      by     intermediate         goods     producers.                  We      have




                                                            7
 t   Et        mc t where lower case letters denote log deviations from the non‐stochastic
              t 1


steady state and δ=(1‐F)(1‐βF)/F with (1‐F) the fraction of firms that reset prices each period. It is

useful to write out the open economy Phillips curve explicitly in terms of endogenous variables

and the productivity and cost push realizations




1)                            t  Et  t 1   yt  ct  st  (1   )at    tw




where we have used the fact that nt ≈ yt ‐ at , with the approximation due to the omission of a


second order term that captures the inefficient demand for labor resulting from the dispersion of

domestic relative prices in an economy staggered pricing and non‐zero inflation.

        For households, an Euler equation will characterize the equilibrium relationship between

the log consumption index, CPI inflation, and the one period nominal interest rate Rt

                                                 1
2)                           ct  Et {ct 1}        ( Rt  E t  t 1  Etst  1)
                                                 

where πt+1 is        the rate of inflation in domestic goods prices. Again, recall that in the open

economy CPI inflation is a function of the change in the equilibrium terms of trade as well as

inflation in the price of domestically produced goods.




                                                              8
An Isomorphism Result

           Inspection of equations 1) and 2) reveals that in the special case with γ = 0 the system

reduces to the standard closed economy DSGE model (Clarida, Gali, Gertler (1999);Woodford

(2003)).    That model is closed with a goods market equilibrium condition c             t   = yt and

specification of a policy rule for Rt as a function of πt and yt (and perhaps other, exogenous

variables such as productivity growth or government spending). Moreover, an optimal policy

rule can be derived for the γ=0 version of the model for a loss function that is quadratic in

inflation and the gap between yt and its level yt under flexible prices. And indeed, Clarida,

Gali, Gertler (1999) show that the optimal monetary policy in the closed economy can be written

as a version of a Taylor rule.

           But how does one close the open economy model sketched out above? Although there

are number of ways to do this (see Obstfeld (2002); Corsetti and Pesenti (2005) and Engel (2009)

for alternatives), there are two known cases consistent with global general equilibrium that will

result in a set of equilibrium conditions exactly isomorphic to the closed economy analysis in

Clarida, Gali, Gertler (1999). These results are derived in Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2002) and Gali ‐

Monacelli (2005). Both cases require that preferences be Cobb‐Douglas, and each case is a direct

implication of the insightful analysis of Cole and Obstfeld (1991). The isomorphism result will

obtain for any σ > 0 if home and foreign Cobb‐Douglas utility functions are identical (Clarida,

gali, Gertler (2002)). The isomorphism result will also obtain with differing home and foreign

Cobb‐Douglas utility functions – say featuring a bias for domestically produced goods ‐ if σ is

identically equal to 1 across countries (Gali and Monacelli (2005)). As shown by Cole Obstfeld

(1991), in these two cases the terms of trade that clears the markets for internationally traded

goods will result in balanced trade period by period and will replicate the          period by period

consumption allocations in the home and foreign countries that would result in a world with a complete



                                                  9
set of contingent claims markets. In a Cole Obstfeld world, trade in goods is – macro economically

– equivalent to trade in assets.

        Because in these cases trade is balanced period by period, in equilibrium income will

equal expenditure and there will be an exact linear relationship between ct, yt, and st each period

given by ct = yt + γst . Substituting this consumption index in 2), we obtain an open economy ‘IS’

equation yt = Etyt+1+γst –γEt st+1 ‐ σ‐ 1 (Rt ‐ Et πt+1 –γ Et ∆st+1). As in static models, a terms of

trade worsening today boosts exports and increases demand for domestic output. Also note that

an anticipated terms of trade worsening in the future raises expected CPI inflation and lowers the

consumption real interest rate for any given nominal interest rate which will tilt consumption

demand toward the present.

        With balanced trade and identical preferences goods market equilibrium will imply an

exact linear relationship between st, yt, and y*t given by st = yt – y*t which we can use to

substitute out for st in the open economy ‘IS’ curve. After some simplification we obtain




3)                                 ~
                                   y t  Et{~
                                            y t  1}   01 [ Rt  Et{t  1}  rrt ]




where a tilde over a variable , ~
                                yt , indicates log deviation from its flexible price equilibrium level

which is indicated with an overstrike, yt . The neutral equilibrium real rate consistent with

flexible prices is given by




                                   rrt   0 Et{ yt  1}  k 0 Et{y t*1 }




                                                       10
where σ0 = σ–γ(σ–1) > 0, κ0 = γ(σ – 1), and Δy*t+1 is growth in foreign output. In our

benchmark case σ ≥ 1 and thus κ0 ≥ 0. In other worlds, unless σ = 1 the neutral real interest rate

in the home country will in general be proportional to an average of domestic potential and

world growth rates. Finally we note that the log of potential output will be given by




                                    y t   1 [(1   ) a t   0 y t* ]

where κ = σ(1‐γ) + γ + φ.




        As is the case for the Euler equation, we can substitute out for consumption and the

terms of trade and obtain the structural Phillips curve that will prevail in the open economy

under conditions discussed above. We see that mc t = μw t + κ yt + κ0y*t – (1+φ)at. However,

using the equilibrium condition for potential output y t   [(1   )a t   0 y t ] , it must be the case
                                                            1                    *




that the equation for real marginal cost simplifies to mct   ~
                                                               y t   tw from which we obtain




4)                                    Et{ t 1 }  { (1   )    } ~y t  ut
                                      t




with λ = {σ(1‐γ) + γ + φ}δ and ut = δμwt . We note that in the baseline case. the more open is the

economy the flatter is the Phillips curve relationship between the output gap and inflation.




                                                       11
III. Optimal Monetary Policy in the Open Economy

        To solve for optimal monetary policy in the open economy we need to specify the central

bank of objective function. There are two ways to do this. We can just assume – as in the closed

economy analysis of Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) much of the ‘pre‐Woodford’ international

monetary literature ‐ that the objective function is quadratic in inflation and the output gap with

an arbitrary relative weight α on stabilizing output at its natural level y t. Or, as was derived in

Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002) and Gali Monacelli (2005) , we can follow Woodford (2003) and

solve for α – and thus the optimal policy rule ‐ as a function of deep parameters. Under either

approach, it is important to note that, absent a fiscal policy, even under flexible prices the

economy will be distorted away from the first best equilibrium. This is due to the market power

that heterogeneous workers have in the labor market and that input producers have in the goods

market. A welfare maximizing policy will want to offset these distortions with a wage subsidy

that is financed via a lump sum tax. As in Woodford (2003) we assume this is done. However, as

was pointed out by Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) , in an open economy there will be an incentive for

policy to restrict output below its competitive flexible price level to take advantage of the

imperfect substitutability between imported and exported consumption goods. In order to avoid

the time consistency issues (Kydland‐Prescott (1977)) that would arise, we follow Clarida , Gali,

Gertler (2002) and assume the employment subsidy is set so that the central bank has no incentive

to engineer a surprise depreciation or appreciation of its exchange rate. This subsidy will satisfy

(1‐τ)(1+μw)(1+ μp)(1‐γ) = 1.

        So for a policymaker that wants to maximize an objective function proportional to

                                                
                                  W H   E 0   t [ t2   ~
                                                              y t2 ]
                                               t 0



subject to 3) and 4) and taking y*t and Etπt+1 as given, the first order condition will be given by




                                                      12
                                           
                                    y~t    t
                                               

which is of the same form as in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999). Since under optimal policy the

output gap will be linear in inflation, the equilibriums rate of inflation under optimal policy will

satisfy  t   Et{ t 1}  (2 /  )t  ut . Solving forward and assuming ut  ut 1   t we obtain


πt= (1‐βρ + λ2/α)‐1ut. Thus as is well known, for the case of an entirely forward looking Euler

equation and Phillips curve, there will be no endogenous dynamics and inflation, the output gap,

and the terms of trade of trade will inherit the exogenous dynamics of the cost push shock. In the

next section we show how this model can easily be generalized – via a hybrid Phillips curve ‐ to

incorporate endogenous dynamics and work out the implication for the nominal exchange rate.

         The optimal policy rule given α is obtained by substituting the first order condition into

3) and using equilibriums dynamics for inflation. In terms of endogenous variables we see that




                                                     (1   ) 
                                   Rt  rr t  1             0  E t  t 1
                                                                 




with again σ0 = σ–γ(σ–1) and λ = {σ(1‐γ) + γ + φ}δ . Thus optimal policy in the open economy

can be written as a forward looking Taylor rule with a time varying neutral real interest rate given

by rrt   0 Et{ yt  1}  k 0 Et{y t*1 } . Unless σ=1, there will in general be spillovers from foreign


output growth to the home flexible price equilibrium and under optimal monetary policy this

will be reflected in the neutral real interest rate. Of course the policy rule can also always be

written as a linear function of the exogenous state vector [at ,a*t, ut, u*t]’.




                                                        13
        What are the implications of optimal policy for the nominal exchange rate? We note that

et = et‐1 + Δ st + πt – π*t and that st  ~
                                          yt  ~
                                               yt*  yt  yt* . Using the fact that

                                    yt   1[(1   ) at   0 ( ~
                                                                  yt*  y *t )]

                                    yt*   *1 [(1   )a *t  *0 ( ~
                                                                      yt  yt )]

we can solve for flexible price output levels under optimal policy in terms of exogenous

productivity and cost push shock terms. For the symmetric case γ = ½ this simplifies to




                                                                            w
6)                                 et  et 1  ( w      1) (ut  u *t )      (ut 1  u *t 1 )  ( at  a *t )
                                                                            

            1       
where w =     (1       ) and ψ= (1‐βρ + λ2 / α)‐1 .There are five important implications of 6).
            2      1 

        First, optimal monetary in this class of models with nominal rigidities will feature a

flexible exchange rate. The exchange rate regime is not assumed or imposed on the analysis – it

arises endogenously from the environment with a policymaker who maximizes the welfare of

domestic households. Second, not only does optimal monetary policy feature a flexible exchange

rate, the equilibrium exchange rate must possess a unit root even though shocks are stationary and

our Cole‐Obstfeld equilibrium replicates the complete market allocation. Third, so long a relative

home and foreign productivity levels at – a*t are stationary, then so too will be the equilibrium


terms of trade st , and this will imply that the nominal exchange rate is co integrated with relative

home and foreign price levels pt – p*t. Thus the nominal exchange rate must possess a unit root

because time consistent monetary policy cannot deliver a stationary price level, only a stationary rate of

inflation around a zero mean (C Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999); Woodford (2003)). The unit root in

the nominal exchange rate is required to produce a stationary equilibrium terms of trade given

that optimal monetary policy produces unit root price levels at home and abroad that themselves




                                                         14
are not co integrated. Fourth, in the symmetric two country model presented here bad news about

inflation will be good news for the nominal exchange rate under optimal monetary policy so long as α,

the relative weight placed on stabilizing output, is not too large. A ‘cost push’ shock ut will

increase domestic inflation and under optimal policy induce the central bank to              raise the

nominal interest rate by more than expected inflation.      The rise in the ex‐ante real interest rate

will cause st to fall and this, along with the rise in the real interest rate itself, will reduce

demand for home output. In the ‘bad news good news’ case the equilibrium decline in st is larger

in absolute value than is the equilibrium rise in inflation, and thus can only be accomplished via

an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate. This is so even though, because of the unit root in

the home price level, the nominal exchange rate is expected to depreciate in the long run in

response to a cost push shock today.         As is evident from inspection of 6), a necessary and

sufficient condition for the ‘bad news good news’ result is simply that α < wλ . In the baseline

case with σ ≥ 1 this will always be satisfied so long as α < λ; that is – if the relative weight on the

output term in the welfare function is less than the slope of the Phillips curve, then bad news for

inflation must be good news for the nominal exchange rate.

        Thus far, we have taken α to be a primitive. However, as confirmed in Clarida, Gali and

Gertler (2002) and Gali Monacelli (2005) ,        Woodford’s (2003) derivation of the quadratic

approximation to the welfare function of the representative agent actually pins down α as a

function of deep parameters. And indeed as in Woodford’s (2003) closed economy analysis

Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002) show that         α = λ/ξ with ξ >1 in the open economy as in the

closed. Thus for the baseline σ≥1 case, with α chosen optimally, bad news for inflation must be good

news for the nominal exchange rate in the symmetric equilibrium.




                                                  15
Robustness

        In the two country model analyzed here, there will gains to international policy

cooperation unless σ = 1. It is natural to ask if the key conclusions discussed above are robust in

an equilibrium where monetary policy is chosen to maximize world welfare and incorporates the

gains from international policy cooperation that are ignored in the Nash equilibrium. At least in

the model of Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002) and the important extension in Engel (2009) – who

allows for currency mis‐alignment, home bias in preferences, and local currency pricing (all of

which are absent in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002)) ‐ the answer is yes. Under cooperation, a

regime of flexible exchange continues to be optimal and the exchange rate will continue to

possess a unit root because again, in the absence of the commitment device, home and foreign

price levels are non‐stationary and importantly are themselves not co integrated with each other.

The mirage of fixed exchange rates continues to be a mirage. And at least for the symmetric

equilibrium in the two country model, bad news about inflation will continue to be good news

for the nominal exchange rate under optimal cooperative monetary policy.

        Moreover, under cooperative policy a version of a Taylor rule continues to characterize

the optimal monetary policy in the open economy, with the simple difference that the monetary

policy rule in each country under cooperation reacts to an average of foreign as well as home

inflation – producer price inflation in the case of Clarida, Gali and Gertler and CPI inflation in

Engel (2009) ‐ the    with the relative weights on the two a function of the importance of

international spillovers. In particular, under cooperation the policy rule is given by


                                         (1   )                    (1   )
                       Rt  rr t  1             0  E t  t 1  0            0 Et  t*1
                                                                     




                                                       16
IV. A Model with Endogenous Dynamics

        Clarida‐Waldman (2014) work with a version of the Gali–Monacelli (2005) DSGE model

that can produce endogenous dynamics in output, inflation, and deviations from PPP. The

model features a hybrid Phillips curve (Gali‐Gertler (1999)) and allows for home bias in

consumption, and thus transitory deviations of the CPI real exchange rate from long run PPP.

We preserve the Cole Obstfeld structure by assuming Cobb‐Douglas utility but with home bias

and σ = 1, so there will be no cross country spillovers impacting potential output. We treat log

foreign output, the foreign interest rate, and foreign inflation as exogenous , constant (as in Gali

and Monacelli (2005) and De Paoli (2009)), and equal to zero.

        Goods market equilibrium requires γNYt/St +(1‐γ*)N*Y*t = N*Y*t where N is population of

home country and Y* is per capita foreign output. This implies

                                             N Yt
                                    St 
                                            * N * Yt *

We assume the share of foreign spending on the home good satisfies γ* = γ(N/N*) so that

St = Yt/Y*t exactly for any (N/N*) so st = yt – y*t . Note also that an appeal of this formulation is that

the goods market equilibrium condition is invariant to (N/N*) while the share of foreign

spending on home output converges to zero as does N/N*.                  The ‘IS’ curve simplifies to




3’)                                 ~
                                    y t  Et{~
                                             y t  1}  [ Rt  Et{t  1}  rrt ]




with rrt  Et{at  1} and y t  at .




                                                          17
        We assume a Gertler‐Gali (1999) hybrid Phillips curve emerges because a constant

fraction of price re setters each period use a rule of thumb based on lagged inflation to set prices




                                   t   f Et        t 1     b t 1    mc t



where the parameters χf , χb , and δ χ are functions of the fraction of rule of thumb price setters as

well as the Calvo parameters F and β. Under our assumption on preferences and using the goods

market equilibrium condition, we can substitute for real marginal cost to obtain




4’)                                t   f Et{ t 1}   b  t 1  {1  }  ~y t  ut
                                     t




where we now have λ = (1+φ)δx. To focus on endogenous persistence, we now assume ut is white

noise. With home bias, the CPI real exchange is given by Qt = EtP*cpit/Pcpit = (k/k*)St      1 – γ* ‐ γ   where

k =(1‐γ)(1‐γ)γγ and similarly for k*. Recall γ is share of home spending on foreign good while 1‐ γ*

is share of foreign spending on foreign good. With home bias, the CPI real exchange rate will

reflect fluctuations in equilibrium terms of trade.

        The isomorphism result is very useful because the policymaker that wishes to maximize




                                                   
                                  W H   E 0   t [ t2   ~
                                                              y t2 ]
                                                  t 0




subject to 3’) and 4’) as well as an assumed law of motion for inflation




7)                                 t  a  t  au ut



                                                          18
faces exactly the same problem as the policymaker in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) Section 6.

What the policy maker takes as given, accordingly, is not the level of expected inflation, but

rather how private sector expectations of inflation tomorrow respond to movements in inflation

today. To solve for the equilibrium we assume that private sector forecast of πt + 1 takes the form

νππt + νuut, where νπ and νu are arbitrary constants that the policy‐maker takes as given. In the

rational expectations equilibrium νπ and νu equal the true fundamental parameters in the reduced

form inflation equation , aπ and au. And of course aπ and au must be consistent with the inflation

dynamics implied by 3’) 4’) and the policy rule.

        The first order condition for this problem is




                                  ~             
                                  yt                  
                                            (1   a ) t




where we note that optimal policy with endogenous inflation inertia calls for a more aggressive

response to inflation deviations from target than for the case of exogenous costs push persistence.

Using the goods market equilibrium condition and recalling that qt = (1‐γ* ‐ γ)st we see that

under optimal policy

                                                                
                                  qt  {1   *  }(                  )  {1   *  }at
                                                            (1   a ) t

where qt is the log deviation of the CPI real exchange rate from the steady state value of 0.




        We seek a fixed point for aπ by substituting the first order condition into 4’) and

imposing the law of motion 7) on expected inflation

                                                                         2
                                   t   f a  t   b  t 1                  ut
                                      t
                                                                     (1  a ) t



                                                      19
Collecting terms we see that

                                                           2
                                   t (1   f a                 )   b  t 1  ut
                                     t
                                                       (1  a )

We see immediately that the fixed point aπ must satisfy




                                              2
8)                                (1                 )   b / a   f a
                                          (1  a )




Existence of a fixed point for aπ in the compact set [0,1] is insured for all admissible parameters

so long as χf + χb ≤ 1 which is always the case in the Gali‐ Gertler (1999) formulations of the

`hybrid Phillips curve. Moreover, for a standard parameterization (ξ=10,φ=1,β=0.99,F=0.75) the

Blanchard – Kahn conditions (1979) for uniqueness (in this case, that one root of the cubic be

stable and the other two have modulus greater than unity) are satisfied for all feasible choices for

the share of backward looking price setters.

        Figure 1 depicts the determination of aπ as a function of α and is the DSGE model


analogue to Figure 1 in Clarida Waldman (2008) paper which studied a similar but ad hoc model

with χf = 0. We see immediately that

Result One: Equilibrium inflation inertia as well as the half‐life of deviations from PPP in

response to cost push shocks are monotonically increasing in α, the relative weight on output

stabilization in the central bank welfare function.




Under optimal policy the nominal exchange rate must satisfy




                                                  
9)                                et  (                   1) t  at  pt 1
                                              (1   a )


                                                       20
where we have used the first order condition plus the equilibrium condition for terms of trade

and the definition of the nominal exchange rate. The following results follows immediately.




Result Two: Bad News for inflation must be Good News for the nominal exchange rate if α < λ.




Result Three: Bad news for inflation must be Good News for the nominal exchange rate if α is

equal to its optimal value α = λ/ξ.

         We gain insight into these results by deriving the optimal policy rule as before. It takes

the form


                                                                (1  a )        
                                         Rt  Et at 1  1                      E t  t 1
                                                             (1   a ) a       

We note that in this σ = 1 case, while economies can differ in their degree of openness, if their

policymakers share the same α and their economies same structure, they will run the same optimal

policy rule. This policy rule in turn will imply that a shock to inflation in time t will impact the

entire expected future time path of the ex‐ante real policy rate as of time t. It is straightforward to

show that in equilibrium with lim i                   Et st i  0 we must have

                                                                                             (1  a )
       et  pt  p *t  Et i 0 ( Rt i   t i1 )  pt  p *t  Et i 0 at i 1                 Et i0  t i 1
                                                                                                          

                                                                                            (1  a )

Thus the exchange rate is an asset price that is the sum of three terms: a purchasing power parity

term (the source of the unit root), a term reflecting the path of expected future productivity

growth, and a term reflecting the expected time path of future inflation. So via the Taylor rule

the macro drivers of the optimal policy rate become the macro factors of the nominal exchange

rate pinned down by the parameters of the optimal Taylor rule as well as the endogenous rate of

inflation inertia.




                                                             21
V. Concluding Remarks

        The models outlined above are simple – but solvable! ‐ and do omit a number of

important considerations such as endogenous capital accumulation, current account imbalances,

and imperfect financial markets, the latter of which can open the door to nominal exchange rate

volatility unrelated macro fundamentals. And in practice, several inflation targeting central

banks do appear to allow the policy rate to react directly to exchange rate deviations from PPP

over and above any information that said PPP deviations provide for forecasting inflation itself

(Clarida , Gali , Gertler (1998); Lubik and Schorfheide (2003) Engel and West (2006); Engel, Mark,

and West (2007)). That said, at least to this author, the framework outlined above does provide a

useful construct for thinking about monetary policy in the open economy and understanding

what it can deliver and what it can’t.      The framework suggests that good macroeconomic

outcomes in open economies are possible by focusing inflation targeting that is implemented by a

Taylor type rule, a rule that in equilibrium is reflected in the exchange rate as an asset price just

as it is reflected in long term bond yields via the expectation channel for the expected future

policy rate (Ang and Piazzesi (2003)).      Optimal monetary policy will not be able deliver a

stationary (‘stable’) nominal exchange rate – let alone a fixed exchange rate or one that remains

inside a target zone ‐ because, absent a commitment device, optimal monetary can’t deliver a

stationary domestic price level. Moreover, even under cooperation, home and foreign domestic

price levels will not be co integrated so a unit root in the nominal exchange rate is necessary to

deliver a stationary terms of trade.

        Another feature in the data for inflation targeting countries that is consistent with

optimal monetary policy via Taylor type rule is that it will tend push the nominal exchange rate

in the opposite direction from PPP in response to a ‘cost push’ shock – the ‘bad news god news’

result of Clarida –Waldman (2008;2014). This is so even though in the long run of these models




                                                 22
the nominal exchange rate must in expectation obey PPP.               So what at first glance might appear

to be an indictment of monetary policy by Taylor rule in the open economy – that it pushes the

exchange rate away from PPP in response to inflation shocks – is actually a property of optimal

policy!

          The model outlined in Section IV also has implications for the Rogoff (1996) PPP puzzle:

why are estimated half‐lives of PPP deviations on the order of twelve to twenty quarters while

estimated half‐lives of inflation deviations from target are two to four quarters? Recall that in the

model of Section IV the log deviation from PPP is given by

                                                       
                          qt  {1   *  }(                 )  {1   *  }at
                                                   (1   a ) t

Now for the special case of no productivity shocks, PPP deviations and inflation deviations from

target will have identical half‐lives governed by the endogenous rate of inflation persistence aπ.


But, if there are stationary (relative) productivity shocks and home bias, the PPP deviation is no

longer an AR(1) but the sum of two AR(1) processes. And as is well known, the sum of two

different AR(1) processes is an ARMA(2,1) process. Depending on the persistence of relative

productivity shocks and their variance, PPP deviations can have a much longer estimated half‐

life recovered from a mis–specified AR(1) model for the real exchange rate than do inflation

deviations from target in the model of optimal monetary policy in Section IV.

          As of this writing many of the world’s major central banks are operating at or close to the

zero lower bound for the policy rate. For many of them, Taylor type rules that well accounted for

the policy rate before the global financial crisis have implied negative policy rates since 2008.

That said as economies recover and output gaps close (after adjusting for the impact of the crisis

on potential output), central banks will begin to normalize the policy rate. As they do a Taylor

rule ‐ with suitable inputs for the expected path of the neutral real interest rate, inflation, and the




                                                       23
output gap – can be a relevant benchmark for assessing the expected normalization path for the

policy rate communicated by the central bank and priced into financial markets (Clarida – Parikh

(2014)).



 *Paper prepared for the Hoover Institution Conference on Monetary Policy for the 21st Century.
I would like to thank the conference organizers, participants, and especially my discussant
Maurice Obstfeld as well as Ken Judd for insightful suggestions for future work.




                                              24
References

Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi. ʺA no‐arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dynamics with
macroeconomic and latent variables.ʺ Journal of Monetary economics 50.4 (2003): 745‐787.

Blanchard, O J, and C. M. Kahn. ʺThe solution of linear difference models under rational
expectations.ʺ Econometrica (1980): 1305‐1311.

Calvo, G., “Staggered Prices in a Utility‐Maximizing Framework,ʺ Journal of Monetary Economics
12: 383‐398 (1983).

Clarida, R. H. “G3 exchange rate relationships: A recap of the record and a review of proposals
for change” No. w7434. National bureau of economic research, 1999.

Clarida, R H. ʺThe empirics of monetary policy rules in open economies.ʺ International Journal of
Finance & Economics 6.4 (2001): 315‐323.

Clarida, R., J Gali, and Gertler, “ Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some International
Evidence,” European Economic Review, (1998).

______________, “The Science of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, (1999).

______________, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Closed versus Open Economies: an Integrated
Approach,” No. w8604. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2001

______________, “A Simple Framework for International Monetary Policy Analysis,ʺ Journal of
Monetary Economics 49: 879‐904 (2002).

Clarida, R H., and M Gertler. ʺHow the Bundesbank conducts monetary policy.ʺ Reducing
Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. University of Chicago Press, 1997. 363‐412.

Clarida, R. and S. Parikh: “Guidance Counselors” The International Economy , Spring 2014

Clarida, R and D Waldman, “Is Bad News about Inflation Good News for the Exchange Rate” in
John Campbell, Editor, Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2008.

_______________, “Bad News About Inflation is Good News for the Nominal Exchange Rate
Under Optimal Monetary Policy: DSGE Theory and a Decade of Empirical Evidence”, in process
, 2014

Cole, H L., and M Obstfeld, “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing: How Much Do
Financial Markets Matter?ʺ Journal of Monetary Economics 28: 3‐24 (1991).

Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti, “Welfare and Macroeconomic Independence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2001.




                                                25
______________, ʺInternational dimensions of optimal monetary policy.ʺ Journal of Monetary
economics 52.2 (2005): 281‐305.

De Paoli, B. ʺMonetary policy and welfare in a small open economy.ʺJournal of International
Economics 77.1 (2009): 11‐22.

Devereux, M B., and V Hnatkovska. Consumption Risk‐Sharing and the Real Exchange Rate: Why does
the Nominal Exchange Rate Make Such a Difference?. No. w17288. National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2011.

Engel, C, and K West,” Taylor rules and the deutschmark dollar real exchange rate.ʺ Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking38.5: 1175‐1194, 2006

Engel, C., N. Mark, and K. West,” Exchange Models are Not As Bad As You Think?“ , NBER
Macro Annual 2007.

Engel, C. Currency misalignments and optimal monetary policy: a reexamination. No. w14829. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2009.

Galí, J. Monetary Policy, inflation, and the Business Cycle: An introduction to the new Keynesian
Framework. Princeton University Press, 2009.

Galı, J, and M Gertler. ʺInflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis.ʺ Journal of monetary
Economics 44.2 (1999): 195‐222.

Gali, J, and T Monacelli, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open
Economy,ʺ Review of Economic Studies 72: 707‐734 (2005)

Krugman, P. M. Obstfeld, M. Melitz, International Economics Prentice Hall Page 2011

Kydland, F E., and E C. Prescott. ʺRules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal
plans.ʺ The Journal of Political Economy (1977): 473‐491.

Laubach, T, and J. C. Williams. ʺMeasuring the natural rate of interest.ʺ Review of Economics and
Statistics 85.4 (2003): 1063‐1070.

Lubik, T A., and F Schorfheide. ʺDo central banks respond to exchange rates? A structural
investigation.ʺ Journal of Monetary Economics. 2003.

Molodtsova, T, and D H. Papell. ʺOut‐of‐sample exchange rate predictability with Taylor rule
fundamentals.ʺ Journal of International Economics77.2 (2009): 167‐180.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff, Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT Press, 1997.

_______________, ʺNew directions for stochastic open economy models.ʺ Journal of international
economics 50.1 (2000): 117‐153.




                                                26
Obstfeld, M. ʺInflation‐targeting, exchange‐rate pass‐through, and volatility.ʺ American Economic
Review (2002): 102‐107.

Svensson, L. E.O., “Open‐Economy Inflation Targeting,ʺ Journal of International Economics 50: 155‐
183 (2000).

Taylor, J, B., 1982, Macroeconomic tradeoffs in an international economy with rational
expectations, in: Hildebrand, ed., Advances in economic theory (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge).

_____________, Macroeconomic Policy in a World Economy: From Econometric Design to
Practical Operation, W.W. Norton, New York, 1993.

___________, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie‐Rochester Series on Public
Policy, North‐Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195‐214.

White, W., “Globalization and the Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” BIS Working Paper No.
250, March 2008.

Woodford, M , Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2003.

_________, Globalization and Monetary Control, in Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler,
eds. International Dimensions of Monetary Policy. University of Chicago Press, 2010.




                                                 27
                                                   TABLE 1

    The Original Clarida – Waldman (2008) Result for the July 2001 – December 2005 Sample



            Regression of Exchange Rate Change on
          Inflation Surprise in 10 Minute W indow Before
                     and After Announcement
        Bad News About Inflation is Good News for The
              Exchange Rate for IT Countries
                                           Headline                                   Core
                                    M oM                YoY                 M oM                 YoY
Coefficient                          0.2                0.2                  0.5                  0.5
T- Statistic                         5.9                6.2                  9.7                  9.2
R-Squared                           0.08                0.09                0.27                 0.25
# O bservations                     394                 387                 257                  259
Regression m ethod: stacked O LS.
Percentage change in exchange rate resulting from a one percentage point upward surprise in inflation.
Positive coefficient indicates appreciation of dom estic currency.
Countries: Australia, Canada, Euro area, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, and US.
Data: July 2001- Decem ber 2005. Som e countries m issing observations.

  Clarida – Waldman “Is Bad News About Inflation Good News for the Exchange Rate”,
  NBER Working Paper 2006.




                                                       28
                                 TABLE 2

Updated Clarida – Waldman (2014) Result for July 2001‐ December 2013 Sample




                                    29
                 FIGURE 1

Fixed Point Solution for aπ as function of λ/α




                      30
