                                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION LENDING ON GROWTH:
                        EVIDENCE FROM U.S. COUNTY-LEVEL DATA

                                                Andrew T. Young
                                                Matthew J. Higgins
                                                Donald J. Lacombe
                                                   Briana Sell

                                               Working Paper 20543
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w20543


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            October 2014




       We thank Jerry Thursby, Bart Hamilton and Daniel Levy for valuable comments and discussions.
       We also thank the Small Business Administration for their help in our FOIA request. Higgins acknowledges
       funding from the Imlay Professorship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
       not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2014 by Andrew T. Young, Matthew J. Higgins, Donald J. Lacombe, and Briana Sell. All rights
       reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
       provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Direct and Indirect Effects of Small Business Administration Lending on Growth: Evidence
from U.S. County-Level Data
Andrew T. Young, Matthew J. Higgins, Donald J. Lacombe, and Briana Sell
NBER Working Paper No. 20543
October 2014
JEL No. C31,E65,H25,O47,R11

                                             ABSTRACT

Conventional wisdom suggests that small businesses are innovative engines of Schumpetarian growth.
However, as small businesses, they are likely to face credit rationing in financial markets. If true then
policies that promote lending to small businesses may yield substantial economy-wide returns. We
examine the relationship between Small Business Administration (SBA) lending and local economic
growth using a spatial econometric framework across a sample of 3,035 U.S. counties for the years
1980 to 2009. We find evidence that a county’s SBA lending per capita is associated with direct negative
effects on its income growth. We also find evidence of indirect negative effects on the growth rates
of neighboring counties. Overall, a 10% increase in SBA loans per capita is associated with a cumulative
decrease in income growth rates of about 2%.


Andrew T. Young                                     Donald J. Lacombe
College of Business and Economics                   Regional Research Institute,
West Virginia University                            West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26505-6025                           PO Box 6825
andrew.young@mail.wvu.edu                           886 Chestnut Ridge Road
                                                    Morgantown, WV 26506-6825
Matthew J. Higgins                                  Donald.Lacombe@mail.wvu.edu
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology                     Briana Sell
800 West Peachtree Street                           Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308                                   Scheller College of Business
and NBER                                            800 West Peachtree St. NW
matt.higgins@scheller.gatech.edu                    Atlanta, GA 30308
                                                    Briana.Sell@scheller.gatech.edu
    “I said I would cut taxes for small businesses [ - ]the drivers and engines of growth, and we've
    cut them 18 times. And I want to continue those tax cuts for middle-class families and for small
                                              businesses.”

                                                                  Democratic US President Barack Obama



“[C]hampioning small business. Our party has been focused on big business too long. I came
through small business. I understand how hard it is to start a small business. That's why
everything I'll do is designed to help small businesses grow and add jobs. I want to keep their
taxes down on small business. I want regulators to see their job as encouraging small enterprise,
not crushing it.”
                                                Republican US Presidential Nominee Mitt Romney
                                                 Second US Presidential Debate, October 16, 2012


1.        Introduction

On October 16, 2012, during the second U.S. presidential debate, President Barack Obama and

challenger Mitt Romney together used the phrases “small business” and “small businesses” a

total of 21 times.1 Politicians, policymakers, and pundits regularly extol the virtues of small

businesses as engines of economic growth. This positive view towards small business is reflected

by society more broadly. For example, a 2012 Gallup Poll found that more than 94% of

Americans surveyed reported having a positive image of “small business”.2

          David Birch (1979, 1987) did much to popularize the perception that small businesses

account for the bulk of job creation in the U.S. And many researchers – most prominently Zoltan

Acs and David Audretsch along with their coauthors – have argued that small businesses are also

important sources of Schumpetarian (1942) innovation (e.g., Acs and Audretsch, 1993; Acs,

1999; Acs et al., 2009; Audretsch et al., 2006). If this innovation is associated with positive
1
  Based on the transcript produced by U.S. National Public Radio (NPR):
http://www.npr.org/2012/10/16/163050988/transcript-obama-romney-2nd-presidential-debate; last accessed March
11, 2014. There were additional references to “small enterprise” and “small employers”.
2
  Alternatively, only 75% of Republicans and 44% of Democrats reported having a positive image of “big business”.
“Small business” also garnered more positive reactions than general terms like “free enterprise” and “capitalism”:
http://www.gallup.com/poll/158978/democrats-republicans-diverge-capitalism-federal-gov.aspx; last accessed
March 14, 2014.

                                                        2
spillovers but small businesses are financially constrained, then the gains from subsidizing them

may be considerable (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Evans and Leighton, 1989).

        Consistent with these popular and scholarly perceptions, small businesses in the U.S. are

directly and indirectly subsidized by the federal government in numerous ways. For example

they receive exemptions from regulations (e.g., requirements for advanced notice of layoffs) and

are given preferential tax treatment (e.g, tax credits for the expenses of new retirement plans).

They also receive preferential treatment for government contracts. Additionally, small business

innovative efforts are also subsidized through the Small Business Innovation Research Program

(SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer Program (STTR).3 And, of course, the Small

Business Administration (SBA) is a federal government agency whose very mission is to “…aid,

counsel, assist and protect the interests of small business…”.4

        The asymmetric information problems that exist between financial intermediaries and

small businesses may be particularly severe. The systematic recording and communication of

information relevant to creditors is subject to economies of scale. As such, small businesses may

be particularly subject to credit rationing (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). An important component of

the SBA is its loan programs. To help with these potential information asymmetries, the SBA

facilitates exchange between small businesses and intermediaries, often guaranteeing 75% to

90% of the loan.

          Despite popular pro-small business sentiment and scholarly support, not all researchers

are convinced of the benefits of subsidizing small businesses. Hurst and Pugsley (2011) examine

survey responses from a sample of entrepreneurs taken before they started their small businesses.

They find that most of these entrepreneurs are not Schumpetarian innovators – they do not

3
 de Rungy (2005) provides a concise overview of these government programs.
4
 This is from the SBA mission statement: http://www.sba.gov/about-sba/what_we_do/mission; last accessed March
14, 2014.

                                                      3
attempt to introduce new ideas, nor do they seek to enter a new or underserved market. Instead,

many of these individuals tend to be seeking non-pecuniary benefits such as those associated

with being one’s own boss. Many small businesses may also be started by “necessity

entrepreneurs” who have opted for self-employment because of difficulties in finding wage or

salaried positions.5 Necessity entrepreneurs often tend to have lower levels of human and social

capital than “opportunity entrepreneurs” (i.e., those seeking to exploit new ideas and markets)

(Acs, 2006; Block and Wagner, 2007); and their small businesses are more likely to fail (Pfeffier

and Reize, 2000; Block and Sandner, 2009; Caliendo and Kritikos, 2009). Small business

subsidies may or may not successfully reach opportunity entrepreneurs rather than necessity

entrepreneurs and individuals with be my own boss preferences.


        Hurst and Pugsley also note that firms with less than 20 employees account for 90% of

U.S. firms but actually only about 20% of total employment. Furthermore, Haltiwanger et al.

(2013) and Neumark et al. (2011) both find that the perception of small businesses as engines of

growth is at least in one sense incorrect. Once firm age is controlled for, there is no meaningful

relationship between firm size and firm growth. Subsidizing small firms, then, may divert

resources from larger firms that are just as or even more likely to innovate and to grow.6


        In this paper we examine the relationship between SBA lending and real per capita

income growth using a panel of 15,175 observations of 3,035 U.S. counties during the years

1980 to 2009. We employ spatial econometric techniques to estimate the direct effects of SBA

lending on a county’s growth rate, as well as the indirect effect on its neighbors’ growth rates.


5
  For example see Audretsch and Vivarelli, 1995; Blau, 1987; Evans and Leighton, 1989; Fairlie and Krashinsky,
2006; Shane, 2009; Taylor, 1996; Thurik et al., 2008
6
  In developing economies, La Porta and Shleifer (2008) and Banerjee and Duflo (2011) both report evidence that
most small businesses are started due to a lack of jobs at larger firms. These small businesses most often neither
innovate nor grow.

                                                          4
Our estimations include county-level SBA loans per capita. As an indicator of the implicit

subsidy in favorable interest rates on SBA loans, in some specifications we control for a county’s

average loan rate relative to the prime rate. Furthermore, we check the robustness of our results

controlling for SBA loan failure rates, as well as the share of loans that are covered by the SBA

guarantee. In all specifications we also control for non-SBA variables that are likely correlates

with the level of entrepreneurial activity (e.g., per capita venture capital and citation-weighted

patent counts (Samila and Sorenson, 2011)) as well as measures of educational attainment,

demographics, and industry composition.7 These latter controls are similar to those used in the

county-level growth studies of Higgins et al. (2007) and Young et al. (2013).

        Approaching a study of the relationship between SBA lending and growth, a cursory look

at the data does not lend itself to strong priors. Figure 1 contains a plot of county-level real per

capita income growth against (log) SBA loans per capita.8 No meaningful relationship is

apparent in the plot and the slope of an OLS best-fit line is actually negative (though the estimate

is not statistically different from zero). Figure 2 contains another plot where now, in place of

SBA lending, the horizontal axis marks the difference between the prime rate and the average

rate charged on SBA loans in a county. This difference is increasing in the favorability of SBA

rates relative to the prime benchmark. Again, there is no discernable relationship between this

measure and growth.9

        To our knowledge, there are only two other studies focusing on the effects of SBA loans

on growth. First, Craig et al. (2007) provide OLS estimates based on an annual panel of




7
  We also include time period fixed effects and U.S. state fixed effects in the estimations.
8
  As described in detail in Section 2, we relate average SBA variable values over 5-year periods to average growth
over subsequent 5-year periods.
9
  Though not statistically different than zero, the slope point estimate on an OLS best-fit line is negative.

                                                         5
metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and non-MSA counties from 1991 to 2001.10 They report a

small but positive and statistically significant relationship between guaranteed loans and income

growth. However, their set of control variables is much smaller than the one we employ in the

present study. We also include state-level fixed effects in our estimations while Craig et al. do

not.11 Furthermore, while Craig et al. focus on annual variation in their data, we construct a panel

of 5-year averages. This is more conventional for a study of economic growth.

        Focusing on 5-year averages acknowledges that the effects of SBA lending in a county –

including the indirect effects on neighboring counties – are likely to only be realized over time.

We also go beyond the Craig et al. (2007) study by employing spatial econometric techniques. If

spatial dependence is present but uncontrolled for then it can lead to inconsistent or otherwise

biased estimates (Corrado and Fingleton, 2012). Furthermore, there is good reason to think that

spatial dependence will be present in regional data on SBA lending and economic activity. For

example, if small businesses are financially constrained but also innovative then SBA loans may

promote growth both in the county where the loans are made and also in neighboring counties

via spillover effects. Alternatively, if small businesses are not particularly innovative then SBA

loans to a given area may simply result in a relocation of firms and resources from neighboring

areas. Estimating the indirect effects of SBA loans on neighboring counties, therefore, is likely to

yield important information for evaluating the economy-wide desirability of the SBA loan

programs.

        Second, our work is also related to a recent paper by Lee (2013). He estimates the

relationship between small business birth rates, employment and income growth at the MSA-

level during 1993-2002. He reports positive, statistically significant, and sizable effects on both

10
 Craig et al. (2008) provide a similar study where local area employment rates are the dependent variable.
11
 Aside from SBA variables and time period dummies they only control for the per capita income level and a
measure of concentration in the deposit market. (Our estimations also include period fixed effects.)

                                                       6
of these variables. Given this, he further finds that SBA loan activity is not positively related to

employment or income growth. According to Lee’s estimates, government-backed small

business creation simply crowds out, one for one, the non-government-backed creation of small

businesses. The present study differs from Lee (2013) in a number of important ways. First, we

again exploit a substantially larger number of control variables.12 Second, Lee focuses on the

number of SBA loans made in an MSA, while we focus on the amount of SBA lending per capita

and, therefore, account for the fact that average loan sizes may differ across counties. Third, Lee

does not account for variation in SBA loan rates relative to a benchmark (the prime rate); nor for

failure rates and guarantee shares. Lastly, our study includes all counties – metro and non-metro

– and allows for spatial dependence. Doing so may yield a more comprehensive picture of the

effects of SBA lending activity. As well, our paper complements Lee’s (2013) by allowing for

the possibility that SBA lending has crowding out effects not only in the county where the

lending occurs, but also in neighboring counties.

        We find that SBA lending activity has a negative effect on per capita income growth. In

most spatial Durbin model (SDM) specifications that we estimate, both the direct and indirect

effects of SBA lending are negative, though the latter are larger in absolute value. (Even when

statistically insignificant, the point estimates of the SBA lending effects are always negative, so

in no case do find any evidence that SBA lending is associated with increased incomes.) Our

estimates suggest that a 10% increase in SBA loans per capita (which is about $3.43 for the

average county in our sample) is associated with a cumulative decrease in income growth rates

of about 2 percentage points.




12
  Lee (2013) includes medium and large establishment births; the initial number of establishments, employment,
annual payroll, population, and a housing price index; and 9 census division dummies as additional controls.

                                                        7
       We organize this paper in the following way. In Section 2 we describe the U.S. county-

level data set. Then in Section 3 we describe our empirical specifications; in particular the spatial

Durbin models that allow us to estimate both the direct and indirect effects of SBA lending on

county-level growth rates. The results of our analysis are presented and discussed in Section 4

and, finally, in Section 5 we provide some concluding remarks.



2.     U.S. County-Level Data

We construct a panel of U.S. data that includes observations on 3,035 counties that cover the

years 1980 to 2009. Our dependent and independent variables, discussed more fully below, are

constructed as averages over 5-year periods. In the case of our dependent variable we consider

the time frames: 1985-1989, 1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, and, 2005-2009. For our

independent variable we consider the preceding 5-year periods: 1980-1984, 1985-1989, 1990-

1994, 1995-1999, and, 2000-2004. As a result of stacking these 5-year periods for our 3,035

counties the final dataset has 15,175 observations.

       Personal income data (net of taxes) was obtained from the BEA and converted into

constant 2005 U.S. dollars using the GDP deflator. We define our dependent variable as the

average growth rate of real personal income per capita over a 5-year period. For each of these 5-

year periods the initial year (log) real per capita income is always included as a control to

account for possible conditional convergence effects.

       Data on SBA loan activity and a number of related variables were obtained from the SBA

via a Freedom of Information Act request. Our first task was to aggregate the loan data into

yearly flows at the county-level. Next, we created yearly measures of SBA loans per-capita. We

are interested in establishing whether SBA lending activity is associated with higher or lower



                                                  8
rates of income growth, both directly within the county where loans are being made and

indirectly via the spatial dependence of neighboring counties. As such, we define our primary

independent variable of interest, SBA loans per capita, as the log of the average flow of SBA

loans per-capita over each 5-year period.13

        Controlling for the level of loan activity, we are also interested in the subsidy implicit in

those loans and whether or not it is associated with greater county-level income growth. This

subsidy is related to the rate paid on SBA loans relative to the cost of non-SBA funds. While we

do not have data on loans that were never made, we argue that we can construct a reasonable

proxy for the variation in the subsidy across counties and time periods. In particular, we assume

that the subsidy will be proportional to the rate paid on an SBA loan relative to the prime rate.

The prime rate provides a benchmark that, in principle, represents the rate that a very good credit

risk would be offered anywhere in the country. Variation in SBA loan rates relative to this

benchmark tells us something about how the subsidy is varying across both counties and time

periods.

        We have the interest rates associated with each of the individual SBA loans in our data.

In our estimations we consider, at the country-level, the prime rate minus the average SBA

interest rate charged.14 We interpret an increase in this differential as an increase in the implicit

subsidy. While controlling for the level of loan activity, we include this interest rate differential

in some of our models. Additionally, we create a measure of the per capita level of the subsidy

by multiplying the interest rate differential by (log) SBA loans per capita.15



13
   We always add 1 to the SBA loan amount before taking the log since there are observations of loans per capita
that are equal to 0.
14
   Prime rate observations are taken from the St. Louis Federal Reserve.
15
   Strictly speaking, we should take the rate differential times the amount of loans and then take the log of that
product. However, the differential is not bounded above 0.

                                                          9
       SBA has two main loan programs. Their main effort is the 7(a) loan program that

facilitates loans to existing small businesses and startups by guaranteeing a large part of the

principal. In our sample over 90% of loans are 7(a) loans. With this data we create two variables

(i) share of SBA loans that are “7(a)” loans in a county and the (ii) share of SBA loans that are

guaranteed. The guarantee share represents the actual percentage of dollars loaned that are

guaranteed (on average, about 58% in our sample) so it is related to the 7(a) share. In either case,

these controls are included to gain insight into both the potential costs of moral hazard and the

potential benefits of having the SBA alleviate credit rationing. In specifications where we

introduce either of these controls, we do so by including, separately, the share times the SBA

loan level and one minus the share times the SBA loan level. For example, in the case of the

guarantee share, we control for the average guaranteed and unguaranteed SBA dollar loan

amounts separately.

       A contentious issue in both scholarly and popular discussions about the U.S. economy is

the decline in the manufacturing sector. Manufacturing (relative to, say, services) can be

particularly capital intensive; successfully entering the manufacturing sector may require

financing to cover relatively large fixed costs. In some specifications we control for the share of

SBA loans that are made to manufacturing firms (on average, about 16% in our sample). Similar

to the 7(a) and guarantee shares, we scale SBA loan levels by, separately, the manufacturing

share and one minus the manufacturing share. In this way we can estimate the different effects

on income growth of SBA loans in the manufacturing sector versus those in non-manufacturing

sectors.

       Finally, we have data on SBA loan failures (charge offs) in each county. We define an

SBA loan failure rate as the sum of SBA loan charge offs that occur during a given period



                                                 10
divided by the sum of SBA loans made and SBA loan charge offs. The reason for including the

latter in the denominator is to ensure that the ratio is bounded between 0 and 1. This allows us to

estimate the different growth effects of the amount of, ex post, “successful” versus

“unsuccessful” lending. On average, the failure rate in our sample is about 8%. Previous studies

have reported that the likelihood of default on SBA loans is similar to that of a large percentage

(40% or more) of large commercial bank loans (Treacy and Carey, 1998; Glennon and Nigro ,

2005). That being said, we are interested in knowing whether the variation in SBA failure rates

can help account for the effect of SBA lending on growth.

        The arguments in favor of subsidizing small businesses typically revolve around their

being particularly innovative and entrepreneurial. In all of our estimations, then, we control for a

number of variables that are suggested by Samila and Sorenson (2011) in their study of

entrepreneurial activity in U.S. metropolitan areas. In particular, we control for dollars of venture

capital funds invested in a county and the number of citation-weighted patents per capita. (The

latter is based on successful patent applications filed by inventors located in the county.)16

Venture capital investments are a potentially important determinant of innovative activity, and

patenting is a potentially meaningful indicator of innovative activity that is actually occurring.

Furthermore, we control for a number of county-level indicators of entrepreneurial activity: the

numbers of employees, establishments with less than 500 employees, and establishments with

more than 500 employees.

        The inclusion of venture capital and patent measures constitutes an additional

contribution of this paper. Samila and Soreson find that both venture capital and patents are

positively linked to firm starts, employment, and payroll (income) in U.S. metropolitan statistical

16
  Following Samila and Sorenson (2011) for patent applications listing a number (n) of inventors, 1/n patents is
assigned to the county of each individual inventor. This is described more fully in the Samila and Sorenson (2009)
working paper.

                                                        11
areas (MSA). We extend their perspective to explore the relationships between these variables

and county-level income growth. Our analysis covers all counties; not only MSAs. Also, while

Samila and Soreson examine a panel with annual frequency from 1993 to 2002, we consider a

longer time period (1980 to 2009) and a frequency of 5-year averages. The 5-year frequency is

more appropriate for the study of income growth, and we relate venture capital and patenting

activity over 5-year periods to income growth in the subsequent 5-year periods. By allowing for

spatial dependence we also consider the possibility that innovative activity in a given county

creates spillover effects in neighboring counties.

       Finally, we include a large number of additional controls that are suggested by the

county-level growth studies of Higgins et al. (2006) and Young et al. (2013). These include land

area and water area per capita; whether or not a county is in a metropolitan area; demographic

controls for age, ethnic/racial, and educational composition of a county’s population; the poverty

rate; federal and state and local government employment; and the industry compositions of a

county. Average income growth rates over 5-year periods (1985-1989; 1990-1994; 1995-1999;

2000-2004; and, 2005-2009) are related to the initial year values of each of these additional

controls (1985; 1990; 1995; 2000; and, 2005). All of our estimations include U.S. state fixed

effects and period fixed effects. Sources and summary statistics for all of the variables described

above are reported in Table 1.

       It should be noted that among our controls, the initial (log) per capita income level is of

particular interest because of its link to conditional convergence effects (Baumol, 1986; Barro

and Sala-i-Martin, 1992). Higgins et al. (2006) report a conditional income convergence rate of

between 6% and 8% across U.S. counties. While Higgins et al. report standard errors that are

robust to spatial correlation in growth equation error terms (Rappaport, 1999; Conley, 1999) they



                                                 12
do not account for the bias that might arise from not explicitly allowing for spatial dependence of

income growth rates.

        Rey and Montouri (1999) are the first paper that employs a spatial econometric

framework to estimate the conditional convergence rate. They do so using cross-sections of U.S.

state-level data from 1929 to 1994 and report that the estimated rate is generally around 2%

(what Barro (2012) refers to the “iron law of convergence”), similar to OLS estimates using the

same data. However, aside from initial income Rey and Montouri do not include any additional

control variables in their analysis. Also, to our knowledge only Rupasingha et al. (2005) employ

county-level data within a spatial econometric framework to estimate a U.S. conditional

convergence rate. However, these authors do not calculate the correct estimates of direct,

indirect, and total effects as described by LeSage and Pace (2009). Rupasingha et al. (2005) also

employ a much smaller set of controls than are employed in the present paper. An additional

contribution of this paper, then, is to provide a correct analysis of how accounting for spatial

dependence affects the conditional convergence rate estimate for the U.S. economy; one that

incorporates a large number of additional economic and demographic controls



3.      Empirical Framework: the Spatial Durbin Model

Consider the panel made up of data described in Section 2 above. Denote the number of counties

in the panel by N (= 3,035) and the number of time periods as T (= 5). A spatial Durbin model

can be expressed as follows:

(3.1)          g it    Wg it  X i ,t 1  X  WX i ,t 1 X   it ,

where git is an (T  N)  1 vector of income per capita growth rates and Xi,t-1 is a (T  N)  k

matrix of k control variables. (For simplicity of exposition we will assume that Xi,t-1 includes


                                                           13
period and U.S. state fixed effects.) Also, εit is a (T  N)  1 vector of errors and βX is a k  1

coefficient vector.17

        Additionally, (3.1) differs from a standard OLS specification by allowing for two types of

interesting spatial dependence. First, income growth in a given county can exhibit spatial

dependence on the growth rates of neighboring counties. This is modeled with a spatial

autoregressive (SAR) term: ρWgit. As an intuitive example of this sort of spatial dependence,

when incomes grow faster in a county its residents may increase their demands for the goods

sold in neighboring counties. Those increased demands can cause incomes in those neighboring

counties to grow faster as well.

        Second, income growth in a given county can exhibit spatial dependence in the values of

control variables in neighboring counties. This is modeled with what is commonly referred to as

a spatial lag of X (SLX) term: WXi,t-1X. As an intuitive example of this second type of spatial

dependence, SBA lending in one county may lead to the creation of job opportunities, including

some that are filled by residents of neighboring counties. Those residents of neighboring counties

will then experience income growth higher than otherwise would have been the case. As an

alternative example, when SBA guarantees are offered on loans to applicants in a given county,

the funds for those loans may come, in whole or in part, at the cost of loans that would have

otherwise been made in neighboring counties. This may result in indirect, negative growth

effects in those neighboring counties.

        Both types of spatial dependence are a function of the definition of “neighbors” as

embodied in a (N  N) weight matrix, W, along with a spatial autoregressive parameter, ρ, and a


17
  Importantly, βX cannot be interpreted by itself as the direct effects of a county’s X variables on its own income
                                                                     డ௚
growth. As LeSage and Pace (2009) show, for the rth X variable,          ൌ ሺ‫ܫ‬ே െ ߩܹሻିଵ ሺߚ௑௥ ൅ ܹߠ௑௥ ሻ. Intuitively, the
                                                                  డ௑ೝ
SAR and SLX parameters (see immediately below) matter because there are feedback effects.

                                                          14
k  1 vector of coefficients, . We define any county’s neighbors by its k nearest neighbors and

we choose to set k = 5. (Nearest here refers to, for a given county, the 5 counties that are closest

to its geographic center.) For counties in our sample, 5 is the average number of contiguous

counties. An entry in W takes a value of 1 when it corresponds to a pair of counties that are

neighbors; it otherwise takes a value of 0.

         While we believe our choice of k is reasonable, any particular value will be somewhat

arbitrary. However, as LeSage and Pace (2010) explain, if the effects estimates are computed and

interpreted correctly then the results will not be sensitive to the particular choice of k.18 Along

with the direct effects, we provide correct estimates of the indirect and total effects (LeSage and

Pace, 2009). The indirect effects that are reported below are to be interpreted as cumulative

effects that include not only the effect of a given county on its neighbors, but also the effect of

those neighboring counties on their own neighbors. (Feedback effects on the original given

county are included in the estimate of the direct effect.) The total effect of a change in a control

variable in a given county is then the sum of the direct and indirect effects.

         We estimate specifications along the lines of (3.1) using maximum likelihood. Maximum

likelihood estimation is employed to avoid the simultaneity bias that would arise in OLS

estimation when a spatially lagged dependent variable is included.



4.       Results

18
  Intuitively, consider the example of 3 counties (“A”, “B”, and “C”) that lay in succession along a line: A, then B,
and then C; and consider that growth rates are spatially dependent on neighboring growth rates. We want to use an
SAR model to estimate that spatial dependence. We could consider a 1-closest neighbor weighting scheme. In that
case, A would affect B which would affect C; and then there would be feedback effects. Alternatively we could
consider a 2-closest neighbor scheme where A affects both B and C; and then there are feedback effects. In either
case, a particular spatial autoregressive root (ρ) that is less than 1 in absolute value will imply a finite cumulative
effect. If there is a true cumulative effect, then there will be a root (ρ1) such that a 1-closest neighbor SAR
specification is consistent with it; and there will be another root (ρ2) such that a 2-closest neighbor SAR
specification is consistent with it. From either specification, then, we can in principle estimate that true cumulative
effect.

                                                           15
Our most interesting results will be based on the spatial econometric framework. However, as a

benchmark, we begin by reporting OLS results for the model with no spatial dependence. (The

empirical model in this case is simply (3.1) where ρ and the elements of  are all constrained to

be equal to 0.)



4.1      OLS Results

OLS results are reported in Table 2. In these OLS regressions (as well as the SDM estimations

that are reported on subsequently) we include the full set of control variables described in

Section 2. However, to make reporting results manageable Table 2 contains only the coefficient

estimates associated with (a) SBA variables, (b) the innovative activity variables from Samila

and Sorenson (2011), and (c) the initial (log) per capita income level.19

         Across U.S. counties, (log) SBA loans per capita is negatively related to per capita

income growth (columns 1, 2, and 3). The point estimates suggest that a 1 percent increase in

SBA lending corresponds to a 0.1 percentage point decrease in the average annual growth rate

that. All coefficient estimates on SBA loans are statistically significant at the 1% level.

         The regression results reported in column 2 include the difference between the prime rate

and the average SBA loan rate. We interpret variation in this differential as positively related to

an implicit subsidy to small businesses. The differential enters negatively and significantly at the

1% level. The point estimate implies that a 100 basis point increase in the differential

corresponds to about a growth rate that is lower by 0.15 percentage points.20 Column 3 is based


19
  Full OLS results are provided in Appendix A and full SDM results are provided in Appendix B.
20
  The interpretation of the rate differential coefficient can be confusing given that the average value of the prime
rate net of the SBA rate in our sample is negative (-0.009). A negative coefficient on the rate differential may
suggest a positive growth effect at that average value. However, the marginal growth effect is negative. For
example, starting from the average (-0.009) a decrease in the SBA rate lowers the rate differential in absolute value,
implying that the marginal effect on growth is negative when the coefficient is negative.

                                                          16
on an alternative measure of the implicit subsidy where the rate differential is scaled by (log)

SBA loans per capita. This alternative measure has some intuitive appeal because it takes the

average rate differential per dollar and scales it by the total number of dollars lent. However, this

alternative measure does not enter significantly.

        Perhaps surprisingly, across columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 2 the coefficient estimates

associated with (log) venture capital per capita are negative and all statistically significant at the

1% level. Samila and Sorenson (2011) report that venture capital is positively related to payroll

levels across U.S. MSAs.21 Though venture capital is not the primary focus of this paper, this

discrepancy is difficult to ignore.22 Likewise, the (log of) patents per capita also enters our OLS

regressions negatively and significantly (5% level). This again contrasts with Samila and

Sorenson (2011) who across U.S. MSAs generally report positive (though often statistically

insignificant) correlations between patenting activity and payroll levels.

        In Table 3 we report on regressions exploring these discrepancies between our results

and those of Samila and Sorenson. These regressions focus on two key differences between their

study and our own: (i) Samila and Sorenson’s data is comprised of MSAs while we examine U.S.

counties (both metro and non-metro) and (ii) they examine payroll (income) levels while we

examine income growth rates. Table 3, then, contains the results of regressions where the

dependent variable is (a) growth rates from the subsample constituted by metro counties

(columns 1 and 2), (b) income levels from the full sample (columns 3 and 4), and (c) income


21
   In an unpublished manuscript Hasan and Wang (2006) report that venture capital is positively related to GDP
growth (as well as new firm establishment and patenting activity) in a sample of 394 US regional labor market areas
(LMAs) during the relatively short period of 1993-1999. Over these 7 years, they rely on an empirical specification
that contemporaneously links venture capital to GDP growth at an annual frequency.
22
   Firm-level evidence also links venture capital to positive economic outcomes. For examples, Jai and Kini (1995)
and Engel and Keilbach (2007) find that venture capital-funded firms experience higher sales growth and
employment; Kortum and Lerner (2000) find that manufacturing firms that receive venture capital have higher
patenting rates. However, Gompers and Lerner (2003) also find that during boom periods venture capital tends to
overfund particular sectors and it becomes less effective.

                                                        17
levels from the metro county subsample (columns 5 and 6).23 For each case we report both a

regression with only SBA loans per capita and a regression that includes both loans per capita

and the prime-SBA rate differential.

        Apparently the discrepancies in results are driven by our focus on income growth rates

vis-à-vis Samila and Sorenson’s focus on levels. In particular, when the income level is the

dependent variable, venture capital and patents both enter positively and significantly at the 1 %

level. Focusing on the growth rate, alternatively, venture capital and patents both enter

negatively and significantly at the 10% level or better. Whether one focuses on the full sample or

just the metro counties does not make a difference in the signs of those coefficients. As to why

the choice of income levels versus growth rates is critical, we can offer little beyond conjectures.

However, more relevant to the present paper is the fact that, across the Table 3 regressions, SBA

loans per capita always enters negatively. The coefficient estimates are all statistically significant

except for the case of income levels in the metro-county subsample (column 6). Also in this

particular regression, the SBA rate differential enters positively and significantly (1% level).24

Aside from the income level metro subsample regression, across the OLS regressions in Tables

2 and 3 we uniformly find evidence of a negative and significant relationship between SBA

lending and growth.

        Lastly, we note that the coefficient estimates on the initial (log) income level in Table 2

are always negative and statistically significant at the 1% level. The point estimate is -0.015 in

all of the regressions. This point estimate implies a convergence rate of about 1.5% annually.



23
   Initial income is, of course, dropped from the control variable set when we employ the income level as the
dependent variable.
24
   As we shall see, this is also true for the analogous SDM estimation. (See Table 5C.) We will return to its
discussion and interpretation below.


                                                         18
This is reasonably close to (though statistically different than) the 2% iron law of convergence

(Barro, 2012).



4.2    SDM Results

Table 4 contains the results of estimating spatial Durbin models (SDMs). For each of the

specifications (labeled 1 through 3) we report three columns of estimates: respectively for the

direct, indirect, and total effects. The estimates of the ρ parameter in the SDM specifications are

all positive and highly significant. This implies that if we ignore spatial dependence (i.e. focus

only on the OLS) we will be incorrectly interpreting the estimated effects.

       Specification 1 includes only loans per capita as an SBA control variable. Both the direct

and indirect effects of SBA lending are estimated to be negative, but neither is by itself

statistically significant. However, the total effect – the sum of the direct and indirect effects – is

negative and statistically significant at the 10% level. When the SBA rate differential is included

as an additional control (specification 2, Table 4) the direct, indirect, and total estimated effects

of SBA lending per capita are each negative and statistically significant at the 5% level or better.

In specification 2 the direct effect of the rate differential (which we interpret as proportional to

an implicit subsidy) is itself estimated to be negative and significant at the 1% level. The indirect

effect is also estimated to be negative but is not statistically significant. When the rate

differential is scaled by SBA loans per capita (specification 3) only its direct effect is statistically

significant. Regarding SBA loans per capita, the direct, indirect, and total effects are all negative

and statistically significant at the 10% level.

       We consider specification 2 to be our preferred specification. Based on both the OLS and

SDM estimation results, controlling for the implicit subsidy in preferential interest rates appears



                                                   19
to be important. Also, the rate differential enters the estimations with statistically greater

significance than the differential scaled by SBA loans. Based on specification 2, the total effect

of a 1% increase in SBA loans per capita is a cumulative decrease in growth rates of 2 tenths of a

percentage point. Most of that decrease is actually realized in growth rates outside of the county

in which the increase in SBA loans occurs. To put this estimated effect in perspective, 2 tenths of

a percentage point is close to 10% of the mean growth rate in our sample (2.4% annually).

Starting from the mean SBA loans per capita level ($34.27) an increase of about $3.43 per capita

is associated with a cumulative decrease in annual growth rates of about 2 percentage points. The

sample standard deviation of SBA loans per capita ($38.67) is an order of magnitude larger than

$3.43. Relative to the observed variation in SBA lending, then, the estimated total effects are

quite large. Also note that if we use, instead, the point estimates from either of specifications 1 or

3, then an increase in $3.43 in per capita SBA loans is still associated with a cumulative decrease

in annual growth rates of about 1 percentage point, which is itself quite large.

        In Tables 5A and 5B we report on SDM estimations that check the robustness of our

results to controlling for a county’s (i) SBA guarantee share, (ii) 7(a) loan share, (iii)

manufacturing loan share, and (iv) failure rate on SBA loans. We first control for each of these

variables separately (specifications 1, 2, 3, and 4) and report the results of an estimation

including all of them together (specification 5). In all estimations we include SBA loans per

capita and the SBA-prime interest rate differential. As in Table 4 we report three columns of

results (direct, indirect, and total effects) for each specification.

        In each and every specification, the direct, indirect, and total effects of SBA lending on

growth are negative and statistically significant at the 5% level or better. The point estimates for

the indirect effects are always at least as large as those for the direct effects. Each of the total



                                                   20
effect point estimates is -0.002 or -0.003; as large as or larger than the total effects reported in

Table 4. While SBA lending appears to be robustly, negatively related to county-level growth,

we report positive effects associated with the share of the loans that the SBA guarantees and the

share of loans made to manufacturing firms. The 7(a) share appears to have no independent and

significant relationship with county-level growth. Alternatively, the SBA loan failure rate is

associated with highly significant and large negative direct, indirect, and total effects.

       Considering the SBA guarantee share, the indirect effects (Tables 5A and 5B;

specifications 1 and 5) are each an order of magnitude larger than the estimated total effects.

Broadly speaking, SBA lending in a given county may have effects on neighboring counties by

(a) crowding their firms out of loanable funds markets and/or (b) having negative effects on the

given county’s growth that, in turn, spillover to neighboring counties (e.g., lower incomes in the

given county lead to decreased demands for goods sold in the neighbors). Controlling for the

amount of SBA lending, a positive indirect effect of the guarantee share is difficult to account for

based on (a). However, in the case of (b) SBA guarantees serve to absorb losses associated with

SBA lending in a given county, and therefore may, on the margin, dampen the negative

spillovers into the economies of neighboring counties.

       The manufacturing share (Tables 5A and 5B; specifications 3 and 5) is also associated

with direct, indirect, and total effects on growth that are positive and statistically significant.

Similar to the case of the guarantee share, the indirect effects are estimated to be an order of

magnitude larger than the direct effects. Note that, though its coefficient estimates are not

reported in the tables, a county’s manufacturing employment share is one of the control variables

(Table 1). These manufacturing loan share effects, then, cannot be interpreted as simply

implying that counties with a larger manufacturing sector grow faster. Rather, though overall



                                                   21
SBA lending is negatively related to growth, having more of those loans made to manufacturing

firms is, on the margin, positively related to growth.

       Perhaps least surprising, the SBA loan failure rate (Tables 5A and 5B; specifications 4

and 5) is associated with negative direct, indirect, and total growth effects that are always

statistically significant at the 1% level. These effects are large. The total effect reported for

specification 5 implies that a standard deviation increase in the failure rate (0.126) is associated

with a cumulative decrease in county-level income per capita growth rates of more than 1.4

percentage points. The indirect effects estimates are larger than the direct effects estimates by

nearly an order of magnitude. Again, we interpret this result as being consistent with SBA loans

in a county as having negative effects on growth that, in turn, spillover to neighboring counties.

The actual failure of SBA loans would straightforwardly feed into these effects.

       In all of the SDM results reported thus far, the venture capital and patenting variables are

always associated with negative effects that are often statistically significant. (Estimates for

venture capital and patenting are explicitly reported in table 4.) In Tables 6A, 6B, and 6C we

report on robustness checks that are similar to those reported based on OLS in Table 3. Once

again, whether the focus is on income levels or growth rates is important for the signs of the

venture capital and patenting effects. In the case of the latter, the point estimates turn positive

and are most often statistically significant.

       Based on the subsample of metro county growth rates (Table 6A; specifications 1 and 2)

the direct, indirect, and total SBA lending effects are always estimated to be negative. When the

SBA rate differential is included (specification 2) the SBA lending effects are statistically

significant (10% level or better). In particular, the total effect (significant at the 5% level)

implies that a 1% increase in loans per capita is associated with a cumulative decrease in growth



                                                   22
rates of about 3 tenths of a percentage point. Once again, whether one looks at income growth

rates or levels appears to make a difference. Turning to income levels in the full sample of

counties (Table 6B; specifications 3 and 4) the SBA lending effects estimates are all negative

but the direct and indirect effects are not statistically significant. The total effect is statistically

significant only when the SBA rate differential is excluded from the estimation.

        The results are broadly similar for income levels when in the subsample of metro counties

only (Table 6C; specifications 5 and 6). An interesting difference, however, is that when the rate

differential is included (specification 6) its direct, indirect, and total estimated effects are all

positive and statistically significant. There is some evidence, then, that across metro counties the

variation in the implicit SBA subsidy is positively related to income levels. However, that same

subsidy is negatively related to metro county growth rates (specification 2; the direct effect). One

interpretation of these two results is that the implicit subsidy has short-run positive effects on

income levels that are transitory; while the longer-run (i.e., over five years on average) growth

effects that are negative. Turning our attention back to the SBA lending effects, we note that the

results reported in Tables 6A, 6B, and 6C generally support the conclusion that SBA lending has

both direct and indirect negative effects. Importantly, in no case do we find evidence that SBA

lending is positively related to income growth rates or levels.

        Returning to the results of Tables 4A through 4B, we conclude our reporting of results by

noting that the direct effect estimates on initial income are always negative and statistically

significant. This is also true for all of the subsequent estimations (though the initial income

effects are not reported in Tables 5A, 5B, 6A, 6B, and 6C). The indirect effects associated with

initial income are never statistically significant. Based on the direct effects (for which the point

estimates are uniformly -0.017) the implied conditional convergence rate is about 1.7% annually.



                                                    23
This is higher than the implied rate based on the OLS estimates in Table 2, but not in a

particularly meaningful way. Based on either OLS or spatial econometric estimation, our results

imply a considerably lower rate of conditional convergence than Higgins et al. (2006) report

using U.S. county-level data and a similar control variable set.25



5.      Conclusions

The conventional wisdom regarding small businesses is that they are engines of economic

growth. They are particularly innovative and an important source of job creation in the U.S.

economy. However, small businesses are also more likely than their larger counterparts to face

credit rationing in financial markets. The Small Business Administration is a federal government

agency charged with promoting the interests of small businesses; in large part by encouraging

financial intermediaries to extend loans to them. An important part of that encouragement is the

provision of government-backed guarantees on the loans, often for up to 75%-90% of the

principal.

        Despite the political popularity of pro-small business policy, many economists remain

unconvinced that subsidizing small businesses specifically is desirable. Hurst and Pugsley (2011)

argue that surveys of small business owners belie the perception of them as particularly

innovative. Also, Haltiwanger et al. (2013) and Neumark et al. (2011) report that once firm age

is controlled for there is no meaningful relationship between firm size and firm growth. The

result of subsidizing small firms may then be to simply divert resources away from larger firms.



25
  While trying to explain the difference in convergence rate estimates is beyond the scope of the present paper, we
note that Higgins et al. (2006) is a cross-sectional analysis of average income growth rates from 1970 to 1998. The
present analysis, alternatively, is based on panel of 5-year periods with growth rates covering the 1985 to 2009 time
period. The difference in results might stem from either the different time frame or the fact that we are exploiting
time as well as cross-sectional variation in the data.


                                                         24
If these larger firms are actually more likely to be engines of growth then the preferential

subsidization of small businesses may impose meaningful costs on the economy.

       In this paper we examine the relationship between SBA lending and income growth at the

U.S. county-level. Based on a sample of 3,035 counties that covers the years 1980 to 2009, we

find little evidence to support the desirability of the SBA loan programs. A spatial econometric

analysis suggests that an increase in SBA loans per capita in a county is associated with negative

effects on its own rate of income growth; also the growth rates of neighboring counties. For the

average county in our sample an increase in a per capita SBA loans of $3.43 is associated with a

cumulative decrease in annual growth rates of about 2 percentage points. (The average county in

our sample has $34.27 in SBA loans per capita.) The largest part of this decrease is in the form

of indirect effects on neighboring counties.

       In addition to including period and state-level fixed effects and a large number of other

controls, we also check the sensitivity of the results to (a) examining income levels rather than

growth rates and (b) examining a subsample of only metropolitan area counties. The results are

largely robust and, perhaps more importantly, we never find any evidence of positive growth

effects associated with SBA lending. Even when the estimated effects are statistically

insignificant, the point estimates are always negative.

       Our findings suggest that SBA lending to small businesses comes at the cost of loans that

would have otherwise been made to more profitable and/or innovative firms. Furthermore, SBA

lending in a given county results in negative spillover effects on income growth in neighboring

counties. Given the popularity of pro-small business policies, our findings should give reason for

policymakers and their constituents to reevaluate their priors.




                                                 25
References

Acs, Z. J. 1999. Are small firms important: their role and impact. Boston: Kluwer.

Acs, Z.J., 2006. How is entrepreneurship good for economic growth. Innovations: Technology,
Governance, Globalization 1(1), 97-107.

Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B. 1993. Small firms and entrepreneurship. Boston: Kluwer.

Acs, Z. J., Braunerhjelm, P., Audretsch, D. B., Carlsson, B. 2009. The knowledge spillover
theory of entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics 32, 15-30.

Audretsch, D. B., Keilbach, M. C., Lehmann, E. E. 2006. Entrepreneurship and economic
growth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Audretsch, D.B. and Vivarelli, M. 1995. New Firm Formation in Italy. Economic Letters. 48:77-
81.
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E. 2011. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight
Global Poverty. New York: Public Affairs.

Barro, R. J. 2012. Convergence and modernization revisited. NBER Working Paper 18295
(http://www.nber.org/papers/w18295).

Barro, R. J., Sala-i-Martin, X. 1992. Convergence. Journal of Political Economy 100, 223-
251.

Birch, D. L. 1979. The job generation process: final report to economic development
administration. Cambridge: MIT Program on Neighborhood and Regional Change.

Birch, D. L. 1987. Job creation in America: how are smallest companies put most people
to work. New York: Free Press.

Blau, D. 1987. A Times-Series Analysis of Self-Employment in the United States. Journal of
Political Economy. 95, 445-467.
Block, K. and Wagner, W. 2007. Opportunity Recognition and Exploitation by Necessity and
Opportunity Entrepreneurs: Empirical Evidence from Earnings Equations. Academy of
Management Proceedings. 1-6.
Caliendo, M. and Kritikos, A. 2009. I Want to But I Also Need To: Start Ups Resulting From
Opportunity and Necessity. IZA DP No. 4661.
Conley, T. J. 1999. GMM estimation with cross-sectional dependence. Journal of Econometrics
92, 1-45.

Corrado, L., Fingleton, B. 2012. Where is the economics in spatial econometrics? Journal of
Regional Science 52, 210-239.

                                               26
Craig, B. R., Jackson, W. E., Thomson, J. B. 2007. Small firm finance, credit rationing, and the
impact of SBA-guaranteed lending on local economic growth. Journal of Small Business
Management 45, 116-132.

Craig, B. R., Jackson, W. E., Thomson, J. B. 2008. Credit market failure intervention: do
government sponsored small business credit programs enrich poorer areas? Small Business
Economics 30, 345-360.

de Rugy, V. 2005. Are small businesses the engine of growth? American Enterprise Institute
Working Paper (http://www.aei.org/files/2005/12/08/20051208_WP123.pdf).

Engel, D., Leilbach, M. 2007. Firm –level implications of early stage venture capital. Journal of
Financial Economics 14, 150-167.

Evans, D., Jovanovic, B. 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under liquidity
constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97, 808-827.

Evans, D., Leighton, L. S. 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American
Economic Review 79, 519-535.

Fairlie, R. and Krashinsky, H. 2012. Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship Revisted. Review of Income and Wealth. 58:2, 279-306.
Glennon, D., Nigro, P. 2005. Measuring default risk of small business loans: a survival analysis
approach 37, 923-947.

Gompers, P. Lerner, J. 2003. Short-term America revisited? boom and bust in the venture capital
industry and the impact of innovation. Innovation Policy and the Economy 3, 1-27.

Haltiwanger, J. C., Jarmin, R. S., Miranda, J. 2013. Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus
young. Review of Economics and Statistics 2, 347-361.

Hasan, I., Wang, H. 2006. The role of venture capital on innovation, new business formation,
and economic growth. Unpublished Manuscript.

Higgins, M. J., Levy, D., Young, A. T. 2006. Growth and convergence across the United States:
evidence from county-level data. Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 671-681.

Hurst, E., Pugsley, B. W. 2011. What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 43, 73-118.

Jain, B. A., Kini, O. 1995. Venture capitalist participation and the post-issue operating
performance of IPO firms. Managerial and Decision Economics 16, 593-606.

Kortum, S., Lerner, J. 2000. Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation. RAND
Journal of Economics 31, 674-692.

                                                 27
La Porta, R., Shleifer, A. 2008. The unofficial economy and economic development. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 39, 275-363.

Lee, Y. S. 2013. Entrepreneurship, small business, and urban growth. Williams College Working
Paper.

LeSage, J. P., Pace, R. K. 2009. Introduction to Spatial Econometrics. Boca Routon: Taylor and
Francis CRC Press.

LeSage, J.P., Pace, R. K. 2010. The biggest myth in spatial econometrics. SSRN Working Paper
(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1725503).

Neumark, D., Wall, B., Zhang, J. 2011. Do small businesses create more jobs? New evidence for
the United States from the National Establishment Time Series 93, 16-29.
Pfeffier, F. and Reize, F. 2000. Business Start-Ups by the Unemployed-An Econometric
Analysis Based on Firm Data. Labour Economics. 7:5, 629-663.
Rey, S. J., Montouri, B. D. 1999. US regional income convergence: a spatial econometric
perspective 33, 143-156.

Rappaport, J. 1999. Local growth empirics. Harvard University CID Working Paper No. 23
(http://www.hks.harvard.edu/centers/cid/publications/faculty-working-papers/cid-working-
paper-no.-23).

Rupasingha, A., Goetz, S. J., Freshwater, D. 2002. Social and institutional factors as
determinants of economics growth: evidence from the United States. Papers in Regional Science
81, 139-299.

Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. Capitalism, socialism and democracy. New York: Harper & Row.

Samila, S., Sorenson, O. 2011. Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth.
Review of Economics and Statistics 93, 338-349.

Samila, S., Sorenson, O. 2009. Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth.
SSRN Working Paper (http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1183576).

Shane, S. 2009. Why Encouraging More People to Become Entrepreneurs is Bad Public Policy.
Small Business Economics 33, 141-149.
Stiglitz, J. E., Weiss, A. W. 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information.
American Economic Review 71, 393-410.

Taylor, M. 1996. Earnings, Independence or Unemployment: Why Become Self-Employed?
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics. 58:2, 253-266.



                                                28
Thurik, A., Carree, M. Stel, A. Audretsch, D. 2008. Does Self-Employment Reduce
Unemployment? Journal of Business Venturing. 23:6, 673-686.
Treacy, W. F., Carey, M. S. 1998. Credit risk rating at large U.S. Banks. Federal Reserve
Bulletin 84, 897-921.

Young, A. T., Higgins, M. J., Levy D. 2013. Heterogeneous convergence. Economics Letters
120, 238-241.




                                               29
Figure 1. SBA lending and income growth at the U.S. county-level.

                                                .5

                                                .4

                Real Per Capita Income Growth   .3

                                                .2

                                                .1

                                                .0

                                                -.1

                                                -.2

                                                -.3
                                                      -4   -2        0        2      4         6   8

                                                                (log) Per Capita SBA Lending

Note: dollar values are converted into 2005 constant dollars using the GDP deflator. For 3,038
counties average SBA lending over 5-year periods (1980-1984; 1985-1989; 1990-1994; 1995-
1999; 2000-2004) is related to average income growth over subsequent 5-year periods (1985-
1989; 1990-1994; 1995-1999; 2000-2004; 2005-2009). Personal income net of transfer payments
is from the BEA. SBA lending per capita is from the SBA. Slope coefficient for OLS fit line is -
0.000 and the estimate is not statistically significant.




                                                                         30
Figure 2. Difference between prime and SBA rates in relation to income growth at the U.S.
county-level
                                               .5

                                               .4
               Real Per Capita Income Growth
                                               .3

                                               .2

                                               .1

                                               .0

                                               -.1

                                               -.2

                                               -.3
                                                     -.2          -.1          .0         .1            .2

                                                           Prime Rate minus Average Rate on SBA Loans

Note: dollar values are converted into 2005 constant dollars using the GDP deflator. For 3,038
counties the difference over 5-year periods (1980-1984; 1985-1989; 1990-1994; 1995-1999;
2000-2004) between prime and SBA rates are related to average income growth over subsequent
5-year periods (1985-1989; 1990-1994; 1995-1999; 2000-2004; 2005-2009). Personal income
net of transfer payments is from the BEA. Prime rate is from the St. Louis Federal Reserve. SBA
rates are from the SBA. Slope coefficient estimate for the OLS fit line is -0.001 and it is not
statistically significant.




                                                                          31
Table 1. Variable definitions, sources and summary statistics.
Variable                                           Note                        Source           Mean        Std. Dev.
(Log of) personal income               real per cap.; net transfers             BEA             9.832         0.402
Income Growth                              average growth rate                  BEA             0.017         0.024
SBA loans per capita                        dollars per capita                  SBA            34.265        38.665
SBA loan failure rate                   share of total dollars lent             SBA             0.081         0.126
SBA 7(a) share                          share of total dollars lent             SBA             0.906         0.461
SBA guarantee share                     share of total dollars lent             SBA             0.577         0.266
SBA manufacturing share                 share of total dollars lent             SBA             0.163         0.193
SBA rate                               rate average over all loans              SBA             0.099         0.065
Prime rate                                same for all counties                                 0.091         0.029
Venture capital loans                       dollars per capita              VentureExpert       0.057         0.568
Patents                                per cap. citation-weighted          USPTO; Delphion   0.13610-3    0.29510-3
Establishments (<500 employees)                number of                       Census        1,881.646     6,298.814
Establishments (>500 employees)                number of                       Census         276.934       972.861
Employees                                      number of                       Census        47,739.153   171,173.343
Land area per capita                         km2 per capita                    Census           0.011         0.147
Water area per capita                        km2 per capita                    Census           0.243         0.654
Age: 5-13 years                          share of the population               Census           0.137         0.021
Age: 14-17 years                         share of the population               Census           0.064         0.011
Age: 18-64 years                         share of the population               Census           0.587         0.042
Age: 65+                                 share of the population               Census           0.145         0.042
Blacks                                   share of the population               Census           0.086         0.144
Hispanic                                 share of the population               Census           0.149         0.073
Education: 9-11 years                    share of the population               Census           0.139         0.052
Education: H.S. diploma                  share of the population               Census           0.258         0.069
Education: Some college                  share of the population               Census           0.173         0.052
Education: Bachelor +                    share of the population               Census           0.109         0.054
Poverty rate                             share of the population               Census           0.149         0.073
Federal govt. employment                 share of the population                BEA             0.008         0.015
State & local govt. employment           share of the population                BEA             0.067         0.032
Self-employment                          share of the population                BEA             0.103         0.062
Farm employment                          share of the population                BEA             0.048         0.049
Agri., fishing, & forestry employ.       share of the population                BEA             0.006         0.010
Construction employment                  share of the population                BEA             0.027         0.018
Finance, insurance & real estate         share of the population                BEA             0.026         0.018
Services employment                      share of the population                BEA             0.110         0.074
Manufacturing employment                 share of the population                BEA             0.064         0.054
Mining employment                        share of the population                BEA             0.008         0.043
Retail employment                        share of the population                BEA             0.071         0.028
Transportation & utilities employ.       share of the population                BEA             0.018         0.015
Wholesale trade                          share of the population                BEA             0.015         0.012
Metro Area                            1 if metro area; 0 otherwise             Census           0.284         0.451
Note: summary statistics are taken over all panel observations: 3,035 counties and 5 time periods.




                                                                      32
Table 2. OLS U.S. county-level growth regressions including SBA lending variables and other controls.
                                                           (1)            (2)               (3)
Variable
(log) SBA loans per capita                             -0.001***      -0.001***         -0.001***
                                                        (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                                      -0.015***
                                                                             (0.005)
(log) SBA loans per capita  Prime rate – SBA rate                                            -0.002
                                                                                              (0.001)


log(Venture capital loans)                                -0.004***        -0.004***        -0.004***
                                                            (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)
log(Patents)                                               -1.529**         -1.490**         -1.515**
                                                            (0.689)          (0.689)          (0.689)
log(Establishments) (<500 employees)                      0.003***         0.003***         0.003***
                                                            (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
log(Establishments) (>500 employees)                        -0.021           -0.018           -0.020
                                                            (0.187)          (0.187)          (0.187)
log(Employees)                                               0.001            0.001            0.001
                                                            (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)


(log) personal income (initial)                           -0.015***        -0.015***        -0.015***
                                                            (0.000)         (0.002)           (0.002)

R2                                                          0.207            0.208             0.207

Observations                                               15,175           15,175            15,175


Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, regressions include period and state fixed
effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of real per capita personal income net of
transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Each regression also
includes 27 additional control variables that are not reported for the sake of space. (See Table 1 and
section 2 for a description of these control variables.) Full results are provided in Appendix A.




                                                     33
Table 3. OLS robustness checks.
                                                         (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)

                                                   Growth Rate;                                Income Level;                               Income Level;
Variable                                           Metro Counties                               All Counties                               Metro Counties
(log) SBA loans per capita                           -0.001**              -0.001***              -0.002**              -0.003**              -0.005**               -0.002
                                                      (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.002)               (0.002)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                                      -0.022***                                     -0.015                                     0.127***
                                                                             (0.007)                                     (0.025)                                     (0.044)

log(Venture capital loans)                            -0.003**              -0.003**              0.037***              0.037***              0.028***              0.028***
                                                       (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.007)               (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.008)
log(Patents)                                           -1.922*               -1.843*             46.780***             46.814***             43.699***             43.156***
                                                       (0.985)               (0.985)               (3.691)               (3.692)               (5.866)               (5.865)

R2                                                      0.326                   0.327                  0.859                0.859                 0.905                 0.905
Observations                                            4,315                   4,315                 15,175               15,175                 4,315                 4,315
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, regressions include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of real per capita
personal income net of transfers (“Growth Rate”) or the initial year level of net real per capita income (“Income Level”). 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero
values. Regressions based on metro counties exclude the metro county dummy variable from the control variable set; regressions where the dependent variable is the income level
exclude the initial income control variable.




                                                                                          34
Table 4. SDM US county-level growth estimations including SBA lending variables and other controls.
                                                        (1)                                     (2)                                               (3)
Variable
                                                      Direct     Indirect        Total         Direct              Indirect       Total         Direct       Indirect        Total
(log) SBA loans per capita                            -0.000      -0.001        -0.001*     -0.001***             -0.002**     -0.002***       -0.000*       -0.001*       -0.001**
                                                     (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.000)              (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.001)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                                                              -0.012***       -0.024       -0.036**
                                                                                                     (0.004)       (0.016)       (0.017)
(log) SBA loans per capita  Prime rate – SBA rate                                                                                            -0.003**        -0.006        -0.008
                                                                                                                                               (0.001)        (0.005)       (0.005)

log(Venture capital loans)                               -0.002*         -0.006       -0.008*       -0.002*         -0.005       -0.007*       -0.002*         -0.006       -0.008*
                                                         (0.001)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.079)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.001)        (0.004)       (0.004)
log(Patents)                                              -0.669       -5.383**      -6.051**        -0.629       -5.156**      -5.785**        -0.653       -5.223**      -5.876**
                                                         (0.627)        (2.569)       (2.825)       (0.639)        (2.560)       (2.835)       (0.641)        (2.537)       (2.791)
log(Establishments) (<500 employees)                    0.002***       0.005***      0.007***      0.002***       0.005***      0.007***      0.002***       0.005***      0.007***
                                                         (0.000)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.000)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.000)        (0.001)       (0.002)
log(Establishments) (>500 employees)                       0.036       1.922***       1.959**         0.037       1.956***      1.993***         0.031       1.903***       1.934**
                                                         (0.175)        (0.688)       (0.777)       (0.172)        (0.687)       (0.765)       (0.176)        (0.683)       (0.774)
log(Employees)                                             0.000        0.018**       0.018**         0.000        0.016**       0.016**        -0.000        0.017**       0.017**
                                                         (0.002)        (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.002)        (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.002)        (0.007)       (0.008)

(log) personal income (initial)                         -0.017***       -0.001      -0.018***      -0.017***        0.000       -0.017***     -0.017***       -0.000       -0.017***
                                                          (0.002)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.005)      (0.001)        (0.004)        (0.005)

ρ                                                       0.550***                                     0.551***                                   0.545***
                                                          (0.009)                                     (0.009)                                    (0.009)
Observations                                              15,175                                      15,175                                     15,175
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, estimations include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of real per capita
personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Each regression also includes 27 additional control variables that are not
reported for the sake of space. (See Table 1 and section 2 for a description of these control variables.) Full results are provided in Appendix B.




                                                                                           35
Table 5A. SDM US county-level growth estimations including SBA lending variables and other controls.
                               (1)                                        (2)                                                  (3)
Variable
                              Direct       Indirect         Total        Direct         Indirect              Total          Direct         Indirect         Total
(log) SBA loans per capita -0.001***      -0.002***      -0.003***     -0.000**        -0.001**             -0.002**       -0.001***       -0.002**       -0.002***
                             (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.000)         (0.001)              (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.001)

Prime rate – SBA rate             -0.007         0.005         -0.002         -0.016*          -0.021         -0.038        -0.010**        -0.018         -0.028
                                 (0.006)        (0.021)        (0.024)        (0.009)         (0.032)        (0.035)         (0.004)        (0.016)        (0.017)

SBA guarantee share               0.002         0.010*         0.012**
                                 (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.006)
SBA 7(a) share                                                                 -0.001          0.000          -0.000
                                                                               (0.011)        (0.004)        (0.005)
SBA manufacturing share                                                                                                     0.003**         0.012**        0.016**
                                                                                                                            (0.001)         (0.006)        (0.007)
SBA failure rate


ρ                                 0.548***                                     0.561***                                        0.545***
                                   (0.009)                                       (0.009)                                         (0.009)
Observations                       15,175                                        15,175                                          15,175
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, estimations include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of
real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Each estimation also includes 33 additional
control variables that are not reported for the sake of space. (See Table 1 and section 2 for a description of these control variables.)




                                                                                  36
Table 5B. SDM U.S. county-level growth estimations including SBA lending variables and other controls.
                                                              (4)                                                       (5)
Variable
                                                             Direct         Indirect            Total                  Direct           Indirect            Total
(log) SBA loans per capita                                 -0.000**        -0.001**           -0.002**               -0.001***         -0.002***         -0.003***
                                                            (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.001)                (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.001)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                          -0.016***         -0.057***         -0.073***          -0.016*            -0.022            -0.038
                                                                 (0.005)          (0.017)           (0.018)           (0.009)           (0.030)           (0.033)

SBA guarantee share                                                                                                    0.003*           0.016**          0.019***
                                                                                                                      (0.002)           (0.006)           (0.007)
SBA 7(a) share                                                                                                         -0.001            -0.002            -0.004
                                                                                                                      (0.001)           (0.005)           (0.006)
SBA manufacturing share                                                                                               0.003**            0.010*           0.013**
                                                                                                                      (0.001)           (0.006)           (0.006)
SBA failure rate                                               -0.013***         -0.095***         -0.109***         -0.014***         -0.099***         -0.113***
                                                                 (0.004)          (0.015)           (0.017)           (0.004)           (0.016)           (0.018)


ρ                                                                 0.546***                                              0.536***
                                                                   (0.009)                                                (0.009)
Observations                                                       15,175                                                 15,175
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, estimations include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of
real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Each estimation also includes 33 additional
control variables that are not reported for the sake of space. (See Table 1 and section 2 for a description of these control variables.)




                                                                                  37
Table 6A. SDM robustness checks.
                                         (1)                                                                 (2)

                                   Growth Rate;
Variable                           Metro Counties

                                        Direct               Indirect                 Total                 Direct               Indirect                Total
(log) SBA loans per capita             -0.000                 -0.002                 -0.002               -0.001**               -0.002*               -0.003**
                                       (0.000)               (0.001)                (0.001)                (0.000)               (0.001)                (0.001)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                                                                     -0.016**                -0.030                -0.046
                                                                                                           (0.007)                (0.028)               (0.032)

log(Venture capital loans)            -0.003**                 -0.001                -0.003               -0.003**                -0.001                -0.003
                                       (0.001)                (0.004)               (0.005)                (0.001)                (0.004)               (0.005)
log(Patents)                           -0.968                  -3.777                -4.745                -0.889                 -3.076                -3.965
                                       (0.927)               (-3.884)               (4.341)                (0.925)                (3.853)               (4.290)

R2                                       0.544                                                                  0.545
Observations                             4,315                                                                  4,315
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, regressions include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of
real per capita personal income net of transfers (“Growth Rate”) or the initial year level of net real per capita income (“Income Level”). 1 is always added to SBA
loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Estimations based on metro counties exclude the metro county dummy variable from the control variable set; estimations
where the dependent variable is the income level exclude the initial income control variable.




                                                                                  38
Table 6B. SDM robustness checks.
                                         (3)                                                                 (4)

                                   Income Level;
Variable                            All Counties

                                        Direct               Indirect                Total                  Direct               Indirect                Total
(log) SBA loans per capita             -0.001                 -0.004                -0.006*                -0.002                 -0.002                -0.004
                                       (0.001)               (0.003)                (0.003)                (0.001)               (0.003)                (0.004)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                                                                       -0.011                 0.103                 0.091
                                                                                                           (0.024)                (0.072)               (0.079)

log(Venture capital loans)            0.022***                0.030*                0.052***             0.021***                  0.029                0.050**
                                       (0.006)                (0.018)                (0.020)              (0.006)                 (0.019)                (0.020)
log(Patents)                         37.171***              47.414***              84.584***             37.122***                47.623               84.745***
                                       (3.435)               (11.825)               (13.124)              (3.362)                (11.562)               (12.796)

R2                                       0.894                                                                  0.894
Observations                             15,175                                                                15,175
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, regressions include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of
real per capita personal income net of transfers (“Growth Rate”) or the initial year level of net real per capita income (“Income Level”). 1 is always added to SBA
loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Estimations based on metro counties exclude the metro county dummy variable from the control variable set; estimations
where the dependent variable is the income level exclude the initial income control variable.




                                                                                  39
Table 6C. SDM robustness checks.
                                         (5)                                                                 (6)

                                   Income Level;
Variable                           Metro Counties

                                        Direct                Indirect                Total                 Direct               Indirect                Total
(log) SBA loans per capita             -0.003                -0.014**              -0.017***               -0.001                 -0.006                -0.007
                                       (0.002)                (0.006)               (0.006)                (0.002)               (0.006)                (0.006)

Prime rate – SBA rate                                                                                      0.077*                0.389***              0.465***
                                                                                                           (0.040)                (0.129)               (0.142)

log(Venture capital loans)            0.021***                 0.025                0.047**              0.022***                  0.026                0.047**
                                       (0.007)                (0.021)                (0.023)              (0.007)                 (0.020)                (0.022)
log(Patents)                         35.903***               38.966**              74.870***             34.201***               29.401*               63.602***
                                       (5.628)               (17.871)               (19.381)              (5.503)                (17.297)               (18.729)

R2                                       0.924                                                                  0.924
Observations                             4,315                                                                  4,315
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Though not reported, regressions include period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of
real per capita personal income net of transfers (“Growth Rate”) or the initial year level of net real per capita income (“Income Level”). 1 is always added to SBA
loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. Estimations based on metro counties exclude the metro county dummy variable from the control variable set; estimations
where the dependent variable is the income level exclude the initial income control variable.




                                                                                  40
Appendix A: OLS Results

Table A1. OLS results from column 1 Table 2 regression.
Variable                                 Coefficient                 Std. Error             P-value
(log) SBA loans per capita                  -0.001                     0.000                 0.002
log(Venture capital loans)                  -0.004                     0.001                 0.003
log(Patents)                                -1.529                     0.689                 0.026
log(Establishments) (<500 employees)         0.003                     0.000                 0.000
log(Establishments) (>500 employees)        -0.021                     0.187                 0.912
log(Employees)                               0.001                     0.002                 0.445
Metro area                                   0.001                     0.000                 0.007
(log) personal income (initial)             -0.015                     0.002                 0.000
Education: 9-11 years                        0.014                     0.007                 0.036
Education: H.S. diploma                     -0.024                     0.006                 0.000
Education: Some college                     -0.004                     0.008                 0.590
Education: Bachelor +                        0.082                     0.008                 0.000
Hispanic                                     0.001                     0.003                 0.711
Blacks                                       0.003                     0.002                 0.196
Poverty                                     -0.037                     0.006                 0.000
Age: 5-13 years                              0.151                     0.047                 0.001
Age: 14-17 years                             0.268                     0.039                 0.000
Age: 18-64 years                             0.093                     0.032                 0.004
Age: 65+                                     0.108                     0.030                 0.000
Land area per capita                         0.002                     0.000                 0.000
Water area per capita                        0.002                     0.001                 0.118
Federal govt. employment                     0.012                     0.014                 0.384
State & local govt. employment              -0.016                     0.008                 0.041
Self-employment                             -0.020                     0.006                 0.001
Farm employment                              0.061                     0.008                 0.000
Agri., fishing, & forestry employ.          -0.102                     0.024                 0.000
Mining employment                           -0.059                     0.011                 0.000
Construction employment                     -0.038                     0.013                 0.003
Manufacturing employment                    -0.014                     0.005                 0.009
Transportation & utilities employ.          -0.046                     0.015                 0.002
Wholesale trade                              0.031                     0.020                 0.121
Retail employment                            0.000                     0.012                 0.972
Finance, insurance & real estate             0.033                     0.017                 0.049
Services employment                         -0.013                     0.005                 0.016

R2                                               0.207
Notes: though not reported, the regression includes period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the
average annual growth rate of real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA
loan amounts to avoid logging zero values.




                                                      41
Table A2. OLS results from column 2 Table 2 regression.
Variable                                  Coefficient                Std. Error              P-value
(log) SBA loans per capita                  -0.001                     0.000                  0.000
Prime rate – SBA rate                       -0.015                     0.005                  0.001
log(Venture capital loans)                  -0.004                     0.001                  0.004
log(Patents)                                -1.490                     0.689                  0.031
log(Establishments) (<500 employees)         0.003                     0.000                  0.000
log(Establishments) (>500 employees)        -0.018                     0.187                  0.923
log(Employees)                               0.001                     0.002                  0.543
Metro area                                   0.001                     0.000                  0.013
(log) personal income (initial)             -0.015                     0.002                  0.000
Education: 9-11 years                        0.012                     0.007                  0.070
Education: H.S. diploma                     -0.026                     0.006                  0.000
Education: Some college                     -0.006                     0.008                  0.423
Education: Bachelor +                        0.080                     0.008                  0.000
Hispanic                                     0.001                     0.003                  0.741
Blacks                                       0.003                     0.002                  0.180
Poverty                                     -0.037                     0.006                  0.000
Age: 5-13 years                              0.157                     0.047                  0.001
Age: 14-17 years                             0.278                     0.039                  0.000
Age: 18-64 years                             0.098                     0.032                  0.002
Age: 65+                                     0.114                     0.031                  0.000
Land area per capita                         0.002                     0.000                  0.000
Water area per capita                        0.002                     0.001                  0.100
Federal govt. employment                     0.013                     0.014                  0.348
State & local govt. employment              -0.016                     0.008                  0.042
Self-employment                             -0.019                     0.006                  0.001
Farm employment                              0.064                     0.008                  0.000
Agri., fishing, & forestry employ.          -0.102                     0.024                  0.000
Mining employment                           -0.057                     0.011                  0.000
Construction employment                     -0.035                     0.013                  0.005
Manufacturing employment                    -0.014                     0.005                  0.011
Transportation & utilities employ.          -0.047                     0.015                  0.002
Wholesale trade                              0.028                     0.020                  0.164
Retail employment                           -0.002                     0.012                  0.844
Finance, insurance & real estate             0.033                     0.017                  0.046
Services employment                         -0.011                     0.005                  0.027

R2                                               0.208
Notes: though not reported, the regression includes period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the
average annual growth rate of real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA
loan amounts to avoid logging zero values.




                                                      42
Table A3. OLS results from column 3 Table 2 regression.
Variable                                  Coefficient                Std. Error              P-value
(log) SBA loans per capita                  -0.001                     0.000                  0.001
(log) SBA loans per capita                 -0.002                     0.001                  0.172
Prime rate – SBA rate
log(Venture capital loans)                  -0.004                     0.001                  0.003
log(Patents)                                -1.515                     0.689                  0.028
log(Establishments) (<500 employees)         0.003                     0.000                  0.000
log(Establishments) (>500 employees)        -0.020                     0.187                  0.915
log(Employees)                               0.001                     0.002                  0.482
Metro area                                   0.001                     0.000                  0.008
(log) personal income (initial)             -0.015                     0.002                  0.000
Education: 9-11 years                        0.014                     0.007                  0.044
Education: H.S. diploma                     -0.025                     0.006                  0.000
Education: Some college                     -0.005                     0.008                  0.543
Education: Bachelor +                        0.081                     0.008                  0.000
Hispanic                                     0.001                     0.003                  0.712
Blacks                                       0.003                     0.002                  0.192
Poverty                                     -0.037                     0.006                  0.000
Age: 5-13 years                              0.152                     0.047                  0.001
Age: 14-17 years                             0.271                     0.039                  0.000
Age: 18-64 years                             0.094                     0.032                  0.004
Age: 65+                                     0.109                     0.030                  0.000
Land area per capita                         0.002                     0.000                  0.000
Water area per capita                        0.002                     0.001                  0.115
Federal govt. employment                     0.013                     0.014                  0.355
State & local govt. employment              -0.016                     0.008                  0.043
Self-employment                             -0.020                     0.006                  0.001
Farm employment                              0.062                     0.008                  0.000
Agri., fishing, & forestry employ.          -0.102                     0.024                  0.000
Mining employment                           -0.058                     0.011                  0.000
Construction employment                     -0.037                     0.013                  0.004
Manufacturing employment                    -0.014                     0.005                  0.010
Transportation & utilities employ.          -0.046                     0.015                  0.002
Wholesale trade                              0.030                     0.020                  0.137
Retail employment                           -0.001                     0.012                  0.916
Finance, insurance & real estate             0.032                     0.017                  0.050
Services employment                         -0.012                     0.005                  0.018

R2                                               0.207
Notes: though not reported, the regression includes period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the
average annual growth rate of real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA
loan amounts to avoid logging zero values.




                                                      43
Appendix B: SDM Estimation Results

Table B1. SDM estimation results from column 1 Table 4.
Variable                         Direct                               Indirect                       Total

                                   Coeff.    St. Err.   P-val.        Coeff.     St. Err.   P-val.   Coeff.   St. Err.   P-val.
(log) SBA loans per capita         -0.000     0.000     0.163         -0.001      0.001     0.116    -0.001    0.001     0.075
log(Venture capital loans)         -0.002     0.001     0.067         -0.006      0.004     0.136    -0.008    0.004     0.067
log(Patents)                       -0.669     0.627     0.287         -5.383      2.569     0.036    -6.051    2.825     0.032
log(Establishments) (<500)          0.002     0.000     0.000          0.005      0.002     0.002     0.007    0.002     0.000
log(Establishments) (>500)          0.036     0.175     0.835          1.922      0.688     0.005     1.959    0.777     0.012
log(Employees)                      0.000     0.002     0.984          0.018      0.007     0.011     0.018    0.008     0.024
Metro area                          0.001     0.000     0.115          0.002      0.001     0.162     0.003    0.001     0.054
(log) personal income (initial)    -0.017     0.002     0.000         -0.001      0.005     0.887    -0.018    0.005     0.000
Education: 9-11 years              -0.003     0.008     0.688          0.033      0.017     0.053     0.030    0.017     0.079
Education: H.S. diploma             0.001     0.007     0.886         -0.053      0.016     0.001    -0.052    0.017     0.003
Education: Some college             0.025     0.008     0.003         -0.085      0.021     0.000    -0.060    0.022     0.005
Education: Bachelor +               0.077     0.008     0.000          0.058      0.024     0.016     0.135    0.026     0.000
Hispanic                            0.008     0.004     0.020         -0.022      0.007     0.002    -0.013    0.006     0.034
Blacks                              0.003     0.003     0.255         -0.017      0.006     0.004    -0.014    0.006     0.017
Poverty                            -0.028     0.006     0.000         -0.020      0.016     0.221    -0.048    0.018     0.006
Age: 5-13 years                     0.106     0.045     0.018          0.527      0.155     0.001     0.633    0.173     0.000
Age: 14-17 years                    0.166     0.037     0.000          0.564      0.117     0.000     0.730    0.128     0.000
Age: 18-64 years                    0.066     0.031     0.035          0.287      0.106     0.007     0.354    0.118     0.003
Age: 65+                            0.054     0.030     0.069          0.389      0.099     0.000     0.443    0.110     0.000
Land area per capita                0.002     0.000     0.000          0.002      0.001     0.078     0.004    0.001     0.007
Water area per capita               0.002     0.001     0.151          0.001      0.008     0.854     0.003    0.009     0.707
Federal govt. employment            0.000     0.013     0.999          0.010      0.056     0.856     0.010    0.063     0.872
State & local govt. employment     -0.019     0.007     0.007          0.003      0.029     0.912    -0.016    0.033     0.629
Self-employment                     0.008     0.005     0.130         -0.107      0.017     0.000    -0.099    0.019     0.000
Farm employment                     0.071     0.008     0.000         -0.079      0.028     0.004    -0.008    0.030     0.779
Agri., fishing, & forestry emp.    -0.065     0.022     0.003         -0.039      0.077     0.614    -0.104    0.084     0.217
Mining employment                  -0.017     0.011     0.111         -0.215      0.033     0.000    -0.232    0.036     0.000
Construction employment            -0.023     0.012     0.051         -0.109      0.048     0.022    -0.133    0.054     0.013
Manufacturing employment           -0.015     0.005     0.004         -0.039      0.019     0.045    -0.054    0.022     0.013
Transportation & utilities emp.    -0.035     0.014     0.013         -0.170      0.055     0.002    -0.205    0.062     0.001
Wholesale trade                     0.027     0.019     0.153          0.029      0.071     0.689     0.055    0.079     0.486
Retail employment                   0.001     0.011     0.941         -0.029      0.042     0.485    -0.028    0.047     0.549
Finance, insurance & real estate    0.040     0.016     0.012         -0.049      0.064     0.451    -0.009    0.073     0.905
Services employment                -0.001     0.005     0.839         -0.053      0.019     0.005    -0.054    0.021     0.012

                                    0.550       0.009       0.000
Notes: though not reported, the regression includes period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth
rate of real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. The
 is the spatial autocorrelation parameter.




                                                                 44
Table B2. SDM estimation results from column 2 Table 4.
Variable                         Direct                               Indirect                       Total

                                   Coeff.    St. Err.   P-val.        Coeff.     St. Err.   P-val.   Coeff.   St. Err.   P-val.
(log) SBA loans per capita         -0.001     0.000      0.009        -0.002      0.001      0.031   -0.002    0.001      0.009
Prime rate – SBA rate              -0.012     0.004      0.005        -0.024      0.016      0.122   -0.036    0.017      0.037
log(Venture capital loans)         -0.002     0.001      0.079        -0.005      0.004      0.180   -0.007    0.004      0.093
log(Patents)                       -0.629     0.639      0.325        -5.156      2.560      0.044   -5.785    2.835      0.041
log(Establishments) (<500)          0.002     0.000      0.000         0.005      0.002      0.001    0.007    0.002      0.000
log(Establishments) (>500)          0.037     0.172      0.828         1.956      0.687      0.004    1.993    0.765      0.009
log(Employees)                     -0.000     0.002      0.891         0.016      0.007      0.018    0.016    0.008      0.041
Metro area                          0.001     0.000      0.135         0.002      0.001      0.254    0.002    0.001      0.108
(log) personal income (initial)    -0.017     0.001      0.000         0.000      0.005      0.995   -0.017    0.005      0.001
Education: 9-11 years              -0.004     0.008      0.572         0.031      0.017      0.077    0.026    0.017      0.131
Education: H.S. diploma            -0.000     0.007      0.959        -0.056      0.017      0.001   -0.056    0.018      0.001
Education: Some college             0.023     0.008      0.005        -0.086      0.022      0.000   -0.063    0.023      0.007
Education: Bachelor +               0.076     0.008      0.000         0.056      0.025      0.023    0.133    0.027      0.000
Hispanic                            0.008     0.004      0.026        -0.021      0.007      0.002   -0.013    0.006      0.041
Blacks                              0.003     0.003      0.262        -0.017      0.006      0.004   -0.014    0.006      0.020
Poverty                            -0.028     0.006      0.000        -0.017      0.017      0.323   -0.044    0.017      0.011
Age: 5-13 years                     0.109     0.044      0.012         0.542      0.156      0.001    0.651    0.172      0.000
Age: 14-17 years                    0.175     0.037      0.000         0.603      0.117      0.000    0.779    0.129      0.000
Age: 18-64 years                    0.070     0.031      0.025         0.303      0.108      0.005    0.373    0.120      0.002
Age: 65+                            0.058     0.029      0.049         0.404      0.101      0.000    0.462    0.111      0.000
Land area per capita                0.002     0.000      0.000         0.002      0.001      0.081    0.004    0.002      0.008
Water area per capita               0.002     0.001      0.112         0.002      0.008      0.802    0.004    0.009      0.654
Federal govt. employment            0.001     0.013      0.910         0.014      0.055      0.794    0.016    0.062      0.797
State & local govt. employment     -0.019     0.008      0.014         0.004      0.029      0.899   -0.015    0.033      0.645
Self-employment                     0.009     0.005      0.086        -0.109      0.018      0.000   -0.100    0.020      0.000
Farm employment                     0.074     0.008      0.000        -0.070      0.027      0.009    0.003    0.030      0.908
Agri., fishing, & forestry emp.    -0.065     0.022      0.004        -0.038      0.077      0.616   -0.103    0.083      0.215
Mining employment                  -0.015     0.010      0.148        -0.213      0.032      0.000   -0.228    0.034      0.000
Construction employment            -0.020     0.012      0.106        -0.093      0.051      0.065   -0.114    0.057      0.047
Manufacturing employment           -0.014     0.005      0.006        -0.036      0.020      0.070   -0.050    0.022      0.024
Transportation & utilities emp.    -0.036     0.014      0.009        -0.176      0.058      0.002   -0.212    0.064      0.001
Wholesale trade                     0.024     0.019      0.210         0.016      0.074      0.826    0.040    0.082      0.627
Retail employment                   0.000     0.011      0.980        -0.030      0.043      0.492   -0.029    0.049      0.545
Finance, insurance & real estate    0.039     0.015      0.009        -0.056      0.063      0.373   -0.017    0.071      0.814
Services employment                 0.000     0.005      0.993        -0.049      0.019      0.009   -0.049    0.021      0.021

                                    0.551       0.009       0.000
Notes: though not reported, the regression includes period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth
rate of real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. The
 is the spatial autocorrelation parameter.




                                                                 45
Table B3. SDM estimation results from column 3 Table 4.
Variable                         Direct                               Indirect                       Total

                                   Coeff.    St. Err.   P-val.        Coeff.     St. Err.   P-val.   Coeff.   St. Err.   P-val.
(log) SBA loans per capita         -0.000     0.000      0.065        -0.001      0.001      0.059   -0.001    0.001      0.030
(log) SBA loans per capita        -0.003     0.001      0.024        -0.006      0.005      0.252   -0.008    0.005      0.115
Prime rate – SBA rate
log(Venture capital loans)         -0.002     0.001      0.078        -0.006      0.004      0.146   -0.008    0.004     0.073
log(Patents)                       -0.653     0.641      0.308        -5.223      2.537      0.040   -5.876    2.791     0.035
log(Establishments) (<500)         0.002      0.000      0.000         0.005      0.001      0.001   0.007     0.002     0.000
log(Establishments) (>500)         0.031      0.176      0.859         1.903      0.683      0.005   1.934     0.774     0.013
log(Employees)                     -0.000     0.002      0.908         0.017      0.007      0.010    0.017    0.008     0.026
Metro area                         0.001      0.000      0.135         0.002      0.001      0.204    0.003    0.001     0.072
(log) personal income (initial)    -0.017     0.001      0.000        -0.000      0.004      0.974   -0.017    0.005     0.001
Education: 9-11 years              -0.004     0.008      0.573         0.033      0.018      0.066   0.028     0.018     0.105
Education: H.S. diploma            -0.000     0.007      0.973        -0.054      0.017      0.001   -0.055    0.018     0.002
Education: Some college             0.024     0.008      0.003        -0.084      0.022      0.000   -0.060    0.022     0.007
Education: Bachelor +              0.076      0.008      0.000         0.057      0.024      0.019   0.133     0.027     0.000
Hispanic                           0.009      0.004      0.023        -0.022      0.007      0.002   -0.013    0.006     0.036
Blacks                             0.003      0.003      0.282        -0.017      0.006      0.003   -0.014    0.006     0.015
Poverty                            -0.028     0.006      0.000        -0.018      0.017      0.291   -0.046    0.018     0.011
Age: 5-13 years                    0.105      0.042      0.011         0.518      0.153      0.001    0.623    0.169     0.000
Age: 14-17 years                   0.174      0.036      0.000         0.575      0.116      0.000   0.748     0.129     0.000
Age: 18-64 years                   0.068      0.029      0.019         0.284      0.104      0.006   0.352     0.115     0.002
Age: 65+                           0.056      0.028      0.044         0.386      0.098      0.000   0.442     0.108     0.000
Land area per capita               0.002      0.000      0.000         0.002      0.001      0.086   0.004     0.001     0.008
Water area per capita              0.002      0.001      0.155         0.002      0.008      0.844   0.003     0.009     0.700
Federal govt. employment           0.003      0.013      0.819         0.017      0.054      0.749   0.020     0.060     0.739
State & local govt. employment     -0.019     0.007      0.011         0.004      0.030      0.903   -0.015    0.033     0.649
Self-employment                    0.009      0.005      0.102        -0.108      0.018      0.000   -0.099    0.020     0.000
Farm employment                    0.073      0.008      0.000        -0.073      0.028      0.008   -0.000    0.030     0.991
Agri., fishing, & forestry emp.    -0.066     0.022      0.003        -0.046      0.079      0.556   -0.113    0.086     0.191
Mining employment                  -0.016     0.010      0.121        -0.216      0.033      0.000   -0.232    0.035     0.000
Construction employment            -0.022     0.012      0.061        -0.102      0.047      0.032   -0.124    0.053     0.020
Manufacturing employment           -0.014     0.005      0.004        -0.037      0.019      0.050   -0.052    0.021     0.015
Transportation & utilities emp.    -0.035     0.014      0.009        -0.173      0.054      0.001   -0.209    0.061     0.001
Wholesale trade                    0.025      0.019      0.191         0.021      0.075      0.776   0.046     0.084     0.584
Retail employment                  0.000      0.011      0.979        -0.030      0.042      0.473   -0.030    0.047     0.519
Finance, insurance & real estate   0.040      0.016      0.010        -0.051      0.064      0.423   -0.011    0.071     0.878
Services employment                 0.000     0.005      0.923        -0.051      0.018      0.005   -0.052    0.021     0.012

                                    0.545       0.009       0.000
Notes: though not reported, the regression includes period and state fixed effects. Dependent variable is the average annual growth
rate of real per capita personal income net of transfers. 1 is always added to SBA loan amounts to avoid logging zero values. The
 is the spatial autocorrelation parameter.




                                                                 46
