                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  RESURRECTING THE ROLE OF THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE IN RECESSIONS

                                          Mark Bils
                                       Peter J. Klenow
                                      Benjamin A. Malin

                                      Working Paper 20555
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20555


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         October 2014, Revised November 2017




We are grateful to Susanto Basu, Robert Hall, Julio Rotemberg, Raphael Schoenle, and the
referees and editor for constructive comments. Corina Boar, Cian Ruane, and Zoe Xie provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors declare that they have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Mark Bils, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Resurrecting the Role of the Product Market Wedge in Recessions
Mark Bils, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin
NBER Working Paper No. 20555
October 2014, Revised November 2017
JEL No. E24,E32

                                         ABSTRACT

Employment and hours appear far more cyclical than dictated by the behavior of productivity and
consumption. This puzzle has been called “the labor wedge” — a cyclical intratemporal wedge
between the marginal product of labor and the marginal rate of substitution of consumption for
leisure. The labor wedge can be broken into a price markup and a wage markup. Based on the
wages of employees, the literature has attributed the labor wedge almost entirely to labor market
distortions. Because employee wages may be smoothed versions of the true cyclical price of
labor, we instead examine the self-employed and intermediate inputs, respectively. Any observed
cyclicality in wedges calculated for these inputs cannot reflect wage markups. Looking at the past
quarter century in the U.S. — including the Great Recession and its aftermath — we find that
price markup movements are at least as important as wage markup movements. Thus, sticky
prices and other forms of countercyclical markups deserve a central place in business cycle
research, alongside sticky wages and matching frictions.

Mark Bils                                       Benjamin A. Malin
Department of Economics                         Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
University of Rochester                         90 Hennepin Ave
Rochester, NY 14627                             Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER                                        benjamin.malin@mpls.frb.org
mark.bils@rochester.edu

Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Klenow@Stanford.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20555
2                             BILS, KLENOW, MALIN


1    Introduction

Employment and hours are more cyclical than can be explained by real labor
productivity under conventional preferences for consumption and leisure. See
Hall (1997), Mulligan (2002), and Chari et al. (2007), among others. This “labor
wedge” could reflect either a gap between the marginal product and price of
labor (i.e., a price markup) or a gap between the price of labor and the
opportunity cost of supplying labor (i.e., a wage markup). The decomposition
matters for both stabilization policy and understanding the nature of business
cycles. Recently, a growing consensus argues that the wage markup plays a
dominant role — see, for example, Galı́ et al. (2007), Shimer (2009), Hall (2009),
and Karabarbounis (2014a).
    The consensus that the labor wedge reflects labor market distortions is
based on measuring the price of labor using average hourly earnings. The gap
between average hourly earnings and labor productivity is acyclical, suggesting
that price markup movements are not cyclical. But it is not clear whether the
marginal cost of labor to firms is well measured by average hourly earnings.
Employee wages may not reflect the true marginal cost of labor to the firm.
Wages may be smoothed versions of the shadow cost due to implicit
contracting (e.g., for salaried workers). One obtains a very different picture of
the cyclical price of labor using the wages of new hires, as measured by
Pissarides (2009) and Haefke et al. (2013), or from the user cost of labor, as
measured by Kudlyak (2014).
    In this paper, we seek evidence on cyclical distortions in the product market
that does not rely on wage data for workers. First, we estimate the labor wedge
for the self-employed. If we observe significant cyclicality in the labor wedge
for the self-employed, we presume it cannot be ascribed to wage rigidities or
other labor market frictions. Second, we estimate the price markup from
intermediate inputs (energy, materials, and services).      Intermediate prices
should provide a truer measure of that input’s cyclical price than do average
                   RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                            3


hourly earnings for labor.
   Our evidence is for the United States from 1987 onward. A benefit of using
two distinct approaches is that they rely on different data sources. For the
self-employed, we look at household data from the Current Population Survey
and the Consumer Expenditure Survey, both conducted by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). For intermediates we use the BLS Multifactor Productivity
Database covering 60 industries. Our consistent finding is that, contrary to the
emerging consensus, product market distortions are at least as important as
labor market distortions in recent recessions.
   The countercyclical price markup we estimate is compatible with prices
being sticky (too high) in recessions, serving as a constraint on firm sales.
Given its strong persistence, it is also consistent with firms purposefully
choosing a higher price markup in recessions. As a recent example, Gilchrist et
al. (2017) find that financially constrained firms chose higher markups at the
expense of future market share during the Great Recession. Any model where
expanding      production     has     a    component       of   investment      (e.g.,
learning-by-doing) should have similar implications. The countercyclical price
markup could also reflect greater uncertainty, or aversion to uncertainty, in
recessions as in Arellano et al. (2012).
   Our study is related to several earlier efforts. Bils (1987), Rotemberg and
Woodford (1999), Bils et al. (2013), and Nekarda and Ramey (2013) rely on
measured earnings to estimate the marginal price of labor and thereby the
cyclicality of the markup. Other studies infer the cyclicality of price markups
from the cyclicality of investment (Galeotti and Schiantarelli, 1998), final goods
inventories (Bils and Kahn, 2000;          Kryvtsov and Midrigan, 2013), and
advertising (Hall, 2014). While our results for intermediates have antecedents
in the literature (e.g., Basu, 1995), our analysis is the first to examine plant-level
compositional biases in manufacturing, to look beyond manufacturing, and to
address the cyclicality of the price markup versus the wage markup.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 revisits the conventional labor
4                                    BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



wedge decomposition using wages, doing so for both the extensive and
intensive margins. Section 3 looks at the self-employed. Section 4 investigates
intermediate input use. Section 5 relates our work to other efforts at measuring
the cyclicality of markups. Section 6 concludes.



2        The Aggregate Labor Wedge
We begin by constructing the standard representative-agent labor wedge
(RAW), defined as the ratio of the marginal product of labor (mpn) to the
tax-adjusted marginal rate of substitution of consumption for leisure (mrs).
Constructing the wedge requires assumptions on preferences and technology;
our baseline case follows Hall (1997) and Galı́, Gertler, and López-Salido (2007).
Production features a constant elasticity of output with respect to hours.1
Preferences are separable in consumption and hours, and over time, with a
constant intertemporal elasticity for consumption and a constant Frisch
elasticity of labor supply.2 These assumptions yield a log-linear labor wedge:


                  RAWt ≡ ln(mpnt ) + ln(1 − τt ) − ln(mrst )
                                                                    
                             yt                     1          1
                       = ln       + ln(1 − τt ) −     ln(ct ) + ln(nt ) ,                      (1)
                             nt                     σ          η

           yt
where      nt
                is output per hour, ct is nondurables and services consumption per
                                                                  τtc +τtn
adult equivalent, nt is hours per capita, and τt ≡                 1+τtc
                                                                             is a combination of
average marginal tax rates on consumption and labor.                            See the Online
Appendix for a precise description of all variables used.
        For our baseline case, we use an intertemporal elasticity of substitution
(IES) of σ = 0.5, following Hall (2009), and a Frisch elasticity of labor supply of
    1
     We later entertain constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production in capital, labor, and
intermediate inputs.
   2
     Nonseparable utility in consumption and leisure would not alter our results significantly.
Shimer (2009) and Karabarbounis (2014a) found this as well. We find the same if we calibrate
the nonseparability to how consumption responds to retirement (Aguiar and Hurst, 2013) or
unemployment (Saporta-Eksten, 2014).
                   RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                   5


η = 1.0, based on Chang, Kim, Kwon, and Rogerson (2014). The latter argue,
based on a heterogeneous-agent model with both intensive and extensive
labor margins, that a representative-agent Frisch elasticity of 1 (or slightly
higher) is reasonable.
   To gauge the cyclicality of the RAW, we project it on real GDP and hours
worked. (All variables are in logs and HP-filtered.) We use quarterly data from
1987 through 2012. Table 1 reports the cyclical elasticity of the wedge and its
components: labor productivity, hours worked, consumption, and taxes. The
wedge is strongly countercyclical (elasticity with respect to GDP: -2.69),
reflecting mildly countercyclical productivity (-0.10), procyclical consumption
(0.61), and highly procyclical hours (1.40). In recessions, the RAW increases as
the mrs plummets but the mpn changes little. Using equation (1) and the
results in Table 1, it is straightforward for the reader to recalculate the wedge’s
cyclicality for alternative calibrations of σ and η.


                       Table 1: Representative Agent Wedge


                                                        Elasticity wrt
                                                     GDP           Total Hours
         Representative agent wedge              -2.69 (0.20)      -2.00 (0.06)
          Labor productivity                     -0.10 (0.08)      -0.28 (0.04)
          Hours per capita                       1.40 (0.07)        0.99 (0.01)
          Consumption per capita                 0.61 (0.03)        0.36 (0.02)
          Tax rates                              0.02 (0.07)       -0.01 (0.04)

  Note: Each entry is from a separate regression. Sample covers 1987Q1–2012Q4. All
  variables are in logs and HP-filtered. The wedge calculation follows equation (1) with
  σ = 0.5 and η = 1.0.



   Because the cyclical elasticity will be a key statistic summarizing wedge
behavior throughout the paper, we point out a few other aspects of Table 1.
6                                    BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



First, the contribution of marginal tax rates to the cyclicality of the RAW is
small. Because our tax measures have little impact on our results, we drop
them in the remainder of the paper.3 Second, we have detrended our series
with an HP filter in order to focus on cyclical, rather than low-frequency,
fluctuations in the wedge. Hamilton (forthcoming) has recently pointed out
drawbacks of using the HP filter and suggested an alternative method. In the
Online Appendix, we show that our main findings are robust to using
Hamilton’s method.
        Before proceeding, it is useful to take a step back and consider exactly what
the “labor wedge” is. It measures the gap between the social cost and social
benefit of a marginal unit of market labor under a given set of assumptions. It
implies a deviation between hours worked in the data and what a social
planner would choose. In practice, the measured gap will also reflect any
mismeasurement in the data and/or misspecification of the social planner’s
problem. Thus it is worthwhile to consider possible mismeasurements and
misspecifications and how they might affect our results.
        The Table 1 calculations ignore fluctuations in the quality of the workforce
and a role for overhead labor.4 We calculate that declining average workforce
quality in expansions leads us to understate the cyclical elasticity of labor’s
marginal product by perhaps 0.1 to 0.2 percent, and in turn overstate the
cyclicality of the wedge. Ignoring overhead labor, conversely, overstates the
procyclicality of labor’s marginal product (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999).

    3
     Mulligan (2012) contends that changes in effective marginal tax rates influenced labor
market behavior during the Great Recession. His focus is on how lower-income workers have
been affected by the expansion of means-tested assistance programs.
   4
     The calculations also ignore home production, which Karabarbounis (2014b) suggests can
explain part of the cyclicality in the labor wedge. Countercyclical hours worked at home imply
smaller cyclical movements in effective leisure, whereas countercyclical consumption of home-
produced goods implies smaller movements in effective consumption. Note, however, that
our intertemporal and Frisch elasticities are calibrated to a literature that estimates models
without home production. Matching the same empirical moments in a model with home
production would therefore require lower intertemporal and Frisch elasticities. These lower
elasticities would (at least partly) offset the impact of the smaller movements in effective leisure
and consumption on the labor wedge.
                     RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                  7


For an overhead labor component of the magnitude suggested by Nekarda and
Ramey (2013) — 10 to 20 percent of employment — the effects of composition
and overhead labor on the cyclicality of labor’s marginal versus average
product (and on the estimated labor wedge) should approximately offset.
       A representative agent requires not only workers of equal quality but also
perfect consumption sharing. To the extent this is not true, the cyclicality of
the wedge may be overstated. In the Online Appendix we calculate that the
consumption of those who are continuously employed does not move as much
as per-capita consumption (cyclical elasticity with respect to GDP of 0.52 for
the employed vs. 0.61 per capita), which implies a slightly less countercyclical
wedge (elasticity of -2.51 instead of the -2.69 in Table 1).


2.1       Extensive and Intensive Margin Wedges

We next depart from the representative agent framework by constructing
separate wedges on the extensive margin (EMW) and the intensive margin
(IMW). These wedges distinguish between the two components of hours
worked – employment and hours per worker – but still measure gaps between
the social benefit and social cost of additional labor, either in the form of an
additional employee or an additional hour per worker. They will also be useful
for decomposing the labor wedge into product and labor market components
for three reasons.5 First, we can calibrate the Frisch elasticity of labor supply to
micro estimates at the hours margin. Second, we can compare the intensive
margin here with the intensive margin for the self-employed (in Section 3).
Third, product market distortions should have an impact on the wedge on
both margins. So, if the labor wedge is important at only one margin, that
would be suggestive that the price markup has little cyclical importance.6
   5
      The EMW is also interesting in its own right and, to our knowledge, it has not been
constructed empirically (though it appears in many theoretical models).
    6
      Some labor market distortions may hit both margins proportionally. Thus, finding equally
important wedges at both margins does not rule for the price markup. But if we find the wedge
is only important at one margin, this is indirect evidence against product market distortions.
8                                         BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



        To analyze the extensive margin, we make some additional assumptions.
We consider a representative household that consists of many members.
Consumption is perfectly shared across members, and labor supply decisions
are made on both the extensive and intensive margins. Preferences are

                           ∞
                                      (                            ! )
                                           1−1/σ          1+1/η
                           X               ct            ht
                      E0         βt               −ν            + ψ et ,
                           t=0
                                          1 − 1/σ       1 + 1/η

where ct denotes consumption per adult equivalent, et employment, and ht
hours worked per employee. The variable ψ is a fixed cost of employment,
which guarantees an interior solution for hours versus employment. The
                                       1+1/η   
                                       ht
marginal disutility of employment is ν 1+1/η + ψ ≡ νΩt ht , while the marginal
                                                       1/η
disutility of an extra hour per worker is νht et .
        For firms we assume (i) a constant output elasticity with respect to labor,
and (ii) employment and hours per worker are perfect substitutes (i.e.,
production depends on total hours, nt = et ht ). The marginal product of labor is
                                                       yt
thus proportional to output per hour                   nt
                                                          ,   while the marginal product of
                                  yt
employment is mpnext
                 t   ∝               h
                                  nt t
                                           and the marginal product of hours per worker is
              yt
mpnint
   t ∝           e.
              nt t

        Adding employment involves frictions.                  Firms post vacancies at the
beginning of the period, while matches form and produce during the period.7
The matching technology is mt = vtφ f (ut ), where mt are matches, vt vacancies,
and ut unemployment.              Let the variable κ denote the opportunity cost of
creating a vacancy, expressed in labor input as a fraction of the steady-state
workweek h. Let δ be the per-period separation rate, and γ the fraction of the
initial period of employment devoted to training.8



    7
     Blanchard and Galı́ (2010) and Galı́ (2011) use this timing, although it is more conventional
for matches to start producing in the following period. The former timing gives cleaner results,
but it could be altered without changing our analysis substantially.
   8
     The assumptions that κ, δ, and γ are constant over time (and thus exogenous) are not
necessary for the derivation of the EMW but do simplify the data needed for its construction.
                               RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                           9


   In this environment, the intensive margin wedge is given by
                                                                                                      
                                                                           yt         1          1
        IM Wt ≡           ln(mpnint
                                t )     −   ln(mrsint
                                                  t )           = ln                −   ln(ct ) + ln(ht ) .   (2)
                                                                           nt         σ          η

The IMW in (2) differs from the standard RAW in equation (1) in two ways: hours
per worker ht replaces hours per capita nt , and we calibrate η = 0.5. A lower η is
appropriate given that it now reflects the Frisch elasticity only at the intensive
(hours) margin (Chetty et al., 2013).
   On the extensive margin, consider creating one more vacancy in period t and
reducing vacancies in t + 1 by just enough to keep employment unaffected from
t + 1 forward. Spending κh nytt to create an additional vacancy generates φmt /vt
additional matches, of which (1 − δ) survive to t + 1. This perturbation requires
                                                          mt /vt
lower spending on vacancies at t + 1 by (1 − δ)κh nyt+1
                                                    t+1 mt+1 /vt+1
                                                                   . A social planner
would set
                                                  
                 φmt 0               h      yt                     yt
                       u (ct ) 1 − γ      ht − Ωt ht − u0 (ct )κh                                             (3)
                  vt                 ht     n                     nt
                                         t                                
                                 0           yt+1 mt /vt       φmt yt+1
                 +β(1 − δ)Et u (ct+1 ) κh                    +      γh         = 0.
                                             nt+1 mt+1 /vt+1    vt     nt+1

The marginal benefit of an extra vacancy (utility from consuming increased
output today) equals its marginal cost (disutility of employment plus the cost
of creating an added vacancy today less the resource savings from creating
fewer future vacancies). Rearranging (3) to get a (log) ratio of the marginal
benefit to the marginal cost of additional employment, we have
                                                                            
                                                yt         1
                               EM Wt = ln                −   ln(ct ) + ln (Ωt ) − St ,
                                                nt         σ
                                                             yt+1 vt+1                        yt+1 
                     vt
       h        κv                                 u0 (ct+1 )   nt+1  vt                  u0 (ct+1 ) nt+1
       ht       φm
                     v
                     mt       1 − β(1 − δ)Et        u0 (ct )     yt   + γ 1 − β(1 − δ)Et u0 (ct ) yt
                                                                     mt+1
                     m                                           nt   mt                              nt
St ≈                                                                 h       i                                ,
                                                                       κv
                                                   1 − [1 − β(1 − δ)] φm  +γ
                                                                                                   (4)
10                                 BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



where Ωt is the marginal disutility of employment (per hour worked).9
                                                                                      
                                                                                       yt
         The EMW, like the IMW, reflects movements in labor productivity, ln           nt
                                                                                            ,
                                                  1
and the marginal utility of consumption,          σ
                                                      ln(ct ). But the EMW also differs
from the IMW. Whereas the IMW reflects the marginal disutility of an extra
hour, which is highly procyclical for reasonable Frisch elasticities, the extensive
margin reflects the average disutility of adding a worker. We find this average
disutility to be nearly acyclical. In addition, the term St , which is specific to the
EMW, reflects the efficacy of spending on vacancies. In recessions St declines
as vacancies are more likely to yield a match. This lends a countercyclical
component to the EMW. The cyclicality of the EMW vis-à-vis the IMW
essentially reduces to whether cyclicality in the hiring term St exceeds that in
the marginal disutility of working a longer workweek.
         It is well established that cyclical movements in total hours are primarily
driven by employment fluctuations. That holds true for our 1987 to 2012
period, where cyclical employment fluctuations (with respect to real GDP or
total hours) are about four times larger than in the workweek. One might jump
to the conclusion that cyclicality in the extensive (employment) margin wedge
would similarly dominate cyclicality in the intensive (workweek) margin
wedge. That jump would be unwarranted, however. Important components of
the wedge — labor’s marginal product and consumption’s marginal utility —
display the same cyclicality with respect to both margins.                    Any wedge
differences, as just discussed, reduce to cyclicality in the hiring term St versus
that in the marginal disutility of working a longer workweek.                    Although
employment fluctuations are larger than those in the workweek, the elasticity
of the marginal disutility in response to the workweek may exceed that of the
hiring cost St to employment.
         We treat the elasticity of labor supply at the intensive margin as reflecting
curvature in preferences, while that at the extensive margin reflects the impact

     9
   The approximation stems from our use of several first-order Taylor series approximations.
The Online Appendix provides more details on the EMW (and IMW) construction.
                         RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                11


of adjustment costs. Of course, a more general calculation might allow for
adjustments costs at the intensive margin as well, or allow for upward sloping
labor supply at the extensive margin, beyond that generated by adjustment
costs.     For instance, consider heterogeneity in worker productivity.                    This
introduces comparative advantage in labor supply. Ignoring search costs, the
social planner would select the most productive workers for employment first.
If expanding employment requires adding a worker with less market
comparative advantage in a boom than in a bust, then this should act to
stabilize employment.            So by ignoring comparative advantage, we may
understate the cyclicality of the wedge at the extensive margin.10
       To construct the EMW, we use the same variables required by the IMW, plus
vacancies (vt ), matches (mt ), and additional parameters. A quarterly separation
rate of δ = 0.105 matches the average rate of quits, layoffs, and discharges in the
BLS Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey. The discount factor β = 0.996
implies a steady-state annual real interest rate of 1.6 percent, the average of the
three–month T–bill rate less core PCE inflation over our sample. Hiring costs
               κv
per match,     m
                  ,   are set to 0.4 quarters of output, and training costs to γ = 0.16,
consistent with estimates by Barron, Berger, and Black (1999). Finally, the
elasticity of matches to vacancies is set to φ = 0.5. These parameter values
imply a steady-state ratio of mrs to mpn on the extensive margin of about 0.90.
       We find that the EMW and IMW elasticities are quite similar. Figure 1 shows
the unfiltered extensive and intensive margin wedges from 1987 to 2012. Table
2 reports their cyclical elasticities with respect to real GDP and hours worked.
The elasticities of EMW and IMW with respect to GDP are -1.99 (0.26) and -1.91
(0.13), respectively.11




  10
     Heterogeneity in preferences through Ωt acts similarly, as comparative advantage is then
dictated by a worker’s productivity relative to Ωt .
  11
     EMW and IMW elasticities are smaller than for the RAW; an aggregate Frisch elasticity of 2.3
would make the RAW behave similarly to the EMW and IMW.
12                                                        BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



                                          Figure 1: EMW vs. IMW (Unfiltered)

                            0.2




                            0.1
                  In Logs




                              0




                            ‐0.1




                            ‐0.2
                                   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011

                                                                EMW (based on VAR)         IMW




2.2     Decomposing the Wedge

We now empirically decompose the labor wedge into product market and labor
market components (or, equivalently, price and wage markups). This requires a
measure of the marginal cost of labor to firms. As stressed by Galı́, Gertler, and
López-Salido (2007), the assumption that any particular wage measure reflects
labor’s true marginal cost is controversial. We will show that alternative wage
measures lead to vastly different conclusions about the relative importance of
the price markup versus wage markup. This motivates our subsequent analysis,
which decomposes the labor wedge without using wage data.
     The IMW decomposition is standard and given by
                                                    
                      yt       wt      wt  1         1
        IM Wt    = ln    − ln     + ln    − ln(ct ) − ln(ht )
                      nt       pt      pt  σ         η
                 = µp,int
                    t     + µw,int
                             t     ,                                                                                          (5)

        wt
where   pt
             is the (real) marginal cost of labor to firms. The price markup based
on the intensive margin (µp,int ) is the gap between the firm’s marginal product
                    RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                   13



                 Table 2: Extensive and Intensive Margin Wedges


                                                        Elasticity wrt
                                                     GDP           Total Hours

           Extensive margin wedge                 -1.99 (0.26)     -1.55 (0.14)

           Intensive margin wedge                 -1.91 (0.13)     -1.38 (0.05)


    Note: Each entry is from a separate regression. Sample covers 1987Q1–2012Q4. All
    variables are in logs and HP-filtered. Wedge calculations, equations (2) and (4), use
    σ = 0.5 and η = 0.5, and EMW expectation terms are constructed by a VAR.




and marginal cost of labor. The wage markup based on the intensive margin
(µw,int ) is the gap between the firm’s marginal cost and the household’s cost of
providing an additional hour.
   The EMW decomposition is
                                                                  
                  yt              wt      wt             1
EM Wt    = ln         − S̃t − ln     + ln    + S̃t − St − ln(ct ) − ln(Ωt )
                  nt              pt      pt             σ
            p,ext    w,ext
         = µt     + µt ,                                                 (6)


where S̃t takes the same form as St in equation (4) but with φ = 1. The presence
of S̃t rather than St reflects the fact that firms do not internalize the congestion
effects of their decision to post another vacancy; each firm views the
                                          m
probability of filling a vacancy as       v
                                            ,   whereas the social planner knows one
                              φm
more vacancy generates         v
                                   additional matches. For intuition, momentarily
consider S̃t = St in equation (6). Doing so, it is apparent that the wage markup
on the extensive margin (µw,ext ) mirrors that on the intensive margin (µw,int ),
but with the household’s mrs calculated at the employment margin. For the
price markup on the extensive margin (µp,ext ), an additional employee
            
produces ln nytt − St because firms pay the vacancy cost (St ).
14                                 BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



     Table 3 decomposes the EMW and IMW into the price markup and wage
markup using average hourly earnings (AHE) as the measure of the firm’s
marginal cost of labor (wt ). This wage measure is conventional and would
reflect the true marginal cost if all workers were employed in spot markets.
                                   
                           yt
Here the price markup ln nt − ln wptt is simply the (log) inverse labor share.
Using AHE, the price markup accounts for only 2 to 6 percent of the cyclicality
of the labor wedge on the intensive margin, and between 16 and 23 percent on
the extensive margin. These results are in line with Karabarbounis’ (2014a)
conclusion that the price markup is relatively unimportant.


        Table 3: Wedge Decomposition: Average Hourly Earnings (AHE)


                                                        Elasticity wrt
                                                    GDP            Total Hours
              Extensive margin wedge            -1.99 (0.26)       -1.55 (0.14)
              Price markup (AHE)                -0.32 (0.14)       -0.35 (0.09)

              Intensive margin wedge            -1.91 (0.13)       -1.38 (0.05)
              Price markup (AHE)                -0.04 (0.08)       -0.08 (0.05)

     Note: Each entry is from a separate regression. Sample covers 1987Q1–2012Q4. All
     variables are in logs and HP-filtered. Expectation terms in the EMW are constructed
     using a VAR. The price markup inferred from the extensive margin (µp,ext ) follows
     equation (6), and the price markup from the intensive margin (µp,int ) follows (5).



     Alternative frameworks for understanding the labor market, however,
emphasize the durable nature of the firm-worker relationship and imply that
the contemporaneous wage plays no allocative role. For example, in matching
models with search frictions, what matters is the expected surplus generated
over the life of the match and not the wage payment at any one time. Implicit
contracting models similarly imply that the flow wage payment is not
allocative.     Barro (1977) and Rosen (1985) forcefully drive home that an
                       RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                  15


acyclical wage, or even a countercyclical wage, can coincide with a highly
procyclical true price of labor.          (See also Basu and House, 2016.)              Recent
examples of empirical support for implicit contracting include Ham and Reilly
(2013) and Bellou and Kaymak (2012).
       In Table 4 we examine how cyclicality in two alternative measures of the
marginal cost of labor affect the wedge decomposition. We use cyclicality for
the wages of new hires (NH) and the user cost of labor (UC) as reported by
Kudlyak (2014) (please see Online Appendix). Both are arguably more relevant
for job formation.12 We therefore focus on the extensive margin. We find that,
depending on the wage measure used, the price markup can account for
almost none or essentially all of the EMW — from 16 percent using average
hourly earnings to 109 percent using user cost. (Using the user cost of labor,
the price markup also accounts for all cyclicality in the intensive margin wedge
from Table 3.)

             Table 4: Wedge Decomposition: Alternative Wage Measures


                                                          Elasticity wrt
                                                       GDP            Total Hours
              Extensive margin wedge               -1.99 (0.26)       -1.55 (0.14)
                Price markup (AHE)                 -0.32 (0.14)       -0.35 (0.09)
                Price markup (NH)                  -0.98 (0.16)       -0.81 (0.09)
                Price markup (UC)                  -2.17 (0.21)       -1.65 (0.09)

       Note: Each entry is from a separate regression. Sample covers 1987Q1–2012Q4. All
       variables are in logs and HP-filtered. Expectation terms in the EMW are constructed
       using a VAR. The price markup follows equation (6). See Online Appendix for details
       on construction of NH and UC.



  12
    See Pissarides (2009), Haefke, Sonntage, and van Rens (2013), and Kudlyak (2014). Kudlyak
finds that the new hire wage falls 1.2 percent relative to all workers’ wages for each percentage
point rise in the unemployment rate, whereas the relative fall in the user cost of labor is 3.4
percent.
16                             BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



3     The Self-Employed Wedge
Given the ambiguity of the decomposition results just presented, it is useful to
explore decompositions of the labor wedge that do not depend on wage data.
In the Online Appendix we present a static decision problem of individuals
choosing whether to work for others, work for themselves as sole proprietors,
or work for themselves with employees. Talent draws (or occupation-specific
human capital) determine which of these choices maximize utility. Whether a
self-employed person has employees or not, they choose how many hours to
work, leading to a first order condition on the intensive margin. In this first
order condition, their marginal self-employed earnings are proportional to
their average self-employed earnings per hour. This leads to a familiar labor
wedge for the self-employed with the usual decomposition:
                                              
                                     w          w
            µSE   = ln (mpn)SE − ln       + ln       − ln (mrs)SE .
                                     p SE       p SE
                    |         {z        } |          {z         }
                             µp SE                    µw SE

We assume µw SE = 0. That is, for the self-employed, we assume     that their
                                                                
marginal earnings – i.e., the marginal price of their own labor wp – is equal
                                                                   SE
to their mrs because no wage rigidities or other labor market distortions
impinge on their decision to supply labor to their own business. This implies
that any labor wedge for the self-employed must be due to the price markup:


                         µSE = ln (mpn)SE − ln (mrs)SE .
                               |          {z         }
                                         µp SE


Note that, by assuming µw
                        SE = 0, we can use mrsSE as our measure of the
                                                
unobserved shadow wage for the self-employed wp   .
                                                     SE
     We maintain our Section 2 assumptions on preferences. For technology,
unlike in Section 2, where we implicitly assumed employee and self-employed
hours were perfect substitutes, here we assume that self-employed hours enter
production alone with a constant elasticity. The resulting µSE takes the same
                      RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                 17


form as equation (2), though we must now measure hours worked,
productivity, and consumption for the self-employed. To do so, we turn to the
Current Population Survey (CPS) and Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). We
first document the cyclical behavior of self-employed hours worked and then
check whether movements in productivity and consumption can explain these
fluctuations.
       As a starting point, we note that self-employment has been just as cyclical
as total employment. The share of self-employed in nonagricultural industries
declined slightly during each of the past two NBER-defined recessions: from
10.1 to 10.0 percent during 2001 and from 10.5 to 10.4 percent from 2007 to
2009.13 The self-employment share exhibits lower-frequency fluctuations, but
if we HP-filter, the resulting series is completely acyclical with respect to GDP
or aggregate hours. Becoming self-employed requires starting a business, so
fluctuations in self-employment could be affected by financing costs and
constraints. In particular, the decline in self-employment during the Great
Recession may partly reflect financing constraints. Going forward, we thus
focus on the intensive (hours) margin for the self-employed.
       We base our analysis on the Annual Social and Economic supplements to
the CPS, typically referred to as the March CPS. In the March supplement
household members report their hours and income for the previous calendar
year. They also report the income and class of workers at their primary job —
the job held longest during the prior year. The class-of-worker variable allows
us      to   distinguish   the   self-employed       separately     for   agriculture     and
nonagriculture.      We begin our sample in 1987, the first year that data on

  13
     Hipple (2010) reports annual rates of self-employment in the United States for 1994 to
2009 based on the monthly CPS, and these series are extended through 2012 (based on Hipple
input) by Heim (2014). The Hipple series includes both incorporated and unincorporated
self-employed. Incorporated self-employed constitute about one-third of total self-employed.
The numbers reported here are for nonagriculture, which represents 94 percent of the self-
employed. For agriculture, self-employment (again from Hipple) is acyclical. We focus on
nonagriculture workers because top- and bottom-coding of income in the CPS is extreme for
farmers. For farmers, it is also implausible to treat realized income as known at the time that
labor input is chosen, an assumption implicit in calculations of the labor wedge.
18                                  BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



primary-job income are available. Advantages of the March supplement are: (i)
it is large; (ii) its top-coding of income is less extreme than in the monthly
surveys; and (iii) some households can be matched across two consecutive
March surveys, allowing us to examine year-over-year changes for a given set
of workers.         Our unmatched sample contains 197,723 self-employed
individuals for 1987 to 2012 (as well as 1,901,936 wage earners).14
       Figure 2 reports usual weekly hours and total annual hours worked
separately for the self-employed (nonagricultural) and for those earning wages
and salaries for 1987 to 2012. The intensive margin is clearly more cyclical for
the self-employed. If we regress hours per week on real GDP (both series are in
logs and HP-filtered), the elasticity for the self-employed (0.37, standard error
0.13) is nearly twice that for wage earners (0.20, s.e. 0.02). During the Great
Recession (2007–2009), the workweek for the self-employed declined by 4.9
percent (two full hours) compared with only 1.7 percent for wage earners.
Similarly, annual hours declined by 6.9 percent for the self-employed,
compared with 3.2 percent for wage earners.
       Figure 2 might be influenced by composition bias. For example, if workers
becoming self-employed in expansions work more hours than the typical
self-employed, then hours in Figure 2 will have a procyclical bias. For this
reason, we match self-employed individuals across consecutive March
supplements, constructing growth rates for their hours and income.15 Using

  14
     We require that workers be between ages 20 and 70 and work at least 10 hours per week and
at least 10 weeks during the year. Some income and hours responses are top-coded. In each
year we trim the top and bottom 9.6 percent of observations by income on primary job; 9.6
percent is just large enough to remove the top-coding of business income for the self-employed
in all 26 years. We trim the bottom for symmetry; this also serves to remove all negative income
entries. Usual hours are top-coded at 99 per week. We trim the top 1.2 percent of workers by
weekly hours. This is the minimal trimming that removes top-coded hours for all years. We also
report results below making the minimal trims necessary in each year of matched data. This
reduces the average sample share trimmed by top coding of earnings from 9.6 to 4.9 percent,
and for the workweek from 1.2 to 0.5 percent. (We still trim the bottom of earnings distribution
symmetrically.) Our results are essentially unaffected.
  15
     We follow standard matching procedures for the March CPS. Respondents are matched
across years based on household and person identifiers and conformity of each respondent’s
sex, race, and age.
                     RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                19



              Figure 2: Hours for the Self-Employed vs. Wage Earners




these growth rates, we express hours and income relative to 1987. We are not
able to match across 1994 and 1995 calendar years because of a CPS sample
redesign. For 1994–1995 we impute to each series its mean growth rate. We
then create a level series indexed to 1987. In all subsequent statistics, we
exclude years 1994 and 1995.                Our matched sample includes 39,306
self-employed individuals, prior to trimming to deal with top-coding.16
       When we compare these hours indices for the self-employed and wage
earners, we see that the workweek is more cyclical for the self-employed. The
elasticity of the workweek with respect to real GDP (both variables are
HP-filtered) is 0.28 (s.e. 0.07) for the self-employed versus 0.17 (s.e. 0.03) for
wage earners. Annual hours are slightly more cyclical for wage earners, with an
elasticity with respect to real GDP of 0.57 (s.e. 0.08) compared with 0.54 (s.e.

  16
     The March CPS responses for weeks worked and usual hours per week are for all prior-year
jobs, whereas class of worker and income refer to the primary (longest-held) job. To achieve
an income-compatible measure of hours growth, we restrict our self-employed sample to those
who received at least 95 percent of income from their primary self-employed job. (The average
of that income share across the two years must be at least 0.95.)
20                                  BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



0.13) for the self-employed. Similar remarks apply if we measure the cycle by
aggregate hours.
       In Table 5 we report the cyclicality of the intensive margin labor wedge. The
first column is estimated for all workers, not just the self-employed. It repeats
the analysis from Section 2 equation (2), but uses workweek fluctuations
constructed from the matched-CPS surveys.17 It is also annual rather than
quarterly and excludes 1994 and 1995 because we cannot match those years in
the CPS. It dispenses with the tax wedge, which we found to have little impact.
As in Section 2, we find a strongly countercyclical wedge. The elasticities of the
wedge with respect to real GDP and aggregate hours, -1.87 and -1.20, are
modestly smaller than reported in Table 2 (estimates there being -1.91 and
-1.38), with the difference reflecting a slightly less procyclical workweek.
       Columns 2-4 of Table 5 show how the wedge’s cyclicality changes as we
sequentially replace the estimates of cyclicality in hours, productivity, and
consumption for all workers with estimates for the self-employed. Column 2
constructs the wedge using fluctuations in the workweek just for the
self-employed, maintaining the same aggregate series for productivity and
consumption. Not surprisingly, given the greater cyclicality of the workweek
for the self-employed described previously, this results in a modestly more
cyclical labor wedge. The elasticity with respect to real GDP goes from -1.87
(s.e. 0.09) to -2.06 (s.e. 0.15).
       We next replace aggregate labor productivity with a measure of productivity
specific to the self-employed. Our measure is self-employed annual business
income divided by their annual hours worked.18                   Self-employed business
income per hour is proportional to the marginal product of self-employed

  17
     Because the wedge is constructed using hours of continuously-employed workers,
one could argue for using continuously-employed consumption rather than per-capita
consumption. As discussed in Section 2, the former is a bit less procyclical, which implies the
resulting wedge would be somewhat less countercyclical.
  18
     We deflate business income by the nondurables and services PCE deflator. We calculate the
percentage change in self-employed income across matched years by the midpoint formula.
This avoids extreme values for individuals with very low income in one of the years.
                    RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                  21



   Table 5: Cyclicality of the Labor Wedge, All Workers vs. Self-Employed


      Elasticity wrt          (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)


       Real GDP          -1.87 (0.09)    -2.06 (0.15)   -1.97 (0.21)    -3.23 (0.96)


       Total hours       -1.20 (0.05)    -1.41 (0.09)   -1.29 (0.14)    -1.91 (0.63)




      Hours              All workers          SE             SE              SE
      MPN                 Agg. y/n        Agg. y/n       SE inc/hr       SE inc/hr
      Consumption        NIPA PCE        NIPA PCE        NIPA PCE         + CE Adj.



    Notes: The labor wedge is constructed according to equation (2). Sample is based
    on matched March CPS self-employed outside government and agriculture. CPS
    observations are weighted. Each cell represents a separate regression. Regressions
    have 24 annual observations, 1987–1993 and 1996–2012. Newey-West standard errors
    are in parentheses. Hours are weekly. NIPA PCE refers to aggregate real expenditures
    on nondurables and services. CE adjustment incorporates consumption for the self-
    employed vs. all persons from the Consumer Expenditure Surveys.




labor assuming: (i) a constant elasticity of output with respect to self-employed
labor, and (ii) self-employed income is proportional to business output. This
second assumption is likely to be violated: self-employed income probably
includes some returns to equity in the business, not just self-employed labor.
This should lead us to overstate the procyclicality of the marginal product of
labor for the self-employed, because their residual equity claim on business
revenue is likely to be more procyclical than business output. This means we
probably understate the countercyclicality of the self-employed labor wedge.
   An additional factor that works to understate the countercyclicality of the
22                                   BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



labor wedge is that our self-employed productivity measure ignores any
overhead component of self-employed labor.                       This could be especially
important given the small scale of operations for much self-employed
production. A final concern is that reported income could misstate actual
income. The self-employed tend to understate income. Hurst, Li, and Pugsley
(2014) find the ratio of consumption to income is higher for the self-employed,
consistent with the self-employed understating income. The concern for us
would be if the self-employed underreport at a lower rate in recessions.
       Going from column 2 to 3 of Table 5, we replace aggregate labor productivity
with self-employed business income per hour. Aggregate labor productivity has
been modestly countercyclical since 1987, with an elasticity with respect to real
GDP of -0.21 (s.e. 0.05). Self-employed business income per hour has been less
cyclical (elasticity -0.13, s.e. 0.16). Thus, the estimated labor wedge becomes
slightly less countercyclical, with an elasticity of -1.97 (s.e. 0.21) with respect
to real GDP. In summary, the wedge calculated with measured productivity and
hours for the self-employed is just as cyclical as that for all workers. Figure 3
plots the time series of these two wedges.19
       We have assumed the cyclicality of consumption for the self-employed is
the same as for consumption per capita.                     For robustness, we estimate
self-employed consumption relative to aggregate consumption based on
quarterly growth rates in household spending on nondurables and services in
the Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CE). We add these estimates of relative
consumption to aggregate consumption to obtain an estimate of consumption
for the self-employed.
       The elasticity of aggregate consumption with respect to real GDP is 0.64
(s.e. 0.02). Self-employed consumption is even more procyclical, with an

  19
    We reestimate for column 3 making the minimal trims necessary to remove topcoding in
any given matched year of CPS data, rather than trimming the same shares in all years. This
yield a trimmed share that averages about 10 percent. Our results are little affected. The
elasticity of the self-employed wedge with respect to real GDP goes from coefficient -1.97 to
-1.96 (s.e. 0.25). The elasticity with respect to total hours goes from -1.29 to -1.20 (s.e. 0.14).
                     RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                               23



           Figure 3: Labor Wedge for the Self-Employed vs. All Workers
                          Labor Wedge for Self-employed vs. All Workers

               .06


               .04


               .02


               .00


              -.02


              -.04


              -.06
                     88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04      06   08   10   12

                                         All-worker Labor Wedge
                                         Self-employed Labor Wedge




elasticity of 1.27. But the standard error is too large, at 0.51, to reliably infer
that the self-employed have more procyclical consumption. The big standard
error reflects the small number of self-employed observations in the CE. If we
do use this measure of consumption, however, we get an even more cyclical
wedge for the self-employed. This is illustrated in the last column of Table 5.
The self-employed labor wedge now exhibits an elasticity of -3.23 (s.e. 0.96)
with respect to real GDP. In this section’s subsequent exercises, we revert to
measuring self-employed consumption by aggregate consumption, rather than
adopting such a noisy measure.20




  20
    We also examined the cyclicality of consumer expenditure for the self-employed in the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID has reasonably broad expenditure measures
starting in 1999, but only biannually. In the PSID, self-employed consumption relative to
consumption of all households dropped by 2.8 percent from 2007 to 2009, corresponding to
the most recent recession. (Unfortunately, biannual observations miss the timing of the 8-
month recession during 2001.) But, overall, the PSID numbers suggest similar cyclicality of
consumption for the self-employed as for all households.
24                                   BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



       Table 6 presents three robustness exercises.21 First, self-employed who are
incorporated might take income in the form of corporate profits rather than
business income. It is not obvious how the incorporated self-employed treat
these profits in answering the CPS question about their business income. For
this reason, as an alternative measure of labor productivity, we consider
business income per hour excluding the incorporated self-employed. This
series is more procyclical than business income per hour for all self-employed.
Its elasticity with respect to real GDP is 0.28 (s.e. 0.27), whereas the measure for
all self-employed is slightly countercyclical. The first column of Table 6 repeats
column 3 from Table 5, while Table 6, column 2, measures productivity by
business income per hour for those not incorporated. The wedge becomes less
countercyclical, with an elasticity with respect to real GDP of -1.57 (s.e. 0.22).
Nevertheless, the self-employed labor wedge remains nearly as cyclical as that
for all workers (Table 5, column 1).
       A second robustness exercise considers that the self-employed are
distributed differently across industries than are wage earners. For instance,
self-employment is about twice as frequent in construction, a highly cyclical
industry, than overall.             Self-employment is less common in durable
manufacturing, which is also highly cyclical. We constructed a self-employed
labor wedge reweighting observations by industry so that the weighted shares
of the self-employed by industry mimic those for all workers. We do this for 12
major industries.        For example, if self-employment is twice as frequent in
construction, then the self-employed in construction are down-weighted by a
factor of one-half. The results are given in Table 6, column 3. The cyclicality of
the self-employed wedge is modestly reduced. The elasticity is now -1.64 (s.e.
0.29) with respect to real GDP. Again, the wedge remains nearly as cyclical as
  21
     In addition to these exercises, we checked how our results change if the self-employed
supply labor more elastically or are more willing to substitute consumption across time than are
other workers. With a Frisch elasticity of 1.0 rather than 0.5, the elasticity of the self-employed
wedge with respect to real GDP is -1.69. With an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 1.0
rather than 0.5, the self-employed wedge cyclical elasticity is -1.33. In both cases, the elasticity
of the self-employed wedge is a significant portion of the overall wedge (-1.87).
                     RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                   25



                 Table 6: Labor Wedge, Self-Employed Alternatives



 Elasticity wrt         (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)


   Real GDP        -1.97 (0.21)      -1.57 (0.22)        -1.64 (0.29)        -1.64 (0.40)


   Total hours     -1.29 (0.14)      -1.03 (0.18)        -1.03 (0.18)        -1.17 (0.30)




 MPN                 SE inc/hr     Uninc SE inc/hr        SE inc/hr           SE inc/hr


 Industry                                                All workers       Upweight SE
                     SE in CPS        SE in CPS
 Weighting                                                 in CPS          w/ employees


   Notes: The labor wedge constructed according to equation (2). Sample is based
   on matched March CPS self-employed outside government and agriculture. CPS
   observations are weighted. Each cell represents a separate regression. Regressions have
   24 annual observations, 1987–1993 and 1996–2012. Newey-West standard errors are
   in parentheses. For all columns: weekly hours for the self-employed, and NIPA PCE
   consumption.




for all workers.22
       Another possible concern is that some self-employed might contract with
just a single buyer. If so, perhaps they are quasi-employees, with their price
setting resembling wage setting.          For many self-employed we believe this
depiction is implausible, for instance owners of repair shops or professionals

  22
    As discussed in Section 2, if the calibration is misspecified by ignoring countercyclical
home production, this can impart some cyclicality to the labor wedge (Karabarbounis, 2014b).
Might this misspecification fall disproportionately on the self-employed? This would require
that the self-employed have a comparative advantage in home production. Since the self-
employed exhibit higher average market earnings, they would need to be even more able at
home production.
26                                BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



such as plumbers and doctors. As a barometer of whether a self-employed
person is likely to be independent rather than a quasi-employee, we use
whether they have employees of their own.                Our presumption is that a
self-employed person with their own workforce is less likely to be a
quasi-employee.        Beginning with the 2014 March CPS supplement, the
self-employed are asked if they have paid employees.23 Based on these 2014
and 2015 CPS supplements, we contrast the fraction of self-employed with
employees across the 12 major industries, further broken down by three
occupational classifications.       These are (1) managers and proprietors, (2)
professionals, craftsmen, and operatives, and (3) clerical, sales, service
workers, and laborers. Overall, 27 percent of the self-employed report having
employees. It is highest in retailing at 47 percent. (Across industry/occupations
it varies from 7 percent to 70 percent.)
       For the last column of Table 6 we reweight the self-employed for our 1987 to
2012 sample, based on their industry/occupation cell, by the share of
self-employed with employees in those cells in the 2014-2015 March
supplements. That is, we weight observations only to the extent they reflect
industries/occupations where the self-employed employ workers.                        The
cyclicality of the self-employed wedge is reduced, but quite modestly. The
elasticity is -1.64 (s.e. 0.40) with respect to real GDP, nearly as cyclical as for all
workers from Table 5.
       We conclude that the self-employed exhibit a highly countercyclical labor
wedge.24 Depending on the specification, it is either as cyclical as the wedge for
all workers or nearly so. Because this wedge is presumably not driven by wage
or other labor market distortions, it is evidence of a highly countercyclical price
markups. By extension, we find it suggestive of countercyclical price markups

  23
     We merge the 2014 and 2015 March supplements with the basic March files, so the sample
here reflects self-employed whose survey months 4 and 8 coincide with the March supplement.
The sample size is 2,121.
  24
     As shown in the Online Appendix, this finding is robust to detrending our data using
Hamilton’s (forthcoming) method rather than the HP filter.
                       RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                  27


for the overall economy, assuming the cyclicality of price markups is similar for
owner/operators as for other firms.



4         Intermediate Inputs

The conventional way to estimate price markups (µp ) is based on the inverse
labor share of income, such as Karabarbounis (2014a). But any input with a
well-measured marginal product and marginal price can be used to infer
marginal cost and thus price markups. Here we investigate intermediate inputs
— materials, energy, and services.
         Intermediate inputs are promising for several reasons. First, intermediates
are used by all industries. Second, adjustment costs for intermediates are
believed to be low relative to adjustment costs for capital or even labor. See
Basu (1995), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), and De Loecker and Warzynski
(2012).        Third, the assumption of no overhead component seems more
defensible for intermediates than for labor.25
         One question is whether intermediate prices reflect the marginal cost of
intermediate inputs. Long-term relationships between firms and suppliers
could raise the same implicit contracting issues that arise with labor. Still,
intermediates offer an independent piece of evidence vis-à-vis labor. And, as
with labor, one would expect price smoothing relative to true input costs to
impart a procyclical bias to the estimated µp . See Carlton (1986) for evidence
and arguments along this line.



4.1         Technology for Gross Output

We assume a CES production function for gross output in an industry:
    25
    In any case, an overhead component of intermediates would actually reinforce our findings,
just like overhead labor would do. With overhead inputs, variable inputs are more procyclical
than total inputs, so that marginal cost is more procyclical than suggested by total inputs – and
price markups, in turn, are more countercyclical.
28                                BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



                                                                                   ε
             "                     h                               ω
                                                                 i ω−1 1− 1ε   # ε−1
                    1                      1                   1
         y = θm1− ε     + (1 − θ) zv αk 1− ω + (1 − α)(zn n)1− ω

where y denotes gross output, m intermediate inputs, k capital, and n labor.
Technology shocks can be specific to value added (zv ) or labor (zn ). The elasticity
of substitution between intermediates and value added is ε, and the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor within value added is ω.
     With this technology, the marginal product of intermediates is

                                       ∂y     y  1ε
                                          =θ          .
                                       ∂m     m
Based on this marginal product, we can estimate price markups as

                                                            y
                                                                 1ε
                                            p      pθ
                                µp =         ∂y =          m
                                                                       .                (7)
                                       pm    ∂m
                                                           pm


     In the special case of Cobb-Douglas aggregation of intermediates and value
added (ε = 1), the price markup is the inverse of intermediates’ share:

                                                  θpy
                                         µp =          .
                                                  pm m

     A higher price-cost markup boosts gross output relative to spending on
intermediates. This is analogous to using inverse labor’s share to measure price
markup movements. Note one must assume Cobb-Douglas production in
labor and intermediates to estimate markups from the inverse labor share in
value added, as we did in Section 2.                  If production is Cobb-Douglas in
intermediates and value added, then a countercyclical markup would show up
as a procyclical intermediate inputs share.
     Although an overhead component to intermediates is unlikely, one may still
be concerned about fixed costs of production. Suppose yt = ft − Γ, where ft is
our CES production function and Γ is a fixed cost. In the Cobb-Douglas case,
                     RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                 29

                                              
this would imply µpt = θ pmt
                          p t yt
                              mt
                                   1+     Γ
                                          yt
                                                   . Thus, if fixed costs are important, our
estimates will understate the countercyclicality of price markups.


4.2      Evidence on the Cyclicality of Intermediate Inputs

We use the BLS’s Multifactor Productivity Database on industry gross output
and KLEMS inputs (capital, labor, energy, materials, and services). The KLEMS
dataset is annual from 1987 to 2012, covering 60 industries, including 42 outside
of manufacturing. Other studies of the cyclicality of intermediates (Basu 1995,
Vaona 2016, and Kim 2015) have focused on manufacturing, but manufacturing
constitutes only about 12 percent of U.S. GDP. Furthermore, the KLEMS data
reflect significant revising of industry GDP accounts by the BEA, starting about a
decade ago, to much more reliably divide industry output between value added
and intermediate purchases.26
       Figure 4 plots the weighted-average KLEMS industry intermediate share
from 1987–2012. It fluctuates but exhibits no clear trend. If the production
elasticity for intermediates is stable, this is consistent with no trend in the
price-cost markup. This is somewhat surprising in light of De Loecker and
Eeckhout (2017), who infer sharply rising markups in recent decades. Their
sample is Compustat firms, whereas KLEMS is based on listed and unlisted
firms alike. Moreover, our evidence is for intermediate share alone, whereas
theirs is for a combination of labor and intermediate share (cost of goods sold).
       Figure 5 plots the weighted-average KLEMS industry intermediate share
against GDP, where both variables are in logs and HP-filtered.                   As shown,
  26
    The KLEMS dataset incorporates data from a number of BLS and BEA programs. See BLS
Handbook of Methods, Chapter 11 (http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch11.pdf ) for a
description of methodology. Thanks to improvements in Census data collection on output
and intermediates, in August 2010 KLEMS data became available beyond manufacturing. See
Harper et al. (2010) for details. The comprehensive revision of BEA methods, improving
measures of intermediates, is outlined in Moyer et al. (2004). These improvements are not
captured in data based solely on the Annual Surveys of Manufacturing (ASM), employed in
a number of papers. KLEMS is also preferred to ASM because its division of gross output
between value added and intermediates adjusts for intra-industry purchases and better reflects
accumulation of inventories.
30                                  BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



                     Figure 4: Aggregate Intermediate Share




spending on intermediates relative to gross output is highly procyclical in the
KLEMS data. In the Cobb-Douglas case of ε = 1, a procyclical intermediate
share implies a countercyclical markup.
     To explore the cyclicality of markups more systematically, we next run
regressions of the intermediate-based price markup on the cycle. Based on
equation (7), the specification is

                                          1ε !
                          pit       yit
                   log                             = αi + β p log(cyct ) + it ,
                         pmit       mit

where cyct is either real GDP or hours worked, and all variables are HP-filtered.
The industry fixed effects (αi ) should take out changes in the aggregate share
due to shifting industry composition over the cycle. We weight industries by the
average share of their value added in all industry value added from 1987 to 2012.
Standard errors are clustered by year.
     Table 7 presents the results. Consider first the case of ε = 1, for which
production is Cobb-Douglas in intermediates and value added. The price
                      RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                     31



                       Figure 5: Cyclicality of Intermediate Share




markup is estimated to be highly countercyclical.                     This is true for both
measures of the cycle (based on GDP or total hours worked), for all industries
together, and separately for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries.
Though not reported in the table, it is also true if we weight by annual
Tornqvist value-added shares rather than shares over the entire sample, and if
we use growth rates rather than HP-filtered series.
       For manufacturing, we can break intermediate inputs into materials,
energy, and services. As Table 7 shows, the inverse shares for materials and
energy are both countercyclical, and significantly so. In contrast, the inverse
share of spending on services is procyclical, perhaps because services are
contracted less in spot markets than materials or energy.27
       It is often argued that it is tough to substitute between intermediates and
value added. Bruno (1984) and Rotemberg and Woodford (1996) estimate

  27
    Outside manufacturing, we can only break intermediates into these components for the
period 1997–2012. For all industries together, the inverse services share is acyclical, whereas the
inverse shares of materials and energy are countercyclical.
32                                BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



           Table 7: Cyclicality of Price Markups Using Intermediates


                                     ε=1                                  ε = 0.75
 Elasticity wrt →          GDP               Hours                 GDP               Hours
 All Industries        -0.94 (0.24)      -0.59 (0.15)          -1.20 (0.31)      -0.75 (0.19)
     NonMfg.           -0.94 (0.24)      -0.57 (0.16)          -1.24 (0.32)      -0.76 (0.21)
     Manufacturing     -0.95 (0.32)      -0.65 (0.20)          -1.04 (0.39)      -0.71 (0.24)
      Materials        -1.56 (0.52)      -1.03 (0.32)          -1.78 (0.63)      -1.15 (0.40)
      Services         1.49 (0.68)         0.93 (0.43)         1.90 (0.87)        1.16 (0.56)
      Energy           -1.97 (1.05)      -1.58 (0.69)          -2.38 (1.42)      -1.98 (0.90)

Note: Each entry is from a separate regression. Annual data are from 1987 to 2012 for 60
industries (1560 industry-year observations): 18 manufacturing and 42 nonmanufacturing.
All variables are in logs and HP-filtered. Regressions include industry fixed effects and use
industry average value-added shares as weights. Standard errors are clustered by year.




elasticities of 0.45 and 0.69, respectively, for U.S. manufacturing. Oberfield and
Raval (2014) obtain estimates ranging from 0.63 to 0.90 by looking across
regions in U.S. Manufacturing, while Atalay (2017) estimates an elasticity of
0.5, but with large standard errors. We therefore report results using ε = 3/4 in
Table 7.    A smaller elasticity makes the µp based on intermediates more
countercyclical.     Because firms shift toward intermediates in booms, the
marginal product of intermediates falls faster if substitutability is limited,
making marginal cost more procyclical. Thus the price-cost markup implied
by intermediate inputs becomes more countercyclical.
     In the KLEMS data, both the price and quantity of intermediates are
procyclical relative to labor, if one uses average hourly earnings (AHE) as the
price of labor. The elasticity of pm /w with respect to real GDP is 0.65 (standard
error 0.16), while the elasticity of m/n with respect to real GDP is 1.19 (standard
error 0.37). Why do firms shift toward intermediates, over labor, in booms if
                                RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                      33


intermediates become relatively expensive?                                        One answer is that AHE
understates cyclicality in the price of labor, perhaps because of wage
smoothing, with labor’s price even more procyclical than that of intermediates.
That implies a much more procyclical marginal cost and, in turn, a much more
countercyclical markup than judged by AHE.
       What share of the labor wedge might be accounted for by the µp we obtain
from intermediates? To answer this, we construct an industry-specific labor
wedge that is consistent with our gross output production function. We replace
aggregate labor productivity nv with nominal gross output per hour in each
                                

KLEMS industry (relative to the consumption deflator).                                     We also consider
preferences that allow for an industry-specific marginal rate of substitution.28
The industry-i (intensive margin) labor wedge is thus

                              pi mpnint                   pi nvii                                mpnint
                                                                                               
                                     i                                        yi  1    hi
        µint
               
 ln      i         = ln                       = ln                      + ln     − ln     + ln            .
                              p mrsint
                                    i                      p nv               vi  η    h         mrsint

This industry labor wedge differs from the aggregate labor wedge in three
possible ways. Value added per hour could be more or less cyclical in the
KLEMS industries than GDP per hour (the first term on the right side). The
cyclicality of gross output may differ from value added (the second term).
Finally, hours worked per worker, and thus the mrs, could be more (or less)
cyclical for the KLEMS industries than for all industries (the third term).
       Table 8 presents the cyclical elasticities. The KLEMS industry wedge has a
smaller elasticity (-0.89 with respect to GDP) than the aggregate IMW (-1.91)
from Section 2.                  Why?         Nominal value-added labor productivity is more
procyclical in the KLEMS industries than GDP per hour (cyclical elasticity with
respect to GDP of 0.33), and gross output is more procyclical than value added
                                   y
(cyclical elasticity of            v
                                       with respect to GDP of 0.49). Workweeks — which are
                                                                                
                                                  1−1/σ                   1+1/η
                                                                                                    mrsint
                                  P∞                                                                      
  28                                      t       ct          P          hit
    Preferences are E0 t=0 β               −      1−1/σ             i ν  1+1/η + ψ eit and thus ln mrsit
                                                                                                       int   =
                                                                                   t
              
1    hit         eit
η ln ht   + ln et . In the Online Appendix we consider alternative preferences, alternative
technology (e.g., ε 6= 1), and the extensive margin.
34                                  BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



industry-specific and thus affect the all-industry, manufacturing, and
nonmanufacturing wedges in different ways — account for the remainder.29


              Table 8: Cyclicality of the Intensive Margin Labor Wedge


                                                      Elasticity wrt
                                                   GDP         Total Hours
                   All industries              -0.89 (0.26)    -0.59 (0.13)
                   Manufacturing               -0.72 (0.39)    -0.39 (0.20)
                   Nonmanufacturing            -0.93 (0.24)    -0.65 (0.12)

       Note: Each entry is from a separate regression. Annual data are from 1987 to
       2012 for 60 industries (1560 industry-year observations): 18 manufacturing and 42
       nonmanufacturing. All variables are in logs and HP-filtered. Regressions include
       industry fixed effects and use industry average value-added shares as weights.
       Standard errors are clustered by year.




       Comparing Tables 7 and 8, the intermediates-based µp accounts for
essentially all of the cyclical labor wedge.30                 Figure 6 provides visual
corroboration        by    plotting    the    weighted-average         industry      (inverse)
intermediate share against the labor wedge, constructed for ε = 1.31
       When we consider ε = 0.75, µp becomes more countercyclical in Table 7. At
the same time, a smaller ε makes the labor wedge less countercyclical because
firms shift away from value added (labor) in booms. Thus price-cost markups
  29
     Because some of our industries only have workweek data starting in 1990, we use the
aggregate average workweek from 1987 through 2012, which had an elasticity with respect to
GDP of 0.32 (s.e. 0.03), adjusted by the relative elasticity of industry-specific workweeks to
the aggregate from 1990 through 2012. These elasticities are 0.32 (s.e. 0.03) for the aggregate,
0.22 (s.e. 0.04) for all KLEMS industries, 0.41 (0.08) for manufacturing KLEMS industries, and
0.16 (0.04) for non-manufacturing KLEMS industries. Online Appendix Table A1 reports the
cyclicality of the labor wedge using a common workweek for all industries (i.e., omitting the
industry-specific adjustments).
  30
     As shown in the Online Appendix, this finding is robust to detrending our data using
Hamilton’s (forthcoming) method rather than the HP filter.
  31
     The labor wedge in Figure 6 is constructed using the aggregate average workweek. Using
industry-specific workweeks produces similar plots beginning in 1990 rather than 1987.
                   RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                         35



             Figure 6: Intermediates-based µp vs. the Labor Wedge




loom even larger relative to the labor wedge if intermediates and value added
have more limited substitutability.
   The results above are at the level of 60 industries, reflecting the industry
makeup of the KLEMS dataset. We see the KLEMS data as the preferred source
for examining the cyclicality of intermediates because it extends beyond
manufacturing and incorporates the highest quality industry information,
especially on intermediates. One question that arises is whether the strong
cyclicality in the intermediate share occurs at the plant level, or instead reflects
a compositional shift of output toward plants with high intermediate shares
during booms.       For manufacturing, plant-level statistics from the U.S.
Longitudinal Research Database (LRD), which is based on the Census of
Manufacturing and Annual Survey of Manufacturing, are reported in
Garcia-Macia et al. (2016). Though not directly comparable to KLEMS, one can
check whether high intermediate share plants are more cyclical in the LRD
moments.
36                               BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



       Across plants j within each industry i, one can construct the standard
intermediate share as
                            P
                             j∈i pmjt mjt
                                             X pyjt yjt pmjt mjt
                      sit = P              =             ·         .
                              j∈i pyjt yjt   j∈i
                                                 pyit yit pyjt yjt

       For contrast, one can construct a fixed-composition intermediate share as

                                          X pyjt yjt
                                 s̄it =                    · s̄jC ,
                                          j∈i
                                                pyit yit

where s̄jC denotes the average intermediate share for plant j across the Census
years in which it operates. Note that s̄jC only uses the most reliable LRD
components, namely intermediates in Census years and gross output in all
years.32 If gross output shares are no more cyclical for high intermediate share
plants, then s̄it should not project on the business cycle.
       The LRD moments for 1987–2010 include s̄it for 17 industries that closely
correspond to KLEMS industries.                 A regression of the s̄it ’s on the cyclical
component of log GDP, controlling for industry effects, shows that the fixed
composition intermediate shares are indeed procyclical. Comparing these
estimates to Table 7, about one-third of the procyclical intermediate share at
the industry level in manufacturing reflects plant composition, and the
remaining two-thirds can be attributed to within-plant movements.                    If we
remove this compositional component, we still find that the lion’s share of
cyclicality in the labor wedge for manufacturing can be ascribed to price
markups.




  32
   Other than the Census years 1992, 1997, 2002, and 2007, LRD coverage of intermediate
inputs does not include purchased services. Identification of intermediate inputs in non-
Census years is considered sparse and of lower quality (Moyer et al., 2004).
                  RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                     37


5    Discussion and Relationship to Literature

How does our work relate to other attempts at measuring the cyclicality of
price markups? The challenge is capturing cyclicality in the marginal cost of
production.    Researchers must make assumptions about firm production
functions in order to infer marginal cost from quantities and prices of inputs
and output. Marginal cost should be equated across input margins, so one can
consider the cost of increasing output via any input.      Many studies have
focused on labor — for example, Bils (1987), Rotemberg and Woodford (1999),
and Nekarda and Ramey (2013).
    Labor’s share of income — the average price of labor divided by its average
product — often serves as the baseline measure of marginal cost, with
corrections made to address concerns that average prices and products may
not equal marginal ones. We argued in Section 2 that using wage data to infer
the marginal price of labor may be especially fraught with difficulty, and
subsequently eschewed wage data altogether by examining self-employed
labor as well as intermediate inputs.
    Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) pointed out that one could use
intermediate inputs to infer markups. Basu (1995) found that quantities of
intermediate inputs rose relative to real output in expansions, but did not
explore relative price movements. The work of Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1989) on relative price movements for broad categories suggested the relative
price of intermediates was likely to be procyclical.       By looking at the
intermediate share of income, we combine quantities and prices to obtain a
measure of marginal cost in Section 4. We also consider a more recent sample
and more disaggregated industries.
    Like us, Vaona (2016) uses total intermediate inputs to estimate markups.
His sample is 1959–1996 U.S. manufacturing industries, and he estimates the
marginal product of intermediates nonparametrically.       He emphasizes the
response of industry markups to the industry cycle. Our focus is on how
38                                  BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



average industry markups respond to the aggregate cycle. We provide evidence
beyond manufacturing, adjust for the composition of industries (and even
plants within manufacturing), and compare it to the overall labor wedge
quantitatively.
      Kim (2015) estimates markup fluctuations from 1958 to 2009 for
manufacturing industries from spending on energy intermediates. Energy is a
fairly small component of our KLEMS intermediates: for 2010, it constituted
only 4.4 percent of total intermediate spending in manufacturing, 6.2 percent
in other industries. For his sample, Kim estimates that markups increase with
the industry cycle. He includes year fixed effects, so his results are silent on the
movement of markups over the aggregate cycle. If we similarly consider only
energy spending in manufacturing, for our 1987–2012 sample we find energy’s
share of gross output is procyclical and estimate a countercyclical price
markup across a wide range of elasticities of substitution.
      Other researchers have also used approaches that do not require wage data.
Galeotti and Schiantarelli (1998) measure marginal cost using capital inputs.
Like our approach, this requires assumptions on the production function to
infer a marginal product (of capital, in this case). In addition, they must take a
stand on the stochastic discount factor, because the marginal price (i.e., rental
rate) of capital is not directly observable but depends on both today’s
acquisition price of capital and tomorrow’s expected discounted price.33 They
find evidence of countercyclical markups.
      Hall (2014) considers a model in which advertising shifts the static demand
curve faced by a firm. If the markup is high, then the firm will want to advertise
more. The model implies that the ratio of advertising expenditures to revenue is
proportional to the markup. Since the advertising expenditure share is acyclical
in the data, Hall concludes that markups are also acyclical.
      Alternative models of advertising will have different implications for
markups. In the Online Appendix we show that, if advertising affects consumer
 33
      They incorporate adjustment costs, requiring a further functional form assumption.
                     RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                                   39


reservation prices rather than shifting quantity demanded, then changes to the
price elasticity of demand have no effect on the advertising expenditure share,
but do cause markup changes.               A second alteration that breaks the tight
contemporaneous link between advertising expenditures and markups is when
advertising affects future demand (e.g., Bagwell, 2007). Some evidence that
advertising is a durable investment is provided by Campello, Graham, and
Harvey (2010). They report that planned marketing expenditures fell much
more for financially constrained firms than for unconstrained firms during the
Great Recession.34
       Another approach, pursued by Bils and Kahn (2000) and Kryvtsov and
Midrigan (2013), exploits the close theoretical relationship between markups
and finished goods inventories. Consider a firm’s decision to add a unit of
finished inventories. If the additional unit is sold in the current period, the net
benefit is the markup of price over marginal cost. If the additional unit is not
sold, the net benefit is the expected discounted ratio of future to current real
marginal cost (the firm will not have to produce as much in the future). If the
markup is low, holding all else equal, the benefit of holding inventories is
smaller and the firm will reduce its inventories relative to sales.
       Note, however, that empirically all else might not be equal. In particular,
both papers must proxy for how firms’ discount rates vary over the cycle. It also
necessary to capture any cyclicality in the elasticity of sales with respect to
                                                              ∂ sales
inventories. Importantly, both studies assume              ∂ inventories
                                                                           is a time-invariant
function of the sales-to-inventory ratio.35 Given their assumptions and a highly
procyclical sales-to-inventory ratio in the data, both studies conclude that
markups must be countercyclical.
       In the Online Appendix we consider work-in-process (WIP) inventories and
  34
      Hall (2014) does consider a dynamic model, with an annual depreciation rate of 60 percent
for advertising. Because he maintains a constant discount factor, however, there is no channel
from high discounting to reduced advertising during the Great Recession.
   35
      Bils and Kahn (2000) assume the elasticity of sales to inventories is constant, whereas in
Kryvtsov and Midrigan’s (2013) model, which features demand uncertainty, the probability of a
stock-out is a constant function of the ratio of inventories to expected demand.
40                              BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



again infer countercyclical markups. The intuition for the relationship between
inventories and markups is similar to that described above. If markups are high
(i.e., real marginal costs low) relative to the future, a firm should shift production
from tomorrow to today and increase its stock of WIP inventories. The WIP
framework is somewhat simpler than that for finished goods: only the relative
(intertemporal) markup appears rather than both the relative markup and the
level of the markup. Also, one does not need to take a stand on how inventories
affect sales, but instead on how WIP inventories enter the production function.
     In summary, these other nonwage approaches to measuring price markups,
with the possible exception of Hall (2014), yield results broadly consistent with
our own:     namely, countercyclical markups.          However, they all involve
dynamics, requiring one to measure any adjustment costs and the stochastic
discount factor. Our self-employed and intermediates approaches, on the
other hand, require only static measurements.



6     Conclusion
Hours worked fall more in recessions than can be explained by optimal changes
in labor supply in response to real labor productivity. This labor wedge could
reflect distortions in the labor market (e.g., sticky wages) and/or distortions in
the product market (e.g., sticky prices).
     Research has increasingly focused on problems in labor markets, in
particular for firms hiring workers. Using average hourly earnings, the labor
wedge seems to arise between the cost of labor to firms and the value of jobs to
workers. But this inference could be mistaken if the true cost of labor to firms is
more cyclical than average hourly earnings. If labor’s price is measured instead
by the wages of new hires or the user cost of labor, then the resulting labor
wedge occurs mostly between the cost of labor and real labor productivity.
     To bring new evidence to bear on this debate, we estimated the product
market component of the labor wedge without relying on workers’ wages. First,
                   RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                          41


we looked at the self-employed. The labor wedge appears nearly as cyclical for
the self-employed as for wage earners, even though sticky wages and matching
frictions should not be barriers to the self-employed working more hours. The
hours of the self-employed appear to fall in recessions because of difficulty, or
reluctance, in selling their output (for example, because of sticky prices).
Second, we presented evidence on intermediate inputs. In recent recessions,
prices rise relative to the level of marginal cost we infer from intermediate
prices and quantities.      Again, this suggests that firms face difficulty in
converting production into revenue during recessions. We stress that these two
approaches rely on completely different data sources (households vs.
industries).
   Our point estimates imply that the labor wedge’s cyclical variation reflects
product market distortions as opposed to labor market distortions. We cannot
reject that labor market distortions matter, though they appear less important
than has been inferred using data on average hourly earnings. Our evidence is
consistent with a price of labor that is at least as cyclical as the new hire wage.
   Our evidence does not determine the exact nature of these product market
distortions, which is critical for informing stabilization policy. One explanation
would be price stickiness that constrains sales.              Another would be
countercyclical desired markups. (See Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999, for a
review.) If producing has an investment component (e.g., the customer base
model in Gilchrist et al., 2017), then tightening financial constraints could
make firms raise prices relative to marginal cost in recessions as they cut such
investments. Our evidence is also consistent with models where expanding
production puts firms in a riskier position, and risk (or risk avoidance)
heightens during recessions (e.g., Arellano et al., 2012).
   Our findings are also relevant for the puzzle of unemployment’s high
cyclicality relative to labor productivity — the Shimer (2005) puzzle. A highly
countercyclical price markup translates into strongly procyclical labor
demand, beyond what might be attributed to labor productivity. It provides a
42                                 BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



rationale for firms to create less employment in recessions without a decline in
productivity, and even absent important wage stickiness.



References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 2013, 121 (3), 437–492.

Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai, and Patrick Kehoe, “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in
  Volatility,” July 2012. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 466.

Atalay, Enghin, “How Important are Sectoral Shocks?,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (4), 254–280.

Bagwell, Kyle, “The Economic Analysis of Advertising,” in M. Armstrong and R. Porter,
  eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3, 2007, chapter 28, pp. 1701–1844.

Barro, Robert, “Long-term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 1977, 3 (3), 305–316.

Barron, John M., Mark C. Berger, and Dan A. Black, “Do Workers Pay for On-the-Job
  Training?,” Journal of Human Resources, 1999, 34 (2), 235–252.

Basu, Susanto, “Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for Productivity
  and Welfare,” American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (3), 512–531.

     and Christopher L. House, “Allocative and Remitted Wages: New Facts and
  Challenges for Keynesian Models,” in J.B. Taylor and H. Uhlig, eds., Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, 2016, chapter 6, pp. 297–354.

Bellou, Andriana and Baris Kaymak, “Real Wage Growth over the Business Cycle:
  Contractual versus Spot Markets,” 2012. Unpublished manuscript.

Bils, Mark, “The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price,” American Economic
  Review, 1987, 77 (5), 838–855.
                    RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                        43


   and James A. Kahn, “What Inventory Behavior Tells Us about Business Cycles,”
  American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (3), 458–481.

  , Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin, “Testing for Keynesian Labor Demand,” in
  D. Acemoglu, M. Woodford, and J. Parker, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012,
  Vol. 27, 2013, pp. 311–349.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galı́, “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy:        A
  New Keynesian Model with Unemployment,”            American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (2), 1–30.

Bruno, Michael, “Raw Materials, Profits and the Productivity Slowdown,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1984, 99 (1), 1–30.

Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, “The Real Effects
  of Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2010, 97 (3), 470–487.

Carlton, Dennis W., “The Rigidity of Prices,” The American Economic Review, 1986, 76
  (4), 637–658.

Chang, Yongsung, Sun-Bin Kim, Kyooho Kwon, and Richard Rogerson, “Individual
  and Aggregate Labor Supply in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy with Intensive and
  Extensive Margins,” April 2014. Unpublished manuscript.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Business Cycle Accounting,”
  Econometrica, 2007, 75 (3), 781–836.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber, “Does Indivisible Labor
  Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of
  Extensive Margin Elasticities,” in D. Acemoglu, M. Woodford, and J. Parker, eds.,
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012, Vol. 27, 2013, pp. 1–56.

Galeotti, Marzio and Fabio Schiantarelli, “The Cyclicality of Markups in a Model
  with Adjustment Costs: Econometric Evidence for US Industry,” Oxford Bulletin of
  Economics and Statistics, 1998, 60 (2), 121–142.
44                              BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



Galı́, Jordi, “Monetary Policy and Unemployment,” in B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford,
  eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, 2011, chapter 10, pp. 487–546.

  , Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido, “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare Costs of
  Business Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (1), 44–59.

Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J. Klenow, “How Destructive is
  Innovation?,” December 2016. NBER WP 22953.

Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, “Inflation Dynamics
  During the Financial Crisis,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3), 785–823.

Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag, and Thijs van Rens, “Wage Rigidity and Job
  Creation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (8), 887–899.

Hall, Robert E., “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (1), S223–250.

  , “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the Marginal
  Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (2), 281–323.

  , “What the Cyclical Response of Advertising Reveals about Markups and Other
  Macroeconomic Wedges,” April 2014. Unpublished manuscript.

Ham, John C. and Kevin T. Reilly, “Implicit Contracts, Life Cycle Labor Supply, and
  Intertemporal Substitution,” International Economic Review, 2013, 54 (4), 1133–1158.

Hamilton, James D., “Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott filter,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.

Harper, Michael J, Bhavani Khandrika, Randal Kinoshita, and Steven Rosenthal,
  “Nonmanufacturing industry contributions to multifactor productivity, 1987–2006,”
  Monthly Labor Review, 2010, 133 (6), 16–31.

Heim, Bradley T., “Understanding Self-Employment Dynamics Among Individuals Near
  Retirement,” April 2014. Unpublished manuscript.
                    RESURRECTING THE PRODUCT MARKET WEDGE                           45


Hipple, Steven F., “Self-employment in the United States,” BLS Monthly Labor Review,
  2010, 133 (9), 17–32.

Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjmain Pugsley, “Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms?
  Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self Employed,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2014, 96 (1), 19–33.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, “The Labor Wedge: MRS vs. MPN,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 2014a, 17 (2), 206–223.

  , “Home Production, Labor Wedges, and International Business Cycles,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 2014b, 64, 68–84.

Kim, Ryan, “Price-Cost Markup Cyclicality: New Evidence and Implications,” August
  2015. Unpublished manuscript.

Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Virgiliu Midrigan, “Inventories, Markups, and Real Rigidities in
  Menu Cost Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (1), 249–276.

Kudlyak, Marianna, “The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2014, 68, 53–67.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
  Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317–341.

Loecker, Jan De and Frederic Warzynski, “Markups and firm-level export status,” The
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2437–2471.

  and Jan Eeckhout, “The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implications,”
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 23687 2017.

Moyer, Brian C, Mark A Planting, Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, and Sherlene KS Lum,
  “Preview of the comprehensive revision of the annual industry accounts: Integrating
  input-output accounts and gross-domestic-product-by-industry accounts,” Survey
  of Current Business, 2004, 84 (3), 38–51.

Mulligan, Casey B., “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions,” 2002. NBER WP 8774.
46                                BILS, KLENOW, MALIN



  , The Redistribution Recession:      How Labor Market Distortions Contracted the
  Economy, Oxford University Press, 2012.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Building Blocks of Market
  Clearing Business Cycle Models,” in O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds., NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 1989, 1989), volume = 4,, pp. 247–302.

Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost
  Markup,” 2013. NBER WP 19099.

Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval, “Micro Data and Macro Technology,” May 2014.
  Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2012-11.

Pissarides, Christopher A., “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness
  the Answer?,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1339–1369.

Rosen, Sherwin, “Implicit Contracts: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1985, 23
  (3), 1144–1175.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, “Imperfect Competition and the Effects of
  Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
  1996, 28 (4), 550–577.

     and   , “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs,” in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford,
  eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1B, 1999, pp. 1051–1135.

Saporta-Eksten, Itay, “Job Loss, Consumption and Unemployment Insurance,” October
  2014. Unpublished manuscript.

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
  American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 25–49.

  , “Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 280–297.

Vaona, Andrea, “A Nonparametric Panel Data Approach to the Cyclical Dynamics of
  Price-Cost Margins in the Fourth Kondratieff Wave,” Eurasian Business Review, 2016,
  6 (2), 155–170.
