NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PRICE OF STABILITY:
THE BALANCE SHEET POLICY OF THE BANQUE DE FRANCE AND THE GOLD STANDARD (1880-1914)
Guillaume Bazot
Michael D. Bordo
Eric Monnet
Working Paper 20554
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20554
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We are grateful from comments from Vincent Bignon, Rui Esteves, Antoine Parent, Angelo Riva,
Philippe de Rougemont, Pierre Sicsic, Paul Sharp, Stefano Ungaro, François Velde, as well as seminar
participants at the University of South Danemark, Sciences Po Lyon, Federal Reserve of Atlanta and
Banque de France. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Bank of France, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Guillaume Bazot, Michael D. Bordo, and Eric Monnet. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Price of Stability: The balance sheet policy of the Banque de France and the Gold Standard
(1880-1914)
Guillaume Bazot, Michael D. Bordo, and Eric Monnet
NBER Working Paper No. 20554
October 2014
JEL No. E42,E43,E50,E58,N13,N23
ABSTRACT
Under the classical gold standard (1880-1914), the Bank of France maintained a stable discount rate
while the Bank of England changed its rate very frequently. Why did the policies of these central banks,
the two pillars of the gold standard, differ so much? How did the Bank of France manage to keep a
stable rate and continuously violate the “rules of the game”? This paper tackles these questions and
shows that the domestic asset portfolio of the Bank of France played a crucial role in smoothing
international shocks and in maintaining the stability of the discount rate. This policy provides a striking
example of a central bank that uses its balance sheet to block the interest rate channel and protect
the domestic economy from international constraints (Mundell’s trilemma).
Guillaume Bazot
Université Paris 8
bureau D116
2 rue de la Liberté
93200 Saint Denis
France
gbazot@gmail.com
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Eric Monnet
Bank of France
46-1383 DGEI-DCPM-DIACONJ
31 rue Croix des Petits Champs
75049 Paris Cedex 01
France
eric.monnet@banque-france.fr

The Price of Stability.
The balance sheet policy of the Banque de France and the Gold Standard
(1880‐1914)
September 2014

Guillaume Bazot (University Paris 8), Michael D. Bordo (Rutgers University and NBER) and Eric
Monnet (Banque de France)

The textbook account of the classical gold standard emphasizes the crucial role of the “rules of
the game” in international adjustments. In a deficit country, the central bank would use discount-rate
policy and open-market interventions to raise interest rates and tighten credit. In the surplus country, it
would lower the interest rate and expand credit. As a consequence, two components of the “rules of the
game” should be observed in central banks’ practices (Whale 1937, Nurske 1944, Bloomfield 1959):
first, the central bank should raise the discount rate when their gold reserves decrease, and, second,
central banks should not sterilize, that is, expand (or reduce) domestic assets to offset outflows (or
inflows) of gold. The adherence to the rules implies that domestic assets of central banks are positively
correlated with international assets but negatively correlated with the domestic interest rate.
The Banque de France, one of the main pillars of the classical gold standard along with the
Bank of England and the Reichsbank,1 continuously violated the two components of the rules of the
games. First, the official discount rate remained flat. Such a peculiar behavior was the subject of many
discussions by contemporaries in France and other countries alike and it has always been treated as a
curiosity in the subsequent literature on French monetary policy under the gold standard (White 1933,
Whale 1937, Bopp 1952, Nishimura 1995, Gallarotti 1995, Contamin 2003, Rodgers and Payne 2014)2.
It strongly differed from the Banque de France policy under bimetallism – studied in Flandreau (2004)
1

2

Gallarotti (1995, p.219) claims that the Banque de France was the true hegemon of the gold standard as it served as a
lender of last resort to England in 1890 and 1906-1907.
Whale (1973, p.20) argued that “It may be said that the Bank of France was able to avoid varying its discount rates
because the country was only on a limping standard. But this point cannot be substantiated unless it can be shown that the
exchange value of the franc fell below the gold export point for appreciable periods. Other special circumstances might be
adduced in the case of France (e.g. the limited importance of credit money, in later years the size of the metallic reserve).”
Other authors often only refer to the objective of a stable discount rate set by Napoleon when the Banque was created , or
to national preference. Bloomfield (1959, p.24) only suggests that “and several of the banks, especially the Bank of
France, referred to the relative stability and lowness of their discount rates as a measure of their achievements.” See our
discussion on this issue in Section 1.

1

- when the official discount rate changed frequently. In addition – as noted by Bloomfield (1959),
Emanoil (1932) and White (1933) using annual data – the discount portfolio of the Banque de France
varied negatively with gold flows in a systematic way between 1880 and 1913.
This article offers new evidence of these two deviations from the rules of the game and
especially highlights the importance of the Banque de France’s sterilization policy, which is much less
known and documented. More specifically, we show that the Banque de France’s credit to the domestic
economy (discounts and advances) correlates negatively with gold flows because it correlates
positively with the discount rate of the Bank of England. We discuss the conditions that allowed the
Banque de France to run such policies and we explain why and how the objective of a stable discount
rate led the Banque to use its domestic portfolio in order to neutralize the effects of gold inflows and
outflows. We go beyond previous literature that has shown evidence that the rules were violated by
French and other monetary authorities (Bloomfield 1959, Bordo and MacDonald 1997, Morys 2013) as
we provide a complete examination of the mechanisms and adjustments that determined movements in
the balance sheet of the Banque de France and made possible the disconnect between domestic rates
and international rates, without intervention in the exchange market. Following the insights of Jeanne
(1995)’s work on the Bank of England, we use VAR estimations to study the dynamic paths of national
variables in response to international shocks. Our analysis is made possible by newly collected monthly
and quarterly data on the Banque balance sheet and the French business cycle. We are able to estimate
precisely the causes and the effects of central bank interventions, to disentangle domestic aggregate
demand effects from external shocks and to look at differences between short-term adjustments and
long-term relationships. We find that an increase in the English discount rate caused a fall in gold
reserves of the Banque de France but pushed its domestic portfolio up such that gold outflows were
almost completely sterilized. Results show that domestic adjustment to an international shock took
place in a period shorter than a year. Conversely, such an international shock had no significant effect
on the French business cycle (as proxied by imports and railway revenues). We show that the extent of
sterilization of international shocks by the central bank explains these findings.
In a world of integrated financial markets and British leadership, the French money market
interest rate was influenced by foreign, and especially British, rates. A rise in the Bank of England rate
decreased the spread between the French money market rate and the Banque de France official discount
rate. Facing higher demand for credit, the Banque could either increase its discount-rate or, conversely,
increase its discount portfolio to expand domestic credit. The latter brought the spread back to its

2

previous level and maintained the official discount rate stable.3 This is the crucial mechanism identified
in this paper.
As expressed by Governor Pallain in 1908, the commitment of the Banque to discount
commercial paper in order to ease the money market and keep the official discount rate stable was an
essential component of French policy. Our econometric evidence strongly supports this argument and
shows that this led to massive short-term adjustments in the Banque balance sheet in response to
international shocks.
Our elucidation of adjustments that were necessary to keep the discount rate stable also offers a
good explanation of the few changes in the Banque rate. The Banque discount rate was changed only in
extreme cases when the previously highlighted mechanisms could not work fully. Thus the response of
the Banque rate to main economic variables was highly nonlinear. We account for this non linearity in a
regime switching model, in order to avoid the pitfalls of previous studies and we find that the Banque
de France decision to change its discount rate was determined by the Bank of England rate, the gold
stock and the deviation of the exchange rate from the gold point (Officer, 1992). Our interpretation in
terms of regime shifts makes clear that the changes were infrequent because, in normal times, the
Banque de France used all possible means to reduce the probability that these variables affected its
decision to move the discount rate.
A better understanding of the policy of the Banque de France brings a better understanding of
the classical gold standard. It is commonly argued that the Bank of England and the Banque de France
were the two extremes of the spectrum of the monetary regime (Whale 1937, Bloomfield 1959,
Gallarotti 1995). As Jaime Reis writes, “At one extreme of the spectrum was the Bank of England, with
very low reserves and frequent changes in its rate to ensure that, despite gold drains, they were always
sufficient. At the other was the Banque de France, with very large reserves and a preference for an
immobile discount rate.” (Reis 2007, p.720). These opposite positions in policy are reflected in the
liquidity ratios (metallic reserves divided by notes in circulation) of these countries: France had the
higher ratio whereas England had the lower (Morys, 2013, table 3). While the objectives and
interventions of the Bank of England under the gold standard have been studied extensively (Goodhart
1972, Sayers 1976, Dutton 1984, Pippinger 1984, Officer 1986, 1996, Davatyan and Parke 1995,
Jeanne 1995), this paper is the first to provide a complete interpretation and account of the policy of the
Banque de France. The monograph by HD White in 1933 on French international accounts focused on
3

Before 1900, because of the insufficient volume of gold in the Banque de France’s vault, gold devices supplemented these
operations. In some rare and extreme cases, the Banque de France intervened on foreign markets in order to prevent a
further increase in international interest rates (Ramon 1929, Gallarotti 1995, Rodgers and Payne 2014).

3

annual trade flows (it was mostly speculative about the role of the Banque de France and was silent on
the short-term adjustments highlighted in our paper), Bopp (1952) only offered a broad survey of the
institutional and legal context of French monetary policy and Contamin (2003) focused on gold
devices. Thus, an examination of the balance sheet policy of the Banque de France, which was the
opposite of the Bank of England flexible rate policy, can provide new insights for the study of central
banks which fell in between the two poles on the continuum. Overall, our approach adds new
dimensions to the traditional view of the gold standard that assumes that central banks' discount rates
and gold premia were the most important monetary policy instruments. Focusing solely on interest
rates to study domestic policy objectives and international adjustments might be misleading.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 1, we briefly review the literature
dealing with the objective of a low and stable French discount rate. In section 2, we explain how the
Banque de France used the gold premium (until 1900) and its gold stock to avoid following the official
discount-rate of the Bank of England. Section 3 then shows that such a policy implied interventions of
the central bank in the domestic money market in order to stabilize the spread between the market and
the official interest rate. Section 4 discusses how our previous results imply that the reaction of the
Banque de France discount rate to key international and economic variables was highly non-linear. Two
regimes are estimated from a Markov switching equation. Section 5 concludes with general comments
on the functioning of the gold standard.

1) Discount rate stability as a primary objective
The main singular aspect of Banque de France policy under the Gold Standard was to keep a
stable official discount rate.4 The difference with the Bank of England is especially striking, as shown
in Figure 1. Such a difference in policies across the Channel was neither left unnoticed nor attributed to
random idiosyncratic economic factors. The Banque de France never hid that a stable and low discountrate was its primary objective and this was widely discussed within policy and economic circles
(Neymarck 1889, Nitti 1898, Liesse 1910 p.212, Ansiaux 1910, and several other references quoted by
Patron, 1910, p.27). In his history of the Bank of England, Sayers (1976) relates the “grumbles about
4

As noted by Harry Dexter White: over this period, there were only 30 changes in the French official rate of discount as
against 116 in the Reichsbank and 194 in the Bank of England (White, 1933, p.139). The average discount rate of the
Bank of England and the Reichbank over the period were respectively equal to 3.4% and 4.2% while that of the Banque of
France was equal to 3.0%. Also, while the Bank of England and the Reichbank discount rate standard deviations were
equal respectively to 0.99 and 0.92, the Banque of France discount rate standard deviation was equal to 0.57. Even though
the French official discount rate was on average lower than the British rate (by 0.4 points), the most striking difference is
in the volatility of the rate.

4

frequent rises in Bank Rate and contrasts with the stable cheap money regime across the Channel” (p.
43) although the frequent debates in England on this topic did not necessarily lead to an admiration of
the French system: “There was no consensus on whether a stable Bank Rate was to be preferred:
Palgrave seems to have over-rated that attraction of the French system.”(p. 44). Scholars who have
studied the functioning of the gold standard have rightly emphasized that the stability of the French
discount-rate should not be seen as evidence of superior economic policy or of greater financial
development.5 The stability of the French discount rate was a policy choice that implied constraints and
procedures that were different from the British ones.
Banque de France management repeatedly stated that its public mission was to achieve a low
and stable discount rate. Governor Pallain said in a January 1907 speech (Ramon 1932, p. 420) that the
“essential function of the Banque de France is to keep a moderate and stable discount-rate.” A year
after, he stated at the board of the General council that: “In accordance with the traditional view of the
Banque de France’s council, [the Banque] aims to provide cheapest liquidity to national business.”6 In
an interview with Aldrich for the US National Monetary Commission (Pallain, Aldrich 1908, p.215), he
proudly stated: “The stability and the moderation of the rate of discount are considered as precious
advantages, which the French market owes to the organization and traditional conduct of the Banque of
France.” Recent works on French central banking in the late XIXth century inform us as to the decision
of the Banque de France to keep a stable discount rate. In particular, the Banque was a private
institution with profit objectives. Competition with commercial banks – especially large deposit banks
– led the Banque to keep low stable discount rate (most often 3%) to not be crowded out from the
market (Baubeau 2004, Bazot 2014, Bignon 2013, Bignon and Jobst 2013). In addition, inside
influence from the State, merchants and industrialists incited the Banque to stabilize interest rates to
avoid volatility and then to support their businesses (Leclerq 2010).7

5

6

7

“Yet Paris should not be thought of as the monetary center of the world, for this stability reflected the Bank of France's
desire for steady discount rates, and her willingness to use other devices to discourage gold losses from its ample reserves,
and not superior strength. London's rates were higher on average because the Bank of England preferred to use interest
rates to check gold losses and to maintain a free gold market.” (Ford (1962, p.21) See also Bloomfield, 1959, p.32.
« Conformément au principe qui a toujours prévalu dans les Conseils de la Banque de France de donner l'argent à notre
commerce national au prix le moins onéreux possible. » ( ABF, PVCG, 23 janvier 1908)
Bopp (1952) also notices that a stable discount rate was the main objective of the Banque de France from its creation by
Napoleon, and that the Banque attempted to turn to a policy of flexible rates only from the 1850s to the early 1870s.
Regarding the stability of the discount rate at 4% in the first half of the century, he said “I am unable to give a convincing
analysis of how the Bank was able to maintain a fixed rate for such a long period. It is scarcely possible that 4 per cent
was the "equilibrium" rate continuously from 1820 until 1847. In principle, however, a discrepancy between the two
would have touched off cumulative inflation or deflation. Clearly, a 'hiatus should have developed between a fixed rate on
the one hand and either convertibility or profits on the other. How was the gap filled?”, p.233

5

Members of the General Council thought that this constraint implied two consequences: First,
as explained by Governor Pallain in the interview mentioned above (cf also Liesse, 1910, p.2128), the
Banque had to keep high metallic reserves in order to avoid raising the Banque rate systematically
when gold was flowing out of the country: “It is a principle consecrated by experience that the supreme
means of defense for an issue bank, to protect its metallic reserve, is to raise the rate of discount, and
we never lose sight of this principle. However, the extent of our reserves allows us to contemplate
without emotion important variations of our metallic stock, and we only exceptionally have recourse to
a measure which is always painful for commerce and industry.” (Pallain to Aldrich 1908, p.215)
Second, the Banque had to intervene such that the spread between the official Banque discount
rate and the money market rate (taux du marché libre) did not vary too much.9 The next sections will
study each of these consequences in great detail.

2) Gold and gold devices
Supporting Pallain’s claim, the standard explanation of the Banque de France policy under the
Gold standard states that huge reserves allowed the monetary authorities to let gold flow out without
following the increases in the Bank of England’s discount rate (White 1933, Bloomfield 1959)10. Until
1900, the Banque de France also used gold devices (White 1933, Bopp 1952, Bloomfield 1959,
Gallarotti 1995 p.48, Contamin 2003) such that an increase in foreign rates had a less adverse effect on
the domestic gold stock. The Banque offered a premium on gold and could increase it when necessary
to mitigate the demand for gold. The use of a premium on gold was possible because the Banque could
legally redeem its notes in either French gold coin or 5 franc silver coin. Since the silver value of the
latter was lower than the nominal value of the coin, the Banque had a strong control over gold sales:
when the Banque wanted to discourage gold exports, it accepted to redeem its notes in silver only.
8

“In fact, the Bank of France follows a different plan from the credit companies and private banks in general
in the matter of discounts. Its rate is uniform, for the most part, and is modified as little as possible. The Bank can do this,
thanks to a sufficient margin of issue and an imposing reserve. But this state of affairs does not give it the flexibility of the
other credit establishments, which are quite right in not maintaining a fixed discount rate. This is even a leading
distinction between the companies and the large department stores, to which they are often compared.” (Liesse, 1910,
p.212)
9
Banque de France archives (ABF), PVCG, 14 mars 1895.
10
According to the computations of Tullio and Wolters (2003, p.3), from 1880 to 1913 the gold stock of the Banque de
France increased by a factor of 4.7 while that of of the Bank of England increased only by a factor of 1.3. During the same
period the gold stock of the Banque de France increased from 42.5 to 64.5% of the combined gold stock of the Bank of
England, the Reichsbank and the Banque de France while that of the Bank of England fell from 41.1 to 17.3%. As a share
of exports the gold stock of the Banque de France increased from to 61.5% and that of the Bank of England fell from 12.5
to 8.6%.

6

Banks in need of gold for exports could then purchase bullion or foreign gold coins from the Banque de
France only at a premium. The premium on gold sales was used to circumvent the law that prevented
the Banque from redeeming notes in gold at a premium.11
Figures 1 and 2 provide some evidence on this strategy. Figure 1 shows that the discount rate of
the Banque de France is very weakly correlated with the changes in the English and German discount
rate. On the contrary, Figure 2 shows that the gold premium applied by the Banque de France in Paris
followed closely the Bank of England discount rate. The Banque thus preferred to raise the gold
premium instead of its discount rate to prevent gold’s outflows.
2.1 VAR estimations: identification and specification
Since the history of French gold devices and gold reserves are well-known and documented in
the literature, it is not necessary to review them in detail. But previous studies have not discussed the
quantitative impact of these policies and its statistical robustness: to what extent did the Banque de
France use its gold stock and gold premium to avoid raising the discount rate in response to
international shocks? Is this effect large and statistically significant? In order to answer this question,
we estimate a VAR system and simulate the effect of an increase in the Bank of England discount rate
on the balance sheets and the instruments of the Banque de France. Jeanne (1995) has shown the
usefulness of VARs to understand the nuts and bolts of the Bank of England policy under the gold
standard. A VAR analysis is well suited since it accounts for the obvious endogeneity of the variables of
the Banque de France balance sheet to foreign variables. Gold flows and interest rates were endogenous
under the gold standard. The other advantage of the VAR methodology is that we can impose shortterm structural identification in order to isolate an exogenous short-term shock on the French economy.
We use such structural identification to study the impact of an exogenous increase in the English
discount rate (the Bank rate) on the French economy and the policy of the Banque de France.
According to the rules of the games, this should lead to an increase in the Banque discount rate aiming
to offset the decrease in the gold stock.

11

Based on various sources, White (1933, p.186) also documents two other gold devices used by the Banque de France. It
could raise the export point by requiring the banks demanding gold for export to discount long-term bills in excess of the
amount of gold demanded. It could lower the gold import point by crediting importers of specie from the date of shipment
rather than the date of receipt or accepting gold at branches in seaports rather than in Paris in order to decrease shipment
costs. Based on our reading of the archives of the Banque, we follow White in saying that there is no evidence that these
devices were used frequently and that they had major quantitative consequences.

7

The VAR is estimated with data in log levels in order to account for some implicit cointegrating
relationships in the data.12 The Bank rate is ordered first in the VAR such that we identify (through a
Cholesky decomposition) an international shock as a shock to the Bank of England rate that affects
contemporaneously the French economy but which is, in return, affected by the French economy with a
1 month lag. Studies using VARs usually refer to this structural shock as “exogenous” or
“unsystematic” (Christiano et al. 1999). This identification procedure is common in the literature that
identifies monetary policy shocks in fixed-exchange regimes and is straightforward in the case of the
Gold standard due to the international role of the Bank of England. Such an assumption means that a
simulated shock to the Bank rate is an unsystematic shock that is not explained by the current value of
the other parameters of the model affecting the Bank rate (including French gold and French rates). An
immediate response of the Bank of England to a Banque de France decision is thus not defined as a
shock in our model (but our assumption does not imply that such a response did not happen). Formally,
it means that the international shock,

is defined such that the Bank rate at time t,

is the following

function:

where Y are all variables in the VAR (including past values of the Bank rate).
⋯
and C the contemporaneous impact matrix of the

mutually uncorrelated disturbances. Our

identification assumption means that the international shock
increase in

, due to an increase in

is the first element of

. Thus, an

is a policy decision of the Bank of England which is not

explained by past French variables; thus, it is interpreted as a short-term term exogenous international
shock to the French economy.
We use monthly data in order to include a sufficient number of variables in the VAR and to keep
the recursive identification relevant. The variables to be included in the estimation are the following:
the Bank of England discount rate (hereafter “Bank rate”), the exchange rate between London and
Paris, the Banque de France discount rate (hereafter “Banque rate”), and the Banque de France gold
premium in Paris. These variables are obvious candidates since these are prices that are supposed to
determine gold and money flows. The Reichsbank rate will be used for robustness analysis in order to

12

It is worth noting that we also ran the VAR using variables in first differences as in Jeanne (1995) to fully account for
cointegration issues. Results show no difference with the log-based analysis, suggesting that the log-based analysis must
be preferred due to its interpretation superiority.

8

check that the Bank of England rate is the main driver of international shocks. In addition, we include
variables of the balance sheet of the Banque de France: gold stock, silver stock and a liquidity ratio (or
cover ratio). The latter is used in the literature (Goodhart 1972, Tullio and Wolters 2003, Morys 2013)
based on the rationale that the objective of the central bank was to maintain a stable proportion between
metallic reserves and notes in circulation. We define it as equal to (gold stock + silver stock) / notes in
circulation. Last, we include some general indicators of French economic activity.13 There is no
monthly or quarterly series of the French money supply and gold circulation, but we have the excess of
specie imports available from trade statistics and published in White (1933).14 It is exclusive of silver
bullion and expressed in millions francs. Next we need to control for the French business cycle. A
common practice is to use discounts of commercial paper as a proxy for aggregate demand (Baubeau
2004). But total French discounts are available only annually, and the discounts of the Banque de
France are mostly a policy variable rather than a simple proxy for business activity as we will show in
Section 3. Thus we use imports as a proxy for French aggregate demand (as in Bordo and MacDonald
2005). This series is available monthly but is not perfect although we control for the exchange rate in
our estimations. In order to check the robustness of our results, we have constructed the first index of
French economic activity based on railway revenues available for the whole period (1880-1913).15 We
explain in the Appendix how this series was constructed and we present the sources of the data. We will
show below that using imports or railway revenues does not modify the main results of the estimations
and our interpretation of the Banque de France policy.
In Section 3, we will add variables from the asset portfolio of the Banque and the Parisian money
market in the VAR without affecting the results presented in this section.

13

Monthly or quarterly price index series are not available in France before 1899. Nevertheless, a VAR using post-1899 data
to account for price effect does not affect the results. Results are available upon request from the authors.
14
Based on a careful study of French trade and gold circulation, White (1933, p. 172) found that “the Bank of France was
virtually the sole depository of the specie reserve of all the French banks ; specie imported into France went either into
vaults of the Bank of France or into hand to hand circulation. Throughout the period under survey specie imports were in
excess of specie exports. ” Sicsic (1989) also states that the trade statistics of metal imports and exports are not reliable
and miss important flows (especially from coins brought by travelers). These flows are certainly too important to propose
a reliable estimation of the French outstanding gold circulation, but, despite these flows, trade statistics may provide
interesting information to estimate the changes in gold flows after a change in foreign discount rates.
15
Railways revenues have been used as an indicator of economic activity in several analyses studying the gold standard in
the UK and Germany, including Goodhart (1972), Jeanne (1995) and Bordo and McDonald (1997, 2005). Our series of
railways revenues shows a strong correlation with annual series of French activity. The correlation coefficient between
annual railways revenues and annual GPD is 0.94. The correlation coefficient between deflated annual railways revenues
and annual industrial production is 0.85 For imports, these numbers are 0.74 (GDP), 0.84 (Ind.prod) and 0.82 (Agr. prod)
respectively. The correlation between deflated GDP and industrial (agricultural) production is 0.79 (0.82) only. Annual
data is from Saint Marc (1983).

9

2.2 The role of gold reserves and the gold premium
We estimate the VAR and compute structural impulse response functions of variables to a onestandard deviation shock on the English Bank rate using the Cholesky decomposition described above.
Figure 3 presents the results of the estimation of a large scale 8-variable VAR.16
A one-standard deviation shock increases the Bank rate by 0.4 percentage points. Such an
increase in the English discount rate pushes up the exchange rate (i.e a depreciation of the franc) and
has strong effects on the policy of the Banque de France. It mostly affects the Banque gold stock and
the gold premium of the Banque. The former falls immediately and is decreased by 1.5 percent after 4
months when the latter increases immediately by 0.3 percentage points (in a rather similar magnitude to
the Bank rate, as already observed on Figure 2). The magnitude of these effects is important since the
Banque kept a large gold stock. For example, in 1900, from a gold stock of 2000 million francs, 26
million would have flowed out of the Banque 4 months after a 0.4 percentage points increase in the
English rate.
French excess specie imports fall immediately by 5 million francs. After 4 months, 23 million
would have left France, that is around 90% of the amount that had flowed out of the Banque of
France17 Indeed, gold flows caused by international shocks were explained by arbitrage between
countries and thus involved balance of payments movements. Not surprisingly, the response of the
official discount rate of the Banque de France is extremely moderate and only weakly significant. This
is because (as shown in Figure 1) the Banque did not systematically increase its rate after a rise in the
English rate. Estimating the VAR with the liquidity ratio (Figure 4) provides similar results as with the
gold stock: after 3 months, the liquidity ratio is 1.3% below what it would have been without the shock.
In Section 3, we will discuss why gold flew out but the amount of notes in circulation remained
constant.
The results of the VAR estimations confirm our expectations and previous knowledge on the
mechanisms at work during the gold standard. A rise in the English rate depreciates the franc and gold
flows out of the vaults of the Banque de France. It implies that the higher the gold reserves, the less it is
necessary to increase the discount rate since gold outflows would finally stabilize the exchange rate.
The impulse response functions estimated from the VAR also make clear that the Banque used gold
devices rather than its discount rate to mitigate gold exports.
16

We use 12 lags for each variable. This choice is confirmed by the AIC criteria and leads to more precise estimates than
specifications with shorter or longer lag-length. Our conclusions are not affected by the use of more lags.
17
Note that excess specie imports are not in log levels in the VAR but in millions (because they can take negative values).
Thus, the reaction function of this variable in Figure 3 is not cumulative.

10

2.3 The speed of adjustment and the (non)role of silver…
Our estimations offer further insights on the nuts and bolts of the central bank’s adjustment to
international shocks. First, the average time of the adjustment is robust across specifications and is
equal to about 10 months. The effects on the exchange rate, gold stock and gold premium are all nonsignificantly different from zero ten months after the shock. The persistence of the effect of a monetary
policy shock on the French economy during the gold standard is shorter than the one observed in
subsequent periods (Mojon 1998, Monnet 2014) where the effect could be maximal 20 to 25 months
after a shock. Markets and central banks all adjusted very quickly during the gold standard.
Consequently, previous studies using annual data (White, 1933, Bloomfield 1959, Baubeau 2004,
Bignon 2013) could not observe and account for short term (less than a year) adjustments in response
to international shocks
Second, the adjustments worked through gold and not through silver. This result contrasts with
the role attributed to silver in late XIXth century France by economic historians (Bloomfield, 1959,
p.54, Flandreau 1996, Contamin 2003). Silver did play a role in the French economy during the gold
standard and the Banque de France always kept a fair amount of this metal as shown in Figure 5: the
Banque sold silver in order to acquire and accumulate gold (Sicsic 1989), and, more important, the
ability to redeem notes in silver allowed the Banque to use gold devices. But the results of our
estimation rule out the hypothesis according to which silver flows could have played an important role
in mitigating the effect of international shocks on the French economy. The redemption of notes in
silver played at best an extremely small role in the violation of the rules of the game.18
The absence of any major effect of the Bank rate on silver holds when we divide the sample in
two parts, pre and post 1900, the year when the amount of silver and gold in the Banque vaults started
18

Pallain (1908, p.216) suggests that this was used in extreme circumstances only “The Bank of France cannot, of course,
renounce its right to redeem its notes in gold or in silver, since gold pieces and silver coins of 5 francs are equally legal
tender in France. But it only uses this right with discretion and to the extent that it appears necessary in order to prevent an
unjustifiable weakening of its reserves. In no case, however, whatever may have been said, have we ever charged any
premium on French gold in redemption of notes.” In the minutes of the General council of the Banque, we have found
reference to this strategy only in 1880. Debates at the time within the Banque suggest a clear strategy to build high gold
reserves and to let the silver stock decrease.
(PVCG, 29 July 1880).The Banque also looked closely at the circulation of foreign silver coins, especially from Belgium
and Italy (countries from Latin Union) and wanted to keep them in circulation because it knew that these stocks would not
help to pay foreign bankers asking for gold when the Bank of England was increasing its rates. (Ex: PVCG, 15 mars 1883,
8 décembre et 20 decembre 1887, 9 février 1888, and many sessions during the 1890s, 9june 1892 etc.). The number of
foreign coins in the Banque de France balance sheet thus decreased over time, cf. Sicsic (1989, p.721 et al.)

11

to diverge greatly. The response of silver is more significant and stronger – though still very small after 1900 (Figures 7 and 8) because the stock of silver has fallen (a similar drop in volume creates a
higher decrease in percentage in the second part of the sample). These estimations also show that the
percentage decrease in gold was similar across subsamples (around 1.5% after 3 months). Conversely,
the gold premium had stopped playing a role in 1900. Since the nominal value of the gold stock was on
average twice as high in 1900-1914 compared to 1880-1900, we conclude that the decrease in gold
caused by a similar increase in the English Bank rate was – on average – twice as high after 1900. This
result clearly confirms that the gold reserves of the Banque de France played a more important role
after frequent use of the gold premium was abandoned in 1900 (White 1933, Contamin 2003).
2.4 Robustness: quarterly data and the German rate
In order to provide evidence of the robustness of our previous results, we now check that they
hold with quarterly data when using the railway revenues as a proxy for aggregate demand. Then we
discuss the respective role of Germany and England in influencing Banque de France policy. Figure 9
shows that the pattern and magnitude of the response functions is similar in a VAR estimated with
quarterly data and when railway revenues replace imports as a proxy for economic activity.
Interestingly, it also provides further evidence that an increase in the English Bank rate had no negative
effect on the French business cycle, despite large gold outflows and a fall in the liquidity ratio. Such a
conclusion is important as the absence of short term effects of foreign monetary policy on domestic
activity despite the fixed exchange rate may contribute to explain why the gold standard lasted for 35
years without losing public support. The next section will show that the sterilization of gold outflows
through the Banque de France portfolio was crucial to this result.
Was the Bank of England discount rate the main cause of Banque de France gold movements?
Did the Reichsbank also influence Banque de France policy? Crucial to our results is the identification
assumption made in the VAR that Bank rate affects contemporaneously the French economy but with a
lag. When we introduce the Reichsbank rate in the VAR with the assumption that it is
contemporaneously determined by the Bank of England rate, we find no effect of the Reichsbank rate
on French economic variables (Figure 10). A shock to the Bank rate has the same effects as in previous
estimations. Making the opposite assumption (Figure 11) – that is the Reichsbank rate immediately
affects the Bank rate but the latter affects the former with a lag – we find that a shock to the Reichsbank
rate has a small effect on the Sterling-Franc exchange rate and on the gold premium but the effect on
12

the gold stock is similar as with a shock to the Bank rate. In other words, making the heroic assumption
that the Reichsbank was the leader of the gold standard and that English policy adapted to German
policy, we still find an effect of Bank rate on Banque de France’s balance sheet, but the reverse is not
true. These results confirm that the Bank of England was the main player of the gold standard and that
its discount rate was the main factor influencing French gold flows. As a consequence, it is sufficient to
consider Bank rate shocks as a proxy for other international shocks in VAR estimations.
Another robustness check would be to include a price index in the VAR. No monthly or
quarterly price index is available for France before 1900. At this date, an economic newspaper (la
Réforme économique) started to publish a wholesale price index including only a few commodities.
VAR results described previously do not change when we use this monthly index in the estimation after
1900. The absence of a role for prices is consistent with the principles of the gold standard according to
which the difference of prices between countries remained fixed and inflation was low and stable.
2.5 From gold devices to the foreign assets portfolio
In order to keep its discount rate stable, the Banque de France could let gold flow out of the country so
that it pushes the exchange rate back to parity. The VAR shows that these mechanisms were at work
and that their magnitude was massive. In terms of gold, this policy was much more costly than raising
the discount-rate but the Banque de France choose to let gold reserves diminish rather than restricting
the credit supply through an increase in the discount rate. As described previously, the Banque de
France justified its preference for interest rate stability over gold stability in saying that the French
economy was averse to interest rate changes. Nevertheless, the next section will show that the ability to
sterilize these outflows was essential to this policy. The use of gold reserves to avoid an increase in the
discount rate was more important after 1900 since gold reserves were high enough to abandon the
unpopular and controversial gold premium. In fact, members of the General Council, prominently the
Baron Alphonse de Rothschild, emphasized the perverse effect of the gold premium19. Rothschild
(ABF, PVCG, december 1886, 13 septembre 1888, PVCLP tome 006, 14 octobre 1898) turned critical
of this policy because it implied that if the discount rate had to be increased anyway, gold devices
delayed the increase of the discount rate too much and, then, led paradoxically to a higher increase in
the discount rate relatively to what would have been otherwise necessary. Thus, the perverse effect of
gold devices was to make a rise in the discount rate more difficult to accept by the public – and thus
19

Contamin (2003) already pointed out these motivations.

13

less credible. From 1886 to 1898, Rothschild and the Haute Banque favored an increase of the discount
rate whereas the Governor favored adjustments through the gold premium. The Haute Banque feared a
loss of credibility of the Franc due to the reduction of outstanding gold. They also argued that the gold
premium could disconnect French markets from international markets and thereby make the Banque a
non-cooperative player20. Once the gold stock of the Banque had reached a sufficiently high level in
1900, the Banque decided to give up the gold devices policy and to use only the discount rate when
gold flows were not sufficient to restore the equilibrium.
One of the potential consequences of the end of gold devices and the increase of the gold stock,
was the development of Banque de France interventions in foreign markets after 1900. Bloomfield
(1959, p.56) describes this policy as “cooperation between central banks”. In fact, it started in 1890,
during the Barring crisis, when the Banque de France sent gold to England against 3-month Treasury
bills, and it had already occurred several times before the gold standard in 1825 and 1836 (Flandreau
1997, Bordo and Schwartz 1999). Nobody has better explained the rationale of such a policy than
Governor Magnin who decided to implement it: “We avoided the threat of a monetary crisis in
England, which would have impacted the French market and thereby obliged the Banque de France to
increase its discount rate” (Ramon, 1932, p.400).21 Starting in 1906, the Banque started to manage a
portfolio of foreign assets for this purpose. Exceptional interventions on the foreign markets (mainly on
the London market) became more common starting 1906 (Ramon 1932, White 1933, Bopp 1952,
Sayers 1976, Gallarotti 1995, p.80-85, 130-131, 140, Flandreau 1997, Contamin 2003, Rodgers and
Payne 2014) and followed an increase in the Bank of England discount rate, usually with a 1 month lag
(figure 12).22 This portfolio was notably used to end the US financial crisis in 1907 (Rodgers and
Payne, 2014).

20

PVCG of 20/11/1886: “Mr Rothschild cites an article of Le Temps, which, following the New York crisis and its effect in
London, seems to believe that the Banque de France has no solidarity with London and only provides gold when it
concurs with its own terms, regardless of the effect it can have on the English exchange rate.”
21
This operation was actually initiated and mostly organized by the Baron Alphonse de Rothschild. He played the
intermediary and managed to convince the Conseil Général that cooperation was needed (ABF, PVCLP, 10 November
1890). The Bank of England asked the Banque de France to help. At the board of the Banque de France, Alphonse de
Rothschild explained that he had received such a demand and justifications from the English branch of the Rothschild
family and that cooperation was crucial for the interest of the monetary system and the Banque de France. Some members
of the board were reluctant to lend to England because they wondered whether the Banque de France would be repaid in
case of a Franco-English war.
22
Because the discount portfolio is not used before 1906, it has not been included in previously reported VAR estimation.
However, introducing this variable in the estimation does not affect the results. Notice that, the discount portfolio responds
positively but insignificantly to an increase in the BoE discount rate. Significance is obviously biased by the fact that the
discount portfolio is set to zero till 1906.

14

The role of the foreign portfolio to stabilize foreign market rates and then the domestic discount
rate has already been highlighted in the literature23 but, it is better understood if we know how the
Banque de France used its domestic portfolio in order to stabilize the domestic rate. Surprisingly, these
domestic operations and their effects, although at the core of the operations of the Banque, have
received very little attention in previous studies (and much less than the international portfolio…). The
next section attempts to fill this gap.

3) Banque de France credit to the economy and the money
market rate
The consequences of the stable discount rate policy for Banque de France interventions on the
domestic market can be viewed on a graph that displays the Banque domestic asset portfolio (discounts
and advances) and the Bank of England discount rate (Figure 13). Although the correlation is not
perfect since demand for Banque discount also had pure domestic causes, it is noteworthy that all the
increases in the English Bank rate correlate with an increase in the discount portfolio of the Banque de
France.
3.1 What do we really know about the link between international reserves and domestic
assets?
Since an increase in the English rate also drained gold out of France, Figure 13 is consistent
with an overall negative co-movement between domestic and international assets that was observed by
Emanoil (1932), and White (1933 p.198) and interpreted by Bloomfield (1959) as a violation of the
rules of the game. Such a negative co-movement was actually well known at the Banque de France
since Governor Pallain replied to Aldrich 1908 (p.212) in the following way:

23

In addition to the reference quoted above, Flandreau and Gallice (2007) highlighted the impact of this policy from a
private bank perspective: : “The Banque de France, in order to prevent the Bank of England from pushing them too high,
went out buying in Paris whenever the French banks started selling their sterling bills portfolios. This is well illustrated in
Fig. 5.8, which shows the negative correlation existing from 1906 to 1913 between variations in the Paribas bills portfolio
and the portfolio of the Banque de France when Paribas sold, the Banque de France bought. As is apparent, changes in
Banque de France sterling holdings reacted to changes in the Bank of England discount rate as if the Bank of France had
sought to maximize profits. Thus, paradoxically, the variations in the French bank of issue’s bills stock were much more
consistent with British interest rate changes than were those in our private bank’s bills portfolio. This is because, we argue,
private banks mostly bought London bills for liquidity purposes and were thus irresponsive to interest rate
differentials.”(p.99) Section 3 shows that the paradox identified by Flandreau and Gallice about the portfolio of foreign
assets provides a good characterization of the Banque portfolio of domestic assets during the whole period.

15

“Aldrich: Does the export of gold reduce the volume of notes?
Pallain: Not necessarily. It may happen that among our assets a certain fraction of the gold is replaced
by an equal amount of bills in our portfolio, and that without changing the total of notes in circulation.”
However, the negative correlation between domestic and international assets is far from airtight
since it is not observed for all frequencies, as already noted by White and Bloomfield. According to
these authors, it is mostly visible at an annual frequency. With annual data, the correlation is not
statistically significant however, but the graph suggests there is a negative co-movement indeed (Figure
14). Looking at the raw correlation in monthly data between the logs of central bank credit and gold
stock, we find a positive number (.053), rather than the negative sign documented by Emanoil, White
and Bloomfield. The correlation between the changes in these two variables – still with monthly data is a small non-significant number, 0.17, with a standard error of 0.13. With quarterly data, the
correlation between changes is significant but small (0.05, with a sd of 0.01).
Hence, previous studies which have documented a negative co-movement based on simple
descriptive statistics and graphs have provided only limited robust evidence to relate this co-movement
to an active policy of the central bank. We were not able to find strong support for this theory based on
simple correlations.
More generally, there is little attention devoted to how central banks exploited this negative
correlation to violate the rules of the game: how often did it happen and how long did it last? What did
Pallain mean by “Not necessarily” when he replied to Aldrich's question about the expected positive
correlation between notes and gold? As already noted by Jaime Reis (2007), a rare – but still quite
general - case study is in Eichengreen and Flandreau (1997, p.17), who state: that “Although it was
possible to find repeated violations of rules over periods as short as a year, over longer intervals central
banks’ domestic and foreign assets moved together”.
Moreover, Bloomfield’s view that this negative correlation is evidence of the violations of the
rule of the game has not remained unchallenged. As suggested by the proponents of the monetary
theory of the balance of payments (Johnson 1973, McCloskey and Zecher 1976, Sommariva and Tullio,
1987, 1988), there is another possible interpretation of this negative relationship. Contrary to
Bloomfield's assumption, the direction of causation can run from changes in domestic assets to
endogenously determined changes in foreign assets. If there is a positive deviation of domestic
production from trend, the demand for credit at the central-bank increases. In the short-term, such an
increase puts pressure on the interbank money market rate, and, then, the spread between the interbank
rate and the money market rate decreases. In order to ease the market, the central-bank provides more
16

credit and thereby pushes down the interbank rate, leading to gold outflows. Sommariva and Tullio
(1987, chp.2) found some evidence of such a mechanism in Germany during the Gold standard (18801913).
Given the observed correlation between the English rate and the Banque de France portfolio
(Figure 13), it is unlikely that the monetary theory of the balance of payments explains all variations in
Banque discounts, except if we are willing to assume that the French business cycle had a major
influence on the English interbank market (or that it is influenced by a common international business
cycle). Nevertheless, a proxy for economic activity must be included in the VAR in order to account for
this potential effect. Note that the influence of domestic demand on the Banque de France supply of
credit can be important without implying a balance of payments effect and, thus, can be related to
domestic assets of the central bank but not to the English rate and the gold stock. We will test for both
hypotheses.
Did the Banque de France use its balance sheet (namely domestic assets, i.e discount and
advances) to sterilize gold outflows in response to international shocks? Setting an interest rate is not
enough to maintain rate stability. Interventions are needed to avoid a too narrow or too high spread
between the central bank and the interbank rates and thus keep the Banque rate effective. The
alternative theory (monetary theory of the balance of payments) states that the Banque was not
involved in this kind of activity and that the movements in central bank assets and liabilities are mainly
explained by domestic aggregate demand. Before attempting to answer this question using VAR
estimations, it is useful to explain in greater detail the data on the money market rate and the domestic
portfolio of the Banque de France.
3.2 The French money market and the Banque de France portfolio
As explained in Roulleau (1914, chp. VIII) and White (1933, chp. IX), the Parisian money market rate
reported by the Economist was a composite of the rates at which the largest merchant and commercial
banks bought some of the best paper in the Parisian open-market. Most discounting in France was done
at the Banque discount rate or slightly below, but a small part of commercial paper (traded by the best
and most well-known banks) was discounted at a lower interest rate. This market was relatively small
although we do not have any precise evaluation of its size. And the spread between the market rate and
the Banque rate was usually low compared to the English spread (an average of 0.5 percentage point
17

over the period). Thus, it was deemed a good indicator of credit conditions in France by contemporaries
(Neymarck, Liesse, Aupetit, Ansiaux, Roulleau) and by the Banque de France. 24
Research by Flandreau and Sicsic (2003) and Ungaro (work in progress) on the reports market
has also shown that the rate published by the Economist was a good indicator of credit conditions.
Figure 15 suggests that the Parisian money market rate was correlated with the English Bank rate (and
thus to the spread between the official Banque rate and the money market rate since the former was
stable)
The four graphs on Figure 16 present the main trends in the composition of the Banque de
France balance sheet. The domestic asset portfolio increased over the period in the same way as the
metallic reserves. The composition changed slightly as the proportion of advances increased relative to
the rest, but discounting remained the main lending operation. A striking picture is the parallel
evolution over time of credit in Paris and credit in branches. On the liabilities side, the deposits did not
increase much. The expansion of the asset side was financed mostly by the increase in outstanding
circulation as shown by the stability of the liquidity ratio over time (Figure 6)25.
The Banque de France was a true pillar of the French banking system of that time as most banks
depended on its liquidity provision for their usual business. In other words, each time banks were short
of liquidity they could ask the Banque de France to rediscount their bills26 or make an advance on
securities27. Due to the large network of Banque de France branches, any bank in the country could
thus have access to these facilities. Such liquidity insurance had some consequences for the money
market. First, it stabilized supply and demand of liquidity and thereby kept the money market rate at a
“normal” level, that is, below the Banque discount rate. Should the money market rate be too close to
24

An 1895 discussion (PVCG 14 mars 1895) – that led to a decrease in the Banque discount rate – makes clear that if the
volume of discounts decreased and the spread between the money market rate in Paris (“le taux du marché libre”)
increased too much – i.e. the market rate being way below the official rate – the Banque de France felt that it had to
decrease its rate.
25
Contrary to England, France had no law requiring notes to be covered by a certain proportion of gold. But the government
set a ceiling on the outstanding notes in circulation. The Banque de France was aware of the adverse effect of large
reserves on money circulation and thus on economic activity. Thus, the maximum legal limit of coins and notes issuance
was an issue as long as the gold stock was increasing. The ceiling was increased in 1884, 1897 and 1905. Debates took
place between the government and the Banque. The increase in this limit was thus complementary to the gold policy.
26
Bank lending at that time was mainly made up of short-term discount operations, of which the basic form was: first, the
drawer (e.g. a producer) issues a bill to the drawee (its client). Once issued the bill can circulate and be endorsed by
different persons and enterprises. For instance, if the drawer needs liquidity he can ask a bank to discount the bill. By the
same token, the bank can re-discount the bill to another bank or to the central bank, which then becomes an endorser. At
the end of the process, the entity to which the money is paid is called the payee. At the settlement date the payee asks the
drawee to pay the face value of the bill. If the drawee fails to pay, the joint liability rule applies and the payee asks the last
endorser to pay instead. If the last endorser also fails to pay, the payee applies to the previous endorser and so on.
27
Advances on securities played the same role as rediscounting even though they entail higher interest rates (usually 1%
higher than the discount rate). In this case the Banque provided liquidity to the borrower in proportion to the value of
securities. Securities are thus used as collateral and can then be sold on the market in the case of failure of the borrower.
The Banque only accepted the most reliable ones to protect itself against drops in market value.

18

the Banque discount rate, banks could find it advantageous to discount their bills in the Banque de
France, thereby increasing the amount of liquidity available and reducing the money market rate.
Second, because the amount of funds invested on the market depended on investors’ anticipation of the
bills liquidity, the liquidity premium depended on investors’ anticipation of liquidity constraints. By
increasing the provision of liquidity the Banque de France sent a positive signal to investors who
maintained their demand for bills. Hence, the spread between the central bank and money market rates
should decrease after an increase in the Bank of England rate but decrease as long as the Banque de
France is lending more to the domestic economy.
Although the money market rate is mostly a Parisian discount rate, we think it is necessary to
consider all domestic assets to investigate the extent of the possible Banque de France sterilization. As
France was financially integrated during the gold standard and the Banque had a large network of
branches within the country (Nishimura 1995, Bazot 2013), the Parisian rate is a reliable proxy for
credit conditions in France and Banque de France interventions could affect directly these conditions
(Roulleau 1914, chp.VIII). However, as suggested by the parallel evolution in Figure 16, our
conclusions are similar if we use only advances and discounts in Paris.
3.3 VAR estimations: the extent of sterilization
We now turn to the results of VAR estimations. Identification assumptions, data and specifications are
similar to the ones in Section 2. We add the spread (in percentage points) between the Banque discount
rate and the money market rate (the spread falls when the money market rate increases and the Banque
rate remains constant) as well as a variable named “CREDIT_BDF” (in log level) that is the sum of all
discounts and advances of the Banque de France. Described previously, we investigate the responses of
the French economy and Banque de France policy to a shock in the Bank of England discount rate.
The results in Figure 17 first show that adding these two variables does not modify the
conclusion of the previous section: the exchange rate and the liquidity ratio react exactly in the same
way. Most of all, after a positive shock to the English Bank rate, the spread decreases immediately and
the Banque de France increases its loans to the French economy. It goes back to normal after 7 months.
The magnitude of the increase in Banque de France credit (between 1.5 and 2 %) is a bit higher than
the decrease of the liquidity ratio and gold stock. Since the gold stock was on average 1.5 times bigger
than the asset portfolio, it means that the Banque was almost completely sterilizing the gold outflows:
according to these figures, an increase of the Bank rate by 0.4% in 1900 would have caused – after 3
19

months – a loss of 35 million in gold and an increase of 30 million of Banque de France loans to the
economy.
The large magnitude of sterilization is confirmed by other estimations whose results are shown
in Figure 18. If we simulate a one standard deviation shock on the Banque de France gold stock in the
VAR, it increases by 2.5 percent after 3 months and Banque de France credit to the economy drops by 4
percent. The spread decreases as well. Figure 19 turns the mechanism the other way round: a positive
shock to the spread increases the gold stock, appreciates the franc and lowers Banque de France credit
to the economy by a similar extent.
VAR estimations whose results are reported in Figure 17 also include the yield of 6-month
French Treasury bonds. Such a variable is added in order to discuss whether the willingness of the
Banque de France to expand its credit to the economy after an increase in the English discount-rate
could also have been motivated by needs to decrease the cost of government financing (as suggested in
Ramon, 1932). The 6-month bond rate increases by 1 percentage point after an international shock –
though not immediately – and goes back to normal after 8 months. Thus, Banque de France
interventions eased both the private and public credit conditions that had deteriorated after an
exogenous increase in the English bank rate.
3.4 Testing an alternative explanation: the monetary theory of the balance of payments
Thus, the results of the VAR estimations offer a consistent story of the behavior of the Banque
de France domestic assets after a shock to the English Bank rate. We have interpreted our findings as
evidence of full sterilization by a central bank whose primary objective was to keep a stable domestic
official discount rate. Previously suggested, the monetary approach to the balance of payments
provides an alternative explanation however. In order to prove that the negative correlation between the
domestic assets and the international reserves of the central bank is indeed caused by international
shocks, we need to provide further estimations.
First, as in Section 2, we estimate – rather than a monthly VAR with imports – a quarterly VAR
that includes railway revenues as a reliable proxy for aggregate demand. If the spread and gold flows
were primarily determined by aggregate demand, a Bank rate shock should have very little impact on
these variables. This is not what we find (cf. Figure 20): the impact of a shock to the Bank rate on gold,
the spread and Banque de France credit is similar if railway revenues are included or not in the VAR.
Results of VAR estimations with quarterly data and railway revenues are entirely consistent with
previous conclusions and interpretations.
20

Finally, we test directly whether a shock to railway revenues had an effect on the spread, the
liquidity ratio (or gold stock) and on Banque de France credit. We identify a revenue shock as a shock
to railway revenues that affects immediately these three variables but is not affected by them. Such an
identification assumption should imply an increase in the spread and in gold reserves if the monetary
approach of the balance of payments is correct. Figure 21 shows that there is no effect of an increase in
short term activity on the spread and only a very small decrease in the liquidity ratio (0.3 percent).
There is a quite strong effect on Banque de France credit (an increase by 5% in railway revenues led to
a 1.5% increase in Banque de France credit to the economy), but this effect is not related to movements
in the spread and very weakly to gold flows. Hence, in addition to sterilizing gold outflows, the Banque
de France was responding to domestic demand, but these two activities were separated, contrary to
what the monetary theory of the balance of payments would predict.
3.5 Central bank’s assets and the stock market
In the previous discussions and estimations, we have assumed that the response of the Banque de
France balance sheet to an international shock was not influenced by the behavior of the French stock
market. However, in a way to keep sound banking business and to prevent stock market movements
from jeopardizing investment banking activities of the Parisian Haute Banque, the Banque may have
been incited to account for stock market movements in its policy decisions. One could thus argue that
the main use of central bank assets was to support the activity of the Parisian stock market (the
domestic portfolio would thus expand when stock market prices go down), which was itself affected by
the English interest rate. If true, what we have interpreted so far as the response to an international
shock would actually be partly the response to a shock of French stock market activity. The
straightforward way to address this issue is to include a stock market index in the VAR. We use the
monthly index of Le Bris and Hautcoeur (2010) which includes the stocks of the 40 largest firms listed
on the official Parisian stock market. This index could be transformed in several ways in order to obtain
a proxy for stock market stress or stock market cyclicality to which the central bank may have
responded. Hence we use 3 alternative variables: the log of the stock market index, the cyclical
component of the index (detrended through an HP filter) and the 3-month moving variance of the index
(as a measure of volatility). We estimate a 9-variable VAR including all the previous variables of
interest and we find that none of the three stock market variables changes the results obtained and
discussed in the previous sections. Figure 22 shows the impulse response functions of the VAR that
includes the cyclical component of the stock market index (STOCK_MARKET_TCI). Similar results
21

are obtained with the log-level of the index or with the measure of volatility.
Then we go further in the exploration of a potential relationship between the stock market and
the central bank’s portfolio as we simulate the impact of a shock on the stock market index. In Figure
23, we display the responses of the variables to an increase from the stock market index trend. No
significant result is found. The only significant response in Figure 23 is the one of the spread between
the Banque rate and the money market rate but it is extremely small and, furthermore, it is not observed
when we use the log or the volatility of the series.
These findings go against the argument that the portfolio of the central bank could have been used
mainly in response to financial instability. It does not mean that the Banque de France never eased
money market financing in response to a financial crisis (it is well known that it was done during the
1882 and 1889 financial crashes)28 but it means that it was not a systematic policy, contrary to the
sterilization of international shocks described previously.
3.6 Summary
We have provided further evidence that the rise in Banque de France credit after a shock to the
English Bank rate should be interpreted as full sterilization of international shocks by the Banque de
France rather than as a consequence of the monetary theory of the balance of payments. These results
cast new light on how Banque de France policy was constrained by the objective of stable and low
rates. Because of full capital mobility, a shock to the English rate transmitted immediately to the French
interbank market. As a result the spread between the interbank rate and the official discount rate
increased, putting pressure on the Banque de France to increase its rate or to discount more commercial
paper. Use of the discount portfolio in reaction to international shocks was thus key to achieve the
objective of a stable and low discount rate. The VAR estimations show that the gold stock and gold
devices were essential to avoid a further increase in the discount rate but they were not sufficient. The
conclusion is that the objective of a stable discount rate forced the Banque de France to extensively use
its balance sheet to sterilize international shocks.
High gold reserves, a stable discount rate and an expansion of domestic credit in response to
international shocks, were the triptych of Banque de France policy. They complemented each other and
none could work in isolation. International adjustments did not work primarily through official interest
rates but through the movements of the balance sheet of the central bank. The Banque de France
28

On the role of the Bank of France during these two crises, see White (2007) and Hautcoeur, Riva, White (2013).

22

seemed to be aware of these mechanisms, as shown by the testimony of Governor Pallain (1908) who
stressed that high gold reserves were “a compensation” for the stable discount rate and recognized that
“gold could be replaced by an equal amount of bills in the portfolio without changing the total of notes
in circulation”.
Among the analysts of Banque de France policy, Emanoil (1932) is certainly the one who
understood better the link between the Banque de France discount policy and the functioning of the
classical gold standard. He wrote:
“The Banque must be in a strong monetary position for its portfolio to increase and its reserves
of gold to decrease without causing concern. This is how the Banque could keep low discount rate, at
least for a short period of time, in spite of the upward pressure of money market rate. Applied in other
countries this policy proved to be far less successful. […]We can see that, even though gold reserves
decrease, outstanding notes and Banque’s credit increase. However, this does not mean that gold
outflows have no impact on money market rate but that the Banque has more than offset these outflows
by increasing its credit operations.”29 (Emanoil, 1932, p.101 - 104)

4) The official discount‐rate and regime changes
Previous sections made clear that the Banque de France was willing to use all possible means to
keep a stable and low discount-rate, which in many ways, succeeded. Nevertheless, the Banque
discount-rate was sometimes increased or decreased between 1880 and 1914, although rarely. What did
motivate these infrequent changes?
If the story we have told so far is right, such increases in the discount rate may be viewed as
extreme cases when gold flows and domestic interventions proved to be insufficient to maintain the
credibility of the exchange rate band. An analogy would be that an increase in the Banque discount rate
was like a devaluation coming after months of defending the parity. This way to think about the
discount rate policy of the central bank is very different from the usual way which tends to view the

29

“ll faut que la Banque d'émission soit dans une situation monétaire très forte pour que son portefeuille puisse augmenter
d'une manière sensible et son encaisse diminuer, même sans que cela inspire toutefois beaucoup d'inquiétude. C'est ainsi
que la Banque de France a pu garder à différentes reprises, un taux bas et stable, pour un certain temps du moins, malgré
la tendance à la hausse du taux de l'escompte. Appliquée à l'étranger ces dernières années, cette même politique a eu
beaucoup moins de succès. [...] On peut constater souvent que l'encaisse diminue et que pourtant la circulation fiduciaire
et en général les engagements à vue de la Banque d'Emission augmentent. Seulement, cela ne veut pas dire que les sorties
d'or n'ont pas pour effet de déterminer une tension du taux de l'argent sur le marché monétaire, mais simplement que la
Banque a compensé, et au delà, par les crédits accordés, les sommes retirées du marché, en vue de couvrir les exportations
d'or.”

23

interest rate at the core of international adjustments. It implies that the determination of the discount
rate of the central bank is highly nonlinear. In normal times, a rise in the English discount rate and gold
outflows would not affect the level of the Banque de France discount rate. In exceptional cases, it
would.
Looking at Figure 15 reinforces this conjecture. An increase in the Banque de France discountrate is always associated with an increase in the English discount-rate and a smaller spread between the
interbank rate and the official rate. But, the reverse is not true. Previous studies of the changes in
Banque de France discount rates have neglected non linearities in the policy reaction function of the
Banque de France. As a consequence, they have found puzzling results, such that the discount rate is
neither affected by exchange rate deviations (Gallarotti 1995, Morys 2013), nor by the level of the
cover ratio (Tullio and Wolters 2003). Not surprisingly, these studies conclude that standard reaction
functions explain little of the variation of the French discount-rate compared to other countries
(Gallarotti, 1995, Contamin and Denise 1999). Attempts to consider nonlinearities have led researchers
to estimate policy reaction functions with only 35 points (Tullio and Wolters 2003), that is the number
of changes of the discount-rate over the period. The finding that the Banque de France did not react to
exchange rate deviations or to the level of gold in its vaults is especially doubtful. The central bank was
so obsessed by the stability of its discount-rate that it is difficult to consider what reason could have
determined the decision to increase the discount rate except gold flowing out and the exchange rate
rising. Thus, we need to take into account the nonlinearities in Banque de France decisions. A proper
way to do this is to estimate a Markov switching model with two regimes. We expect to obtain a regime
where the discount-rate is very likely to remain stable and is not affected by any variable (since the
Banque de France defended its stability through gold sales and expansion of domestic credit). In
another regime, the Banque de France is expected to change its discount rate under the pressure of
international variables and of the changing composition of its balance sheet. This approach is similar to
the one used to analyze (Jeanne, Masson 2000) and estimate (Chen 2006) the determinants of
devaluations (currency crises) that occur after attempts of central-bank to defend the parity. The
interesting issue is to recover the variables that affected or not the Banque de France decision to change
its discount rate in each regime.
The estimation endogenously selects two regimes and provides the probabilities of being in
either one. The dependent variable is the change in the Banque de France discount rate. The
explanatory variables we include in the equation are the spread (between the Paris money market rate
and the Banque rate), the Bank of England rate in levels and in variations, the Banque de France gold
24

stock in levels and in variations, and the deviation from the upper gold point.30 The latter variable is
denoted “Point” and takes small values when the exchange rate approaches the gold export point. The
way we conduct the estimation is to try several models in order to obtain the best fit. A good fit is
defined such that the change in the Banque de France discount rate is well predicted by the probability
to be in one regime.
Figure 24 shows the probability to be in the so-called “regime 2” together with the discount
rates of the Bank of England and Banque de France. It is straightforward that the probability of being in
“regime 2” equals 1 when the Banque changed its discount rate whereas it is near zero otherwise.
Then, we are interested in how the independent variables explain changes in the Banque rate in
each regime. Estimation results are reported in Table 1. In “regime 1”, none has a significant effect.
This result is not surprising since we have acknowledged that the probability to be in “regime 1” is near
1 when the Banque keeps its discount rate stable. On the contrary, we have selected “regime 2” such
that it predicts well the probability that the Banque changes its rate. In this regime, it turns out that the
change in the Banque discount rate is significantly affected by all our variables. According to this
estimation, the Banque increased its discount rate when the spread is low, when the exchange rate is
close to the gold export point, when the Bank rate is high and increasing and when the Banque gold
stock is low and decreasing.
The results of the Markov switching model are better understood when we compare it to a
standard OLS regression (Table 2). Described previously, the studies that have used this method have
obtained non robust and puzzling results. We find the same problem when we run a simple regression
with the same variables as in the Markov switching equation. In the specification reported in Table 2,
the level of the English Bank rate and the variations of the gold stock have no effect. Similar problems
were obtained with different specifications. But the OLS estimation is mis-specified. Results obtained
with a switching model show evidence of highly nonlinear relationships. The OLS estimation makes
the assumption that an increase in Bank rate would always imply a similar increase in the Banque rate.
But the observation of the pattern of the two discount rates has suggested that this assumption does not
hold. It is not because of a threshold value of the Bank rate (and such a TAR would also be
misspecified). The non-linearity is mainly due to the fact that many factors need to be combined in
order to cause an increase in the Banque rate. A rise in the Banque de France rate occurred only in a
30

We include variables both in levels and variations because we think that the marginal effects matter. A negative change in
gold reserves would be probably perceived as unimportant if reserves are high, but very important if reserves are low.
Nonetheless, we obtained quite similar results when using only the variables in variations. For the definition of gold
points, we use here the values given by Morgenstern (1959) but conclusions are the same when using time-varying gold
points following the method of Officer (1996) and Bordo &Macdonald (2005).

25

very special regime. The main objective of the Banque was to maintain the probability to be in this
regime at the lowest possible level.
This section has shown that accounting for nonlinearities is crucial in order to understand that
changes in the Banque de France discount rate were indeed significantly determined by the English
rate, the exchange rate, the gold stock and the conditions on the French money market. The nonlinearity in the decision to change the official discount rate is due to the very nature of the balance sheet
policy of the Banque de France.

6) Conclusion
Many studies have characterized the Banque de France as an outlier or as a polar case during the gold
standard, but no paper had attempted yet to provide a complete overview of the interventions and
methods that allowed the Banque to continuously violate the rules of the game while staying credible
and maintaining the parity. This paper attempts to fill this gap and argues that the answer lies in the
balance sheet of the central bank. The main objective of the Banque was to keep a stable discount rate.
In order to achieve this objective, the Banque used the gold stock (i.e sold it when foreign rates
increased), used gold devices and foreign interventions (although moderately and non-continuously
over the period) and, most of all, used its discount portfolio to fulfill the demand of French banks and,
then, avoid excessive deviations in the spread between the interbank rate and the official discount rate
of the central bank. Gold sales and purchases affected international rates whereas discounting was used
to absorb international shocks and control the domestic interest rate. As such, the Banque de France
discount rate was largely disconnected from the English rate. Only in extreme cases, the Banque had to
follow the Bank of England. We have shown that such decisions were determined by the standard
forces of the gold standard (exchange-rate deviations, interest rates differentials, cover ratio etc.). The
policy of the Banque de France should be interpreted as the product of a dual constraint (or a double
objective): maintaining the stability of the domestic discount-rate and maintaining the fixed parity of
the exchange-rate. The balance sheet was used to achieve both objectives. When necessary, in few
extreme cases, the Banque always preferred to change the discount rate rather than modifying the
exchange rate parity. But these increases in the discount-rate were seldom and temporary. Frequent or
permanent deviations from the implicit discount rate target of 2-3% would have threatened the
domestic legitimacy of the exchange-rate regimes, in the same way that a permanent suspension of
convertibility would have threatened the international credibility of France abroad. As a consequence,
the ability of the Banque de France to use its balance sheet to absorb international shocks is probably a
26

key element to explain - in political economy terms - the long lasting adherence of the country to the
gold standard.31
Indeed, the Banque de France was at the extreme of the spectrum; the Bank of England being at
the other one. But it was not an outlier. Several central banks fell in between, with values of the cover
ratio or reserves and number of interest rate changes being closer to France than to England (Morys
2013). Our study of France under the gold standard tends to bring at least three conclusions that could
not be drawn from the English case and that are useful for the study of other countries: international
adjustments could work through the balance sheets of central-banks rather than through interest rates
(and the former is thus more important to look at than the latter), the objective of a stable discount-rate
forced the central bank to be able to change rapidly and dramatically the composition of the balance
sheet, and finally, the setting of the official discount rate was highly nonlinear. A more general
conclusion of this study is that the main forces of the gold standard were at work despite constant
violations of the rules of the game: the central bank kept a close eye on exchange-rate deviations;
exchange-rates adjusted through gold movements. Notwithstanding very different central banking
practices, domestic objectives and interpretations of the so-called “rules of the game”, the gold standard
still worked as a credible rule.

31

Foreign exchange interventions were another usual tool – in addition to gold devices – which was mainly used by small
central banks to stabilize the exchange rate and isolate partly domestic economies from international shocks (Reis 2007,
Esteves et al. 2009, Jobst 2009, Ugolini 2012). The objective and operations of the Banque de France were different in
kind and in quantity.

27

APPENDIX
Data sources
N.B: all data are monthly except railway revenues which are quarterly


Imports and exports
From 1880-1885: Statistiques mensuelles du commerce extérieur de la France
(Direction générale des douanes et droits indirects).
From 1886 to 1914 : Bulletin de statistique et législation comparée (available in NBER
MacroHistory database, series m07027 and m07032)



Excess specie imports
White (1933)



Banque de France discount rate
NBER MacroHistory database, series m13014



Bank of England discount rate
NBER MacroHistory database, series m13013



Reichsbank discount rate
NBER MacroHistory database, series m13015



Money market rate in Paris
The Economist, available in NBER MacroHistory database, series m13017



Money market rate in London (open market of discounts)
NBER MacroHistory database, series m13016



Exchange rate Paris-London
NBER MacroHistory database, series m14107

28



Exchange rate Paris – Berlin
NBER MacroHistory database, series m14071



Foreign portfolio
ANNHIS



Gold premium in Paris
White (1933)



French 6-month interest rate on government bonds
Pierre Arbulu, "Le marché parisien des actions au XIXè siècle" in "Le marché financier
français au XIXè siècle", Vol II, Paris, Les Publications de la Sorbonne, 2006.



Gold and silver reserves of the Banque de France
ABF, Situation hebdomadaire de la Banque de France
(available online from 1898 :
http://www.banque-france.fr/la-banque-de-france/histoire/annuaire-historique.html)



Advances and discounts of the Banque de France
ABF, Situation hebdomadaire de la Banque de France
(available online from 1898 :
http://www.banque-france.fr/la-banque-de-france/histoire/annuaire-historique.html)



Notes in circulation
White (1933)



Stock market index
David Le Bris, Les actions françaises depuis 1854 : analyses et découvertes, Phd
Dissertation, Université d’Orléans, 2011. This an index of the forty largest firms listed in
the official stock market. Cf also Le Bris and Hautcoeur (2010) for further details on the
dataset.

29



Monthly price index (1900-1913)
La Réforme économique (20 commodities).



Railway revenues
Revenues of the companies of the General network (“réseau d’intérêt general”) which

was divided in 7 large networks (“Paris-Lyon-Méditerranée ; Rhône au Mont-Cenis ; Nord ;
Ouest ; Orléans ; Est ; Midi”). Reported revenues of the companies are from passengers and
freight, not from other sources (state subsidies, financial investments etc.).
From 1880 à 1886, Bulletin du Ministère des travaux publics. Statistics are available for
each network. We add the revenues of the 7 networks. Data are quarterly.
From 1887 à 1899 ; Bulletin de statistique et législation comparée. Data are quarterly.
The Bulletin publishes the sum of the revenues of the 7 networks.
From 1900 à 1913 ; Bulletin de statistique et législation comparée. Data are monthly; we sum the
revenues for each quarter. The Bulletin publishes the sum of the revenues of the 7 networks.

30

References
Ansiaux Maurice, 1910, Principes de la politique régulatrice des changes, Bruxelles: Mish et Thron
Arnauné Auguste,1922, La monnaie, le crédit et le change, Paris, Felix Alcan.
Bloomfield Arthur, 1959, Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard, New York, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
Baubeau, Patrice, 2004, Les “ cathédrales de papier “ ou la foi dans le crédit. Naissance et crise du
système de l’escompte en France, fin XVIIIe-premier XXe siècles, Thèse de doctorat d'Université,
University of Paris X Nanterre.
Bazot, Guillaume, 2014, “Local liquidity constraints: What place for central bank regional policy? The
French experience during the Belle Époque (1880–1913)”, Explorations in Economic History, 52, pp.
44–62
Bignon Vincent, 2013, “An Early Experiment in Quantitative Easing: The Bank of France and Funding
Stress in the 19th century”, mimeo
Bignon Vincent and Clemens Jobst, 2013, “Efficacy of Lender of Last Resort, Access to Central Bank
Money and the Default Rate: France 1826-1913”, mimeo
Bopp, K. R,1952, “Bank of France Policy: Brief Survey of Instruments, 1800–1914”, American
Journal of Economics and Sociology, 11, pp. 229–244
Bordo Michael D and Ronald MacDonald, 1997, “Violations of the `Rules of the Game' and the
Credibility of the Classical Gold Standard, 1880-1914 ”, NBER Working papers, n°6115
Bordo, Michael D., MacDonald, Ronald, 2005. “Interest rate interactions in the Classical Gold
Standard, 1880–1914: was there any monetary independence?”, Journal of Monetary Economics 52,
pp. 307–327.
Bordo, Michael D., Rockoff, Hugh, 1996, “The gold standard as a ‘good housekeeping seal of
approval”, Journal of Economic History, 56, pp. 389–428
Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz, 1999, "Under What Circumstances, Past And Present, Have
International Rescues Of Countries In Financial Distress Been Successful?," Journal of International
Money and Finance, v18(4,Aug), 683-708
Chen Shiu-Sheng, 2006, “Revisiting the interest rate–exchange rate nexus: a Markov-switching
approach”, Journal of Development Economics, 79, 1, pp. 208-224.
Christiano, Larry, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, 1999, “Monetary policy shocks: What have
we learned and to what end?”, in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, Part A, pp. 65-148.
Congrès monétaire international tenu à Paris, les 11, 12, 13 et 14 septembre 1889. Compte rendu "in
extenso" et documents (1890).
31

Contamin Remy, Denise Caroline,1999, “ Quelle autonomie pour les politiques monétaires sous
l’étalon-or, 1880-1913? “, Économie internationale, 78, pp. 59-84.
Contamin Remy, 2003, “ Interdépendances financières et dilemme de politique monétaire. La Banque
de France entre 1880 et 1913 ”, Revue économique, 54, 1,pp. 157-180
Davatyan, Nurhan, Parke, William.R., 1995. The operations of the Bank of England 1890–1908: a
dynamic probit approach. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 27, pp.1099–1112.
Dessirier, Jean, 1929, "Nouveaux essais de statistiques sur les mouvements boursiers", Journal de la
Société de Statisique de Paris, 71, 2, pp. 35-94.
Dutton, John, 1984. The Bank of England and the rules of the game under the international gold
standard: new evidence. In: Bordo, M.D., Schwartz, A.J. (Eds.), A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
Standard, 1821–1931, Chicago University Press, Chicago, pp. 173–202.
Eichengreen, Barry, 1987. “Conducting the international orchestra: Bank of England leadership under
the Classical Gold Standard”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 6, pp. 5–29.
Eichengreen, Barry., 1995, “ Central bank cooperation and exchange rate commitments: the classical
and interwar gold standards compared”, Financial History Review, 2, pp. 99–117.
Eichengreen, Barry. and Flandreau Marc eds., 1997, “Introduction”, The gold standard in theory and
history , 2nd éd, London, Routledge.
Emanoil Christian, 1932, Les variations du taux de l'escompte en France, thèse université de Paris,
Domat-Montchretien
Esteves, Rui Pedro & Reis, Jaime & Ferramosca, Fabiano, 2009. "Market Integration in the Golden
Periphery. The Lisbon/London Exchange, 1854-1891," Explorations in Economic History, vol. 46(3),
p. 324-345, July.
Flandreau Marc, 1996, “ Les règles de la pratique : la Banque de France, le marché des métaux
précieux et la naissance de l’étalon-or 1848-1876 “, Annales HSS, 4, pp. 849-872.
Flandreau Marc, 1997, “ Central Bank Cooperation in Historical Perspective. A Sceptical View “,
Economic History Review, 50 (4), pp. 735-763
Flandreau Marc, 2004, The Glitter of Gold. France, Bimetalism and the Emergence of the International
Gold Standard, 1848-1873, Oxford University Press.
Flandreau, Marc and Sicsic, Pierre, 2003,“Crédits à la spéculation et marché monétaire: le marché des
reports en France de 1875 à 1914”, in Feiertag, Olivier and Margairaz, Michel, eds., Politiques et
pratiques des banques d'émission en Europe (XVIIe-XXe siècles) , Paris : Albin Michel.

32

Flandreau Marc and François Gallice, 2005, “Paris, London, and the International Money Market:
Lessons from Paribas, 1885–1913”, in Y.Cassis and E.Bussière, London and Paris as International
Financial Centres in the Twentieth Century, Oxford UP.
Ford, A. G, 1962, The Gold Standard 1880-1914: Britain and Argentina, Oxford University Press.
Gallarotti, Giulio. M., 1995, The anatomy of an international monetary regime: the classical gold
standard, 1880–1914, New York, Oxford University Press.
Giovannini, Alberto,1993, ‘‘Bretton Woods and Its Precursors: Rules versus Discretion in the History
of the International Monetary System.’’ In M. Bordo and B. Eichengreen (Eds.), A Retrospective on the
Bretton Woods System. Chicago Univ. Press, Chicago, pp. 109–53.
Goodhart, Charles.A.E., 1972, The business of banking, 1891–1914, London.
Hallwood,Paul., MacDonald, Ronald., Marsh, Ian.W., 1996, “Credibility and fundamentals: were the
classical and interwar gold standards well-behaved target zones?”, In: Bayoumi, T., Eichengreen, B.,
Taylor, M.P. (Eds.), Modern Perspectives on the Gold Standard. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 129–161.
Hamilton James.D., 1989, “A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and
the business cycle”, Econometrica, 57, pp. 357–384
Haupt, O., 1894, Arbitrages et parités. Traité des opérations de banque , Paris Librairie Truchy.
Hautcoeur Pierre Cyrille, Angelo Riva, and Eugene N. White, 2013, “Can Moral Hazard Be Avoided? The
Banque de France and the Crisis of 1889”, Carnegie-NYU-Rochester conference on Public Policy,
Jeanne, Olivier, 1995, “Monetary Policy in England
analysis”,Explorations in Economic History, 32, pp. 302–326.

1893–1914:

a

structural

VAR

Jeanne Olivier and Paul Masson, 2000, “Currency crises, sunspots and Markov-switching regimes”,
Journal of International Economics, 50 (2), pp. 327-350
Jobst Clemens, 2009, “Market Leader: The Austro-Hungarian Bank and the making of foreign exchange
interventions, 1896-1913,” European Review of Economic History, 13, pp. 287-318.

Johnson, Harry G. 1973, "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments Theory." In
International Trade and Money, edited by Michael B. Connolly and K. Alexander Swoboda, pp. 20624. London: Allen & Unwin.
Le Bris, David and Hautcoeur , Pierre-Cyrille, 2010, “A Challenge to Triumphant Optimists? A Blue
Chips Index for the Paris Stock-Exchange (1854-2007)”, Financial History Review, 17 (2), pp. 141183.
Liesse, André, 1910, Evolution of credit and banks in France from the year 1800 to the present,
National Monetary Commission, US Senate 61st Congress, vol.1, n°5, Washington, D.C.,
33

McCloskey, Donald N., and J. Richard Zecher, 1976, "How the Gold Standard Worked, 1880 1913." In
The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments, edited by Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry G. Johnson,
357-85. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,.
Mojon Benoît, 1998. "Monetary Policy Under a Fixed Exchange Rate Regime, the Case of France
1987-1996," Working Papers 1998-14, CEPII research center.
Monnet Eric, 2014, "Monetary policy without interest rates. Evidence from France’s Golden Age
(1948-1973) using a narrative approach," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Morgenstern, Oskar, 1959, International Financial Transactions and Business Cycles. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Morys Matthias, 2013, “Discount rate policy under the Classical Gold Standard: core versus periphery
(1870s -1914)”, Explorations in Economic History, 50, pp.205-226.
Neymark Alfred, 1884, De l'organisation des Marchés financiers en France et à l'étranger, Paris, 1884

Nishimura, Shizuya., 1995,“The French provincial banks, the Banque de France, and Bill Finance,
1890-1913”, Economic History Review, 48 ( 3)pp. 536-554.
Nitti, Francesco S,1898, "Essai sur les variations du taux de l'escompte", Revue d'Économie Politique,
vol. XII, pp. 367-398 and pp. 789-826,
Nurkse, Ragnar., 1944, International currency experience: lessons of the inter-war period, New York,
Columbia University Press.
Ogden, Thomas., 1991, “An analysis of Bank of England discount and advance behaviour, 1870–
1914”, in J. Foreman-Peck, ed., New perspectives on the Victorian economy: essays in quantitative
history, 1860–1914, Cambridge, Cambridge, pp. 305–43.
Officer, Lawrence.H., 1986, “The efficiency of the Dollar–Sterling Gold Standard, 1890–1908”,
Journal of Political Economy, 94, pp. 1038–1073.
Officer, Lawrence.H., 1996, Between the Dollar-Sterling Gold Points: Exchange Rates, Parity and
Market Behavior, Cambridge University Press.
Pallain, Georges, 1908, Entretien de M. Aldrich, Sénateur, Président et des membres de la Commission
Nationale Monétaire des Etats-Unis, avec M. Georges Pallain, Gouverneur de la Banque de France
(English version in “ Interviews on the banking and currency systems of England, France, Germany,
Switzerland and Italy, National Monetary Commission, Washington DC.
Patron M, 1910, The Bank of France in its Relation to National and International Credit, National
Monetary Commission, US Senate 61st Congress, 2nd Session, 20 (494), Washington, D.C.,
34

Pippenger, John, 1984, “Bank of England operations, 1893–1913”, In: Bordo, M.D., Schwartz, A.J.
(Eds.), A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821–1931,Chicago University Press, Chicago,
pp. 203–232.
Ramon Gabriel, 1932, Histoire de la Banque de France, Paris, Grasset.
Reis, Jaime., 2007,“An “art” and not a “science”? Central bank management in Portugal under the gold
standard, 1863–1887”, The Economic History Review, 60, pp. 712–741.
Rodgers, Mary T, 2012, “An Overlooked Central Bank Rescue: How the Bank of France Ended the
American Panic of 1907”, mimeo
Rodgers, Mary T. and James Payne, 2014, “How the Bank of France changed US equity expectations
and ended the panic of 1907”, Journal of Economic History, 74 (2), pp. 420 – 448.
Rouleau, Gaston 1914,,“Les règlements par effets de commerce en France et l’étranger“, Paris, Société
statistique de Paris.
Saint-Marc Michèle, 1983, Histoire monétaire de la France 1800-1980, Paris, Presses Universitaires de
France.
Sayers, Richard R. S. , 1936, Bank of England Operations, 1890-1914 , London: P. S. King .
Sayers, Richard S. , 1976, The Bank of England, 1891-1944, Cambridge University Press
Sicsic Pierre, 1989, “Estimation du stock de monnaie métallique en France à la fin du XIXe siècle”, :
Revue économique, 40 (4), pp. 709-736.
Sommariva, Andrea, and Giuseppe Tullio, 1987, German Macroeconomic History 1880-1979 -A Study
of the Effects of Economic Policy on Inflation, Currency Depreciation and Economic Growth. London:
Macmillan.
Sommariva, Andrea, and Giuseppe Tullio, 1988, “International Gold Flows in Gold Standard Germany:
A Test of the Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments, 1880-1911: Note”Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking , 20 (1) , pp. 132-140.
Tullio Giuseppe., Wolters Joseph. 2003, “ The Objectives of French Monetary Policy during the
Classical Gold Standard, 1876-1913: an econometric analysis of the determinants of the Banque de
France’s official discount rate ”, mimeo
Ugolini, Stefano, 2012, “The Origins of Foreign Exchange Policy: the National Bank of Belgium and the
Quest of Monetary Independence in the 1850s”, European Review of Economic History 16, pp. 51-73.

White Harry .Dexter,1933, The French International Accounts 1880-1913, Cambridge, Harvard
University Press

35

White, Eugene, 2007, “The Crash of 1882 and the Bailout of the Paris Bourse,” Cliometrica, 1 (2),pp.
111-144.
Whale P. B., 1937, “The Working of the Pre-War Gold Standard”, Economica, 4 (13),, pp. 18-3

36

Figure 1 : Discount rates of the Banque de France, the Bank of England and the
Reichsbank, 1880-1914.
8

8

7

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1
1880

1
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

BANK_RATE
REICHSBANK_RATE
BANQUE_RATE

37

1910

Figure 2 : Gold premium at Paris (per 1000 francs) and Bank of England
discount rate, 1880-1914.

8

8

7

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
1880

0
1885

1890

1895

1900

BANQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM

38

1905

1910

BANK_RATE

Figure 3
Responses to One S.D. Innovation on the Bank of England rate
Cholesky decomposition. Bank rate ordered f irst.
± 2 S.E.
Response of exchange rate

Response of Bank rate
.6

.4

Response of French imports

.03

.06

.02

.04

.01

.02

.00

.00

-.01

-.02

.2

.0

-.2

-.02
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

-.04
2

18

Response of Banque de France gol d stock

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

Response of Banque de France silver stock

.01

.00

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of Banque gold premium

.008

.6

.004

.4

.000

.2

-.004

.0

-.008

-.2

-.01

-.02

-.03

-.012
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

-.4
2

18

Response of Banque di scount rate

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of excess of French specie imports

.16

10

.12

5

.08

0

.04

-5

.00

-10

-.04

-15
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

4

6

39

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Figure 4
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Res pons e of BA NK _RA TE to B A NK_RA TE

Res pons e of EXCHA NGE_RA TE t o B A NK _RA TE

.6

.03

.5
.02

.4
.3

.01
.2
.1

.00

.0
-.1

-.01
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

Res pons e o f BA NQUE_ LIQUIDITY _RA T IO t o BA NK_RA TE
.005

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Res pons e of BA NQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM t o BA NK _RA TE
.5
.4

.000
.3
-.005

.2
.1

-.010

.0
-.015
-.1
-.020

-.2
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Res pons e of FRENCH_IMPORTS to BA NK_RA TE

Res pons e of B A NQUE_RA TE t o B A NK _RA TE
.10

.04

.08

.03
.02

.06

.01
.04
.00
.02

-.01

.00

-.02

-.02

-.03
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

40

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Figure 5: gold and silver stock of the Banque de France (1880-1914)
(stock in Ff. 1,000)

4500000

4500000

4000000

4000000

3500000

3500000

3000000

3000000

2500000

2500000

2000000

2000000

1500000

1500000

1000000

1000000

500000

500000
1885

1890

1895

1900

Silver stock

1905

1910

Gold stock

Figure 6: Liquidity ratio the Banque de France
100

100

95

95

90

90

85

85

80

80

75

75

70

70

65

65

60

60
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

Liquidity ratio (in %)

41

1910

Figure 7
Response toCholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
First part of the sample: 1880-1900
Response of BANK_RATE to BANK_RATE

Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to BANK_RATE

.6

.03

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM to BANK_RATE
.8

.02
.4

.4

.01
.2

.00
.0
-.01

.0
-.02
-.2

-.4

-.03
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

Response of BANQUE_RATE to BANK_RATE

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

Response of FRENCH_IMPORTS to BANK_RATE

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK to BANK_RATE

.16

.06

.03

.12

.04

.08

.02

.00

.04

.00

-.01

.00

-.02

.02
.01

-.02

-.04

-.03

-.04
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

-.04
2

4

6

8

10

Response of BANQUE_SILVER_STOCK to BANK_RATE
.004

.000

-.004

-.008

-.012
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

42

12

14

16

18

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Figure 8
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Second par of the sample, 1900-1914
Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to BANK_R ATE

R es pons e of BAN K_R ATE to BAN K_R ATE
.6

.02

.4

.01

.2
.00
.0
-.01

-.2
-.4

-.02
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

R es pons e o f BANQUE_R ATE to BAN K_R ATE

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of FRENCH_IMPORTS to BANK_R ATE

.100

.04

.075

.02

.050
.00
.025
-.02
.000
-.04

-.025
-.050

-.06
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

2

18

R es pons e of BAN QU E_GOLD _STOC K to BAN K_R ATE
.03

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Res pons e of BANQUE_SILVER_STOCK to BAN K_R ATE
.010
.005

.02

.000
.01
-.005
.00
-.010
-.01

-.015

-.02

-.020
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

4

43

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Figure 9
Resp on se to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Re s p on se o f BANK_ RATE to BANK_ RATE

Response of RAILWAYS INDEX to BANK_RATE

.8
.01
.6

.4

.00

.2
-.01
.0

-.2

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

10

Re s po ns e o f BANQUE_ RATE to BANK_RATE

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Response of EXCHAN GE_ RATE to BANK_RATE

.20

.04
.03

.15

.02
.10
.01
.05
.00
.00

-.01

-.05

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

10

R es po n s e of BANQUE_ GOLD_STOCK to BANK_RATE

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Response of BANQUE_GOLD _ PR EMIU M to BANK_RATE

.02

.8

.01

.6

.00

.4

-.01
.2
-.02
.0

-.03

-.2

-.04
-.05

-.4
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

10

44

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 10
Comparisons of Responses to shocks on Bank rate and Reichsbank rate.
Cholesky decomposition.
Bank rate ordered first.
Respo nse of BA NK_RA TE t o Ch oles ky
One S. D. Innovat ions

Res pons e of REICHSBA NK _RA TE to Choles ky
One S.D. Inn ov at ions

.5

.32
.28

.4

.24
.3

.20

.2

.16
.12

.1

.08
.0

.04

-.1

.00
2

4

6

8

BANK_RATE

10

12

14

16

18

2

4

REI CH SBAN K_R ATE

6

8

BANK_RATE

Res pons e of EXCHA NGE_RA TE t o Choles ky
On e S. D. Inno v ation s

10

12

14

16

18

R EIC HSBANK_RATE

Res pons e of BA NQUE_LIQUIDITY _RA TIO to Choles ky
One S.D. Inn ov at io ns

.020

.005

.015
.000
.010
.005

-.005

.000
-.010
-.005
-.010

-.015
2

4

6

8

BANK_RATE

10

12

14

16

18

2

4

REI CH SBAN K_R ATE

6

8

BANK_RATE

12

14

16

18

R EIC HSBANK_RATE

Res pons e of BA NQUE_RA TE t o Cho les ky
One S.D. Inn ov ations

Re s pons e of BA NQUE_GO LD_ PREMIUM t o Choles ky
One S.D. Innov a t ions
.4

10

.08

.3

.06

.2
.04
.1
.02
.0
.00

-.1
-.2

-.02
2

4

6

8

BANK_RATE

10

12

14

16

REI CH SBAN K_R ATE

18

2

45

4

6

8

BANK_RATE

10

12

14

16

R EIC HSBANK_RATE

18

Figure 11
Comparisons of Responses to shocks on Bank rate and Reichsbank rate.
Cholesky decomposition.
Reichsbank rate ordered first.
Res pons e of REICHSB A NK_RATE t o Choles ky
One S. D. Innov at ion s

Response of BA NK_RA TE t o Cholesky
One S.D. Innov ations

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

.0

.0

-.1

-.1
2

4

6

8

10

12

REICHSBANK_RATE

14

16

18

2

4

BANK_RATE

6

8

10

12

REICHSBANK_RATE

Res ponse of EXCHA NGE_RA TE t o Cholesky
One S. D. Innov at io ns

14

16

18

BANK_RATE

Res pons e of BA NQUE_LIQUIDITY _RA TIO to Choles ky
One S.D. Innov at ions

.020

.002

.015

.000

.010

-.002

.005

-.004

.000

-.006

-.005

-.008

-.010

-.010
2

4

6

8

10

12

REICHSBANK_RATE

14

16

18

2

4

BANK_RATE

6

8

10

12

REICHSBANK_RATE

Res pons e of BA NQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM to Choles ky
One S .D. Innov a tions

14

16

18

BANK_RATE

Response of BA NQUE_RATE to Cholesky
One S.D. Innovat ions

.4

.06

.3

.05

.2
.04
.1
.03
.0
.02

-.1
-.2

.01
2

4

6

8

10

REICHSBANK_RATE

12

14

16

18

2

BANK_RATE

4

6

8

10

REICHSBANK_RATE

46

12

14

16

BANK_RATE

18

Figure 12 :Banque de France’s foreign portfolios and discount rate and Bank of England
discount rate

10

90000000

9

80000000

8

70000000

7

60000000

6

50000000

5

40000000

4

30000000

3

20000000

2

10000000

1

0
1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

1912

Foreign portfolio (right axis)
Bank of England discount rate (left axis)
Banque de France discount rate (left axis)

47

1914

Figure 13: Banque de France domestic portfolio and Bank of England discount rate

5

9

4

8

3

7

2

6

1

5

0

4

-1

3

-2

2

-3

1
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

1910

Discounts of the Banque de France (normalized, left axis)
Bank of England discount rate (right axis)

48

5

9

4

8

3

7

2

6

1

5

0

4

-1

3

-2

2

-3

1
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

1910

Domestic portfolio (advances + discounts) of the Banque de France (normalized, left axis)
Bank of England discount rate

49

Figure 14: Negative co-movement between metallic reserves and domestics assets
.12
.10
.08
.06
.04
.02
.00
-.02
-.04
1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

% c hange in BDF specie (gold+silver)
% c hange in BDF Credit (advances + dis c ount s )

50

1910

Figure 15: The money market rate

8

8

7

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
1880

0
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

PARIS MONEY MARKET RATE
BANK RATE
BANQUE RATE

51

1910

Figure 16: Banque de France balance sheet
1,400,000
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
0
1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

1910

Discount_portfolio_Paris
Discount_portfolio_branches

600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

AVANCE_TITRES_branches
AVANCES_TITRES_Paris
52

1910

15.0

14.5

14.0

13.5

13.0

12.5

12.0
1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

1910

Banque de Franc e Discounts and Advances Total (log)
Banque de Franc e Discount and Advances Paris (log)
1,200,000

1,000,000

800,000

600,000

400,000

200,000

0
1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

Depos its _Paris
Depos its _branches
Depos it_Treasury

53

1905

1910

Figure 17
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innov ations ± 2 S.E.
Response of BANK_RATE to BANK_RATE

Response of 6-month TREASURY BONDS to BANK_RATE Response of BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK to BANK_RATE

.6

.4

.15

.005

.10

.000

.05

-.005

.00

-.010

-.05

-.015

.2

.0

-.2

-.10
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

-.020
1

12

Response of BANQUE_RATE to BANK_RATE

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

1

12

Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to BANK_RATE

.08

.03

.06

.02

.04

.01

.02

.00

.00

-.01

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Response of SPREAD to BANK_RATE
.04

.00

-.04

-.02

-.08

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

-.12
1

12

Response of BANQUE DE FRANCE CREDIT to BANK_RATE

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Response of FRENCH_IMPORTS to BANK_RATE

.04

.04

.03

.03

.02

.02

.01

.01

.00

.00

-.01

-.01

1

12

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM to BANK_RATE
.6
.4
.2
.0

-.02

-.2

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

-.4
1

2

3

4

54

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 18
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Res ponse of BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK to BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK

Response of BDF_CREDIT to BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK

.040

.01

.035

.00
-.01

.030

-.02
.025
-.03
.020

-.04

.015

-.05

.010

-.06
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

Res ponse of EXCHANGE_RATE to BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK
.008

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of SPREAD to BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK
.16

.004

.12

.000
.08
-.004
.04
-.008
.00

-.012
-.016

-.04
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

55

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Figure 19
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Res pons e of BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK to SPREAD

Response of BDF_CREDIT to SPREAD_R_I

.020

.01

.015

.00

.010

-.01

.005

-.02

.000

-.03

-.005

-.04
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Response of SPREAD_R_I to SPREAD_R_I

Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to SPREAD_R_I
.010

.24
.20

.005

.16
.000

.12

-.005

.08
.04

-.010

.00

-.015

-.04
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

56

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 20
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innov ations ± 2 S.E.
Quarterly data.
R es pons e of BA NK_RAT E to BAN K_R AT E

Response of BDF_CREDIT to BANK_RATE

.8

R es pons e of RA ILWAYS IN DEX to BANK_RATE

.06

.02

.04

.6

.01

.02
.4

.00
.00

.2

-.01
-.02

.0

-.02

-.04

-.2

-.06
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-.03
1

R es pons e of SPREAD to BAN K_RAT E

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to BANK_RATE

.10

.04

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Res ponse of BAN QU E_LIQUIDITY_RATIO to BAN K_R ATE
.02

.03

.05

1

.01

.02
.00

.00
.01

-.05

-.01
.00

-.10

-.02

-.01

-.15

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-.03
1

2

3

4

Respons e of BAN Q U E_GOLD _PR EM IUM to BAN K_R ATE
.8
.6
.4
.2
.0
-.2
-.4
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

57

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 21
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Res pons e of RAILWAYS to RAILWAYS

Response of BDF_CREDIT to RAILWAYS

.07

.05

.06

.04

.05

.03

.04

.02

.03

.01

.02

.00

.01

-.01

.00

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

Res ponse of SPREAD_R_I to RAILWAYS

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to RAILWAYS

.12

.01

.08
.00
.04
-.01

.00

-.04
-.02
-.08
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

Res pons e of BANQUE_LIQUID ITY_RATIO to RAILWAYS

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Response of FRENCH_IMPORTS to RAILWAYS
.04

.01

.03
.02

.00
.01
.00

-.01

-.01
-.02

-.02
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

58

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Figure 22
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innov ations ± 2 S.E.
Response of BANK_RATE to BANK_RATE

Response of STOCK_MARKET_TCY to BANK_RATE

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK to BANK_RATE

.6

.8

.02

.4

.4

.2

.0

.0

-.4

.01
.00
-.01

-.2

-.02

-.8
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of BANQUE_RATE to BANK_RATE
.10
.08

-.03
2

20

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

20

Response of EXCHANGE_RATE to BANK_RATE

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of SPREAD_R_I to BANK_RATE

.03

.08

.02

.04

.01

.00

.00

-.04

-.01

-.08

.06
.04
.02
.00
-.02

-.02
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Response of LOGCRED_BDF to BANK_RATE
.04

-.12
2

20

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

20

Response of FRENCH_IMPORTS to BANK_RATE
.04

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM to BANK_RATE
.4

.03
.02

.2
.02

.00

.01

.0

.00
-.02

-.2
-.01

-.04

-.02
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

-.4
2

4

6

8

10

59

12

14

16

18

20

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 23
Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.
Response of BANK_RATE to STOCK_MARKET_TCY
.2

.1

Response of ST OCK_MARKET_TCY to ST OCK_MARKET _T CY

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_ST OCK to STOCK_MARKET_TCY

2.5

.020

2.0

.015

1.5

.010

1.0

.005

.0

-.1

0.5

.000

0.0

-.005

-0.5
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of BANQUE_RAT E to STOCK_MARKET_TCY
.08

-.010
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of EXCHANGE_RAT E to ST OCK_MARKET_T CY
.015

.06

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of SPREAD_R_I to STOCK_MARKET_TCY
.050
.025

.010

.04

.000
.005

.02

-.025
.000

.00

-.050
-.005

-.02
-.04

-.075

-.010
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of LOGCRED_BDF to STOCK_MARKET_TCY
.04
.03

-.100
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of FRENCH_IMPORT S to ST OCK_MARKET_TCY

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Response of BANQUE_GOLD_PREMIUM to ST OCK_MARKET _T CY

.03

.3

.02

.2

.01

.1

.00

.0

-.01

-.1

.02
.01
.00
-.01
-.02

-.02
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

-.2
2

4

6

8

10

60

12

14

16

18

20

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 24: Probability to be in regime 2 according to the Markov switching equation,
and discount rates of the Banque de France and Bank of England.

8

1.4

7

1.2

6

1.0

5

0.8

4

0.6

3

0.4

2

0.2

1
1880

0.0
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

PROB_REGIME2 (right axis)
BANK_RATE
BANQUE_RATE

61

1910

Table 1 : Determinants of Banque rate changes (Markov switching estimation)

Variable

Coefficient

Std. Error

Prob.

D(BANK_RATE)
BANK_RATE(-1)
SPREAD_R_I(-1)
D(BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK(-1))
POINT(-1)
BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK(-1)

0.010850
0.006093
-0.001183
0.087182
-0.016409
-0.001179

0.006151
0.003575
0.007068
0.034242
0.048571
0.001146

0.0778
0.0883
0.8671
0.0109
0.7355
0.3037

D(BANK_RATE)
BANK_RATE(-1)
SPREAD_R_I(-1)
D(BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK(-1))
POINT(-1)
BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK(-1)

0.568003
0.089444
-0.181371
-0.065140
-1.219417
-0.009224

0.019426
0.013608
0.034884
0.023744
0.183899
0.004590

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0445

LOG(SIGMA)

-2.926285

0.036907

0.0000

Table 2 : Determinants of Banque rate changes (OLS estimation)

Variable

Coefficient

Std. Error

Prob.

D(BANK_RATE)
BANK_RATE(-1)
SPREAD_R_I(-1)
D(BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK(-1))
POINT(-1)
BANQUE_GOLD_STOCK(-1)

0.119853
-0.006752
-0.048937
0.006325
-0.472308
0.006912

0.024404
0.010423
0.019531
0.052917
0.158092
0.003398

0.0000
0.5175
0.0126
0.9049
0.0030
0.0426

Adjusted R-squared

0.210645

62

