                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FISCAL CHALLENGES IN MULTILAYERED UNIONS:
                            AN OVERVIEW AND CASE STUDY

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                         Gunnar Gunnarsson

                                        Working Paper 20564
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20564


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




Joshua Aizenman is grateful for the support provided by the Dockson Chair in Economics and International
Relations, USC. Gunnar Gunnarsson is grateful for assistance form A. Danielsson, H. Gardarsson
and Th. G. Petursson. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research and Central Bank of Iceland.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joshua Aizenman and Gunnar Gunnarsson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Challenges in Multilayered Unions: An Overview and Case Study
Joshua Aizenman and Gunnar Gunnarsson
NBER Working Paper No. 20564
October 2014
JEL No. F36,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent research dealing with fiscal discipline and revisit the issues of fiscal control
in federal systems, focusing on selective case studies covering the 2000s, before and after the Global
Financial Crisis (GFC). We start by contrasting the recent fiscal history of California to that of Greece,
illustrating the different ways of dealing with fiscal deficiencies in a mature union, U.S., versus a young
union, Eurozone. We continue with an overview of the fiscal developments in Brazil, illustrating the
challenges facing federal systems in emerging markets, and possible ways to move forward in upgrading
a country’s fiscal institutions. We conclude with the fiscal history of Iceland before and after the financial
crisis—a standalone small country, assessed favorably by rating agencies prior to the GFC, and now
recovering from a deep financial crisis.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Gunnar Gunnarsson
Central Bank of Iceland
1, 150 Reykjavík
Iceland
gunnar.gunnarsson@sedlabanki.is
    1. Introduction and Overview

    The 2008 global financial crisis brought to the fore the importance of fiscal space and the
challenges associated with prudent fiscal management. While the importance of these issues had
been well recognized for emerging markets prior to the global financial crisis [GFC], the illusive
“Great Moderation” and the consequent drop in the price of risk put fiscal issues on the back
burner of the U.S., Eurozone, and other OECD crises in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Yet the
GFC showed that countries with seemingly strong fiscal positions could turn around overnight
[more precisely, over a quarter or two] and place them in a trajectory of fiscal instability and
possible ultimate default. Deep financial and banking crises induced the socialization of private
losses, rapidly increasing the public debt/GDP from benign levels below 50% into levels
approaching and exceeding 100% and rendering the public debt into junk bond status within a
year or two. The recent history of Ireland, Iceland, Spain, and other countries provided vivid
examples where socializing tail risks destroyed fiscal spaces. The GFC and follow-up Eurozone
crisis also illustrated the fragility of the Maastricht criteria of fiscal prudence, as by now all of
the Eurozone countries have exceeded the 60% ratio of public debt/GDP and most have
exceeded the 3% fiscal deficit/GDP threshold. Consequently, the search for a more enduring and
efficient fiscal regime has become an urgent agenda.

        Observers and policy makers had hoped that fiscal credibility could be gained by
adopting simple rules that would provide efficient guidelines to the public sector and thereby
enhance fiscal credibility. However, by and large, the quest for such simple fiscal rules failed,
probably due to the challenges of dealing with contingent and underfunded fiscal liabilities in the
presence of tail risks as well as taxpayers’ expectations of publicly funded bailouts in times of
unanticipated large, adverse macro shocks. While simple rules may not work, fiscal credibility
may be earned by curbing the forces that lead to such crises. Common fiscal challenges
identified by the literature are mitigating the pro-cyclicality biases of fiscal policy [see Talvi and
Vegh (2005) and Ilzetzki and Vegh (2008) and the references therein]. While in principle smart
rules linking the fiscal stance of current policies to the projected permanency of shocks may
help, implementation of these rules may depend critically on the independence of the forecasting
agency, the quality of data available to the decision maker, and the qualities of institutional
controls and enforcement of rules.


                                                   2
        Frankel (2011a, 2011b) identified a systematic optimistic bias of official budget forecasts
and GDP, which is stronger at longer horizons and in booms, and greater among European
governments that are politically subject to the budget rules in the Stability and Growth Pact
(SGP). Frankel also found that since 2000, fiscal policy in Chile has been governed by a
structural budget rule that has succeeded in implementing counter-cyclical fiscal policy. Two key
ingredients accounting for Chile’s success are (1) the official estimates of trend output, and (2)
the ten-year price of copper. These are both critical components to the decomposition of the
country’s budget into structural vs. cyclical components and are made by independent expert
panels and thus insulated from the political process. Furthermore, Franekl, Vegh, and Vuletin
(2011) found that over the last decade, about a third of the developing world has been become
countercyclical. They also find a causal link running from stronger institutions to less pro-
cyclical or more counter-cyclical fiscal policy. Intriguingly, Riera-Crichton, Vegh, and Vuletin
(2014) found that for industrial countries, contrary to ones priors, it is not always the case that
government spending goes up in recessions (i.e., acting counter-cyclically); in almost as many
cases, government spending actually goes down (i.e., acting pro-cyclically).1 These insightful
papers show that overcoming pro-cyclical bias remains a work in progress, challenging both the
OECD and emerging markets. They also confirm a more general point: prior to the GFC, the
consensus view held that emerging markets are challenged by deficient yet improving
institutions while the OECD countries “made it”—their financial institutions are mature and
well-functioning. Well, in the topsy-turvy era post-GFC world, all countries are at best emerging,
and it’s a mistake to take it for granted that OECD countries have reached the bliss point of
institutional maturity.
        The GFC and the follow-up Eurozone crisis also brought to the fore the complexity of
managing fiscal discipline in currency and federal unions—the challenges of curbing the
common pool problems associated with multilayered fiscal systems. The manifestation of these
issues, which were the focus of earlier research in the 1990s, were weak unions in such places as
Argentina, Brazil, and other emerging markets at that time. In weak unions, the center has

1
  An prime example of this result is the U.S. during the GFC: Adding up the positive fiscal stimulus of the
federal government during the GFC and the negative fiscal stimulus of the 50 U.S. states that contracted
government expenditures due to states’ balanced-budget requirements and fiscal restraints, the net fiscal
stimulus of the U.S. during the GFC was practically nil and possibly even negative after the GFC
[Aizenman and Pasricha (2011)].

                                                     3
limited control over the spending patterns of union members, leading to a version of the “tragedy
of the commons,” in which the overspending of union members reduces fiscal space. In practice,
most unions are characterized by such a structure although differ in the degree to which the
center has control of its members’ fiscal behavior and the degree to which members have the
ability to roll-over their expenditure to the center.
          Frequently, union member overspending is accomplished via financial intermediation.
For example, a provincial government may encourage (or overlook) the provision of credit by
local banks to questionable local businesses against IOU notes. Upon the collapse of some of
these businesses or the local banks, there is political pressure on the central government to bail
out the local banks (and perhaps the local businesses). If the financing of this rescue is done by
increasing the public debt, the ultimate risk undertaking and expansionary policy of local
provinces (or states) determines the volume of the questionable credit and the resultant public
debt. Thereby, the weakness of the center is manifested directly by excessive spending of
provincial governments. In developing countries where fiscal authorities are weak, the central
bank frequently used seigniorage to finance the bailout, resulting in high inflation as in the cases
of Argentina and Brazil in the 1980s.2

          The Eurozone has been characterized by similar dynamics in which the access of its
members to elastic foreign borrowing during the 2000s has been manifested in runaway private
credit provided by the banking system as well as large current account deficits of the GIIPS
(Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain, see Appendix B for A Glossary of Acronyms used
throughout the paper). The GIIPS banking crises induced bailouts of banking systems, socialized
private debt, and led to massive increase in public debts. While there has been no clear resolution
of the ultimate allocation of the losses among debtors and creditors in the Eurozone, concerns
were raised about the use of the Target2 settlement mechanism, a credit/debit arrangement that
may magnify the common pool problem, whereby the Bundesbank (and several smaller central
banks of Northern Eurozone countries) implicitly co-financed GIIPS current account deficits
during 2011–2012 [see Tornell and Westermann (2012)].




2
    See World Bank (1990), Dillinger and Webb (1999), Aizenman (1991, 1994), and the references therein.

                                                    4
       Imposing fiscal discipline in unions remains a work in progress. One approach to the
problem has been illustrated by the U.S. states—adding built-in fiscal restraints and balanced-
budget requirements to state constitutions and relying on the private funding of states’ public
debt. Wallis (2005) attributes the success of the US $ union to institutional changes following the
sovereign debt defaults of eight U.S. states, which led to fiscal prudence: “After the fiscal crisis
of the early 1840s, states changed their constitutions to eliminate taxless finance in the future.”
Specifically, all states’ deficits, with the exception of Vermont, are now subject to size
constraints and the public debt of several individual states is also subject to constraints [Strauch
and Von Hagen (2001)]. An important ingredient of the fiscal discipline affecting U.S. states has
been the balanced-budget requirement, which was documented and overviewed by Bohn and
Inman (1996). These requirements vary depending on the stage of the budget process to which
each state applies, the funds they apply to [general, capital, or special funds], the different roles
of external enforcement, and varying compositions of the state supreme courts that serve as
supervisory institutions.
       A more detailed analysis indicates that the restraints on state financing are not “water
tight,” allowing states the discretion to maneuver and thereby lead to softness in the
implementation of these restraints. Bohn and Inman (1996) find that no-carryover rules lead to
higher surpluses, which is primarily the result of lower public expenditures. In contrast, ex-ante
requirements, which oblige the governor or the legislature to submit a balanced budget, are less
effective or not effective at all. They also report that the independence of the monitoring entity
contributes to the stringency of the rule. Von Hagen (1991) found that the difference between
states with and without a formal debt limit is a higher share of non-guaranteed debt—debt limits
are associated with a greater likelihood of having low debt levels and large shares of
nonguaranteed debt.
       By and large, the fiscal discipline self-imposed by state constitutions has appeared to
work: since 1934, no U.S. state has defaulted on its debt. The success of this approach was
helped by the growing credibility of U.S. government policy of no federal bailouts of state debt,
and by the market discipline imposed by private borrowers. States borrowing from the private
sector, and the absence of “federal bailer of last resort,” imposes a penalty on excessive
borrowing and the lack of fiscal discipline in the form of higher sovereign spreads. While these



                                                   5
built-in fiscal restrains are imperfect, they have passed the test of time, providing vibrant and
deep private financing to the U.S. states.

       The purpose of our paper is to revisit the issues of fiscal discipline in federal systems,
focusing on selective case studies covering the 2000s, before and after the GFC. We start by
contrasting the recent fiscal history of California to that of Greece, illustrating the different ways
of dealing with fiscal deficiencies in a mature union [U.S.] vs. a young union [Eurozone].
California’s fiscal problems are more extreme than most other states in the U.S. union, but they
are shared to varying degrees by all the U.S. states. Similarly, Greece’s fiscal problems are
deeper than that of other Eurozone members but are indicative of the challenges facing the GIIPS
and other Eurozone members. We continue with an overview of the fiscal challenges facing
Brazil, illustrating the challenges facing federal systems in emerging markets, and possible ways
to move forward in upgrading a country’s fiscal institutions. We conclude with the fiscal history
of Iceland before and after the financial crisis—a standalone small country, assessed favorably
by rating agencies prior to the GFC, and now recovering from a deep financial crisis.

       We close the paper with concluding remarks. The three case studies outlined in this paper
illustrate that imposing fiscal discipline remains a work in progress that requires building
institutional capacities and constant effort in improving the monitoring and enforcement of fiscal
discipline. Greater credibility of “no federal bailout of states’ level debt” and imposing
borrowing constraints linking public debt issuance to a future tax base is helpful but not a
panacea. Curbing pro-cyclicality and destabilizing overspending require vigilant monitoring by
the private sector through charging appropriate spreads and by rules and penalties mitigating the
common pool problems associated with multilayer fiscal funding.



   2. The recent fiscal history of California and Greece: Was California a greater risk
       than Greece?

       The recent histories of California and Greece provide insight regarding the fiscal
dynamics of states in a mature monetary and fiscal union—the U.S. vs. states in the Eurozone, a
younger monetary union. During the GFC, California received a fair share of negative press,



                                                  6
including a negative evaluation by Jamie Dimon, chairman of JP Morgan Chase, in early 2010,
warning that California is a greater risk than Greece:


    “Mr Dimon told investors at the Wall Street bank's annual meeting that "there could be contagion" if a state the size
    of California, the biggest of the United States, had problems making debt repayments. "Greece itself would not be
    an issue for this company, nor would any other country," said Mr Dimon. ‘We don't really foresee the European
    Union coming apart.’ The senior banker said that JP Morgan Chase and other US rivals are largely immune from
    the European debt crisis, as the risks have largely been hedged. California however poses more of a risk, given the
    state's $20bn (£13.1bn) budget deficit.”
     “Earlier this week, John Chiang, the state's controller, said that if a workable plan to reduce the deficit and increase
    cash levels is not reached soon, he will have to return to issuing IOU's, forcing state workers to take additional
    unpaid leave and potentially freezing spending. Last summer, California issued $3bn of IOU's to creditors
    including residents owed tax refunds as a way of staving off a cash crisis. ‘I can't write checks without money;
    that's against the law. My main goal is to keep the state afloat, but I won't be able to do it without the help of new
    legislation,’ said Mr Chiang.”

    California is a greater risk than Greece, warns JP Morgan chief
    The Telegraph, James Quinn, 26 Feb 2010.3



           Taking a snapshot of the credit default swap (CDS) spreads in 2009 may support Mr.
Dimon’s warning: California’s CDS spreads significantly exceeded those of Greece during 2009,
reaching above 300 basis points in mid-year, more than twice Greece’s CDS spreads at that time.
Looking more closely reveals the limitation of relying just on CDS spreads. A more fundamental
assessment of fiscal fragilities may focus on the GDP adjustment that would stabilize the fiscal
outlook, the likelihood of that adjustment taking place, and the degree to which union
membership provides buffers or magnifies the state’s exposure to volatility. Taking this
perspective, California’s deficit at the peak of the crisis was about 2% of its GDP, suggesting
that a fiscal adjustment leading to primary surplus was minor in comparison to the one in Greece,
at that time running fiscal deficits exceeding 10% of its GDP. Furthermore, California’s public
debt at the state and local governments was about 20% of its GDP in 2009, whereas Greece’s
public debt/GDP exceeded 100% at that time.
           Admittedly, it is difficult making an accurate assessment of the likelihood that the fiscal
adjustment aiming at avoiding default would occur. Nevertheless, a much richer and more
diversified state, a member of a mature fiscal union (as has been the position of California in

3
 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/financialcrisis/7326772/California-is-a-greater-risk-than-Greece-
warns-JP-Morgan-chief.html, accessed August 11, 2014.

                                                              7
comparison to Greece), may find it easier to avoid outright default and embark on fiscal
adjustment. Indeed, within less than three years of Dimon’s warning, the new Brown
administration in California provided short-term patches that rapidly shifted California’s fiscal
deficit into a growing surplus. In contrast, Greece has yet to recover from its debt restructuring
and only time will tell if the country will eventually manage to complete the fiscal adjustment
outlined by the Troika.
        Looking more closely, there are several other reasons why the problems of California are
not comparable to that of Greece and why CDS market determined spreads do not capture the
full picture. First, California is a member of a functioning fiscal and monetary union, paying its
full share of federal income and state taxes. The federal system in the U.S. also provides a
complex tax-cub-transfer system, redistributing public funds among states in ways that provide
significant insurance and direct transfers to households [Social Security benefits and the like]. In
contrast, Greece has been burdened by tax collection and enforcement challenges and is a
member in a union that—beyond providing structural help to poorer states—does not function as
a fiscal union.
        Second, California is part of a mature monetary union. Most banks in California are
federally insured and backstopped by the Fed and “by the full faith and credit of the United
States government.”4 Furthermore, the public debt of California is held mostly by households
and institutional investors and not by California banks. Thereby, the vitality of California private
banks is mostly independent from the fiscal health of the state. In contrast, banks in Greece are
not part of a functioning banking union, and are not insured by a federal system backstopped by
Eurozone institutions. The high share of public debt on Greek banks’ balance sheets is indicative
of a common Eurozone problem: the close affinity of private banks and state financing, which
implies sovereign-bank interdependence. Consequently, a fiscal crisis of the state triggers a
banking crisis, and vice versa [Pisani-Ferry (2012)]. The lack of a banking union in the Eurozone
and the absence of deposit insurance schemes backstopped by Eurozone institutions may expose
Greece and other Eurozone countries to self-fulfilling crises [De Grauwe and Yuemei (2013)].




4
 “Full Faith and Credit of U.S. Government: FDIC deposit insurance is backed by the full faith and credit
of the United States government.” Source:
https://www.fdic.gov/consumers/banking/confidence/symbol.html#Full , accessed 9/5/2014.

                                                    8
        These considerations suggest that the fiscal crisis of Greece has been more a crisis about
solvency than liquidity. To recall, from 1999 to 2009, the honeymoon decade of the Eurozone,
the sovereign spreads of Greece relative to Germany collapsed to about 1%, propagating public
and private sectors over-borrowing funded by accelerated current account deficits, reaching 15%
of the GDP in 2008. The resultant gross external debt and public debt in 2009 (160% and 120%,
respectively) implied a solvency crisis and debt restructuring [Alcidi and Gros (2010)]. Recalling
that over-borrowing is funded by over-lending, the Greek debt crisis is also a symptom of the
immaturity of the Eurozone’s institutions. The absence of proper supervision exposed the core of
the Eurozone to growing GIIPS debt overhang and required eventual bailout and restructuring
packages implemented by the “troika” institutions—the ECB, the European Commission, and the
IMF.
        In contrast, California is a rich state with a large tax base, locked in a war of attrition
regarding the distribution of the burden of adjustment: higher taxes or/and lower expenditures.
The fiscal crisis of California, a vibrant and diversified state, has been rooted in a political crisis
in which the voters have tolerated underfunded public services until a resolution of the war of
attrition between the feuding parties. The results of the 2011 election enabled Governor Brown
to implement a modest fiscal adjustment of about 1.5% GDP (a third of which was funded by
higher taxes, the remaining by expenditure cuts). Although these patches do not deal with the
fundamental drivers of California’s fiscal instability, they have been sufficient to reverse a
projected deficit of 1.5% GDP in 2012 into a modest surplus in 2013.
        California’s fiscal history is shared by other states in the U.S. The “no federal bailout of
the states’ debt” mantra has been credible, incentivizing the market to charge sovereign spreads
that impose—with a lag—enough market pressure to induce the political system to react. While
this system does not prevent periodic fiscal crises or guarantee that states adopt robust fiscal
rules dealing with longer-run challenges, they work: no state in the U.S. has defaulted on its debt
since 1934. The rules also work in the sense that the possible default of a big state (like
California or any other state in the U.S. union) does not threaten the stability of the U.S. federal
union and its banking system, though it would induce sizable capital losses to private debt
holders.
        A concise overview of California’s challenges has been provided in the Report of the
State Budget Crisis Task Force (2012) by the non-partisan task force chaired by Richard Ravitch


                                                   9
and Paul Volcker. The report identified several weaknesses that led to the fiscal fragility of
California, resulting with a strong pro-cyclicality bias where in years of strong growth, spending
was increased and taxes were cut. Adjustment was delayed by external and internal borrowing,
avoiding major expenditure cuts or tax increases. The growing costs of social programs
[including Medicaid, public sector retirement, and post-employment health benefits] increase the
under-funded liabilities. The combination of a narrow and volatile tax base, the heavy reliance on
capital gains, an absence of a well-functioning rainy day fund, a pro-cyclical bias of
expenditures, and deteriorating unfunded liabilities had put the state on an unsustainable path.
Figure 1 shows the hazard of relying on capital gain taxes in California—the gains fluctuated
between 30 billion in “lean years,” reaching 130 billion in “fat years.” Broadening the tax base
would reduce but not eliminate the fiscal challenges associated with uncertainty, a common
challenge facing all states.




                                   Figure 1: California’s volatile tax base
                                   Left panel: Net Capital Gains, $ billion
              Right panel: Personal income tax revenue and Personal income, annual % change
                  Source: California Report of the State Budget Crisis Task Force (2012)


       California and other states may benefit by studying Chile’s experience with improving
fiscal performance, as summarized by Frankel (2011). After all, the volatility of tax revenue in
commodity-exporting countries is even greater than the one facing California’s tax revenue. A
way forward is to put the most volatile tax revenues in a rainy day fund, and to allow the
government to spend a fraction of it each year. This fraction may be constant, as is the case with
most university endowments and in several sovereign wealth funds [including the Norwegian
Sovereign Wealth Fund]. Alternatively, the spending fraction may be contingent on the


                                                 10
perceived permanency of the shocks, as estimated by an independent expert board. Similarly, tax
rates may be linked by a transparency rule to the perceived stock of liabilities, as estimated by an
independent expert board, and the tax base may be broadened. Observers noted that Governor
Brown’s latest patches have been effective in eliminating present deficits yet fall short of dealing
with the fundamental fiscal deficiencies of California.
           The above discussion suggests that the fiscal challenges of Greece are deeper and not
comparable to that of the U.S. states. First, deepening the collection and enforcement of existing
tax laws may help. Next, reforms dealing with the Eurozone’s structural incompleteness, as
reviewed by Pisani-Ferry (2012), would stabilize the fiscal outlook of all the GIIPS countries.
These reforms may include breaking the banking-sovereign links, moving toward banking union
and euro-wide deposit insurance supported by a credible backstopping mechanism, and the like.
Time will tell if and how fast the Eurozone could progress on these challenges. The concerns
about Greece’s insolvency remain an obstacle and may require further “debt-forgiveness” and
deeper labor and product market reforms aimed at improving the country’s growth prospects.




      3. Brazil’s fiscal reform efforts: A work in progress

           The absence of built-in fiscal restraints supported by a market-determined sovereign spread
may induce overtime fiscal fragility, excessive borrowing by states and provincial governments,
and eventually lead to macro instability. These trends have been illustrated by Argentina, Brazil,
and other countries. A way to move forward requires fiscal reform efforts aimed at tightening
federal control of the states and adding built-in penalties curbing opportunistic overspending.
These penalties may be in the form of reducing future transfers by the federal government to a
state that is defaulting on its debt obligations, dismissing and prosecuting opportunistic behavior
of states’ policy makers, and the like.5 Brazil’s fiscal restructuring during the 1990s is a vivid
example of such a reform. Dillinger and Webb (1999, page 33) concisely summarized these reform
effects:




5
    See Aizenman (1993, 1998) for a model capturing the role of such penalties.

                                                     11
       “In Brazil, the situation has evolved in several ways since the onset of the state debt crises, many
       of them positive. First, the central bank has tightened limits on the domestic financial system’s
       aggregate exposure to subnational debt. It has also taken steps to limit lending by federal financial
       intermediaries to subnational governments. Although these controls are not air tight, they tend to
       limit state borrowing to unpaid service on outstanding debt. Second, the agreements of 1998 are
       written in a way that allows and requires the federal government to withhold debt service from
       transfers. Thus, even when the much-publicized refusal of Minas Gerais in January 1999 to pay
       debt service resulted in the federal government covering the state’s debt service in order to
       protect the national credit rating, the state was effectively forced to pay, because the Federal
       government deducted their payments from their transfers.” “Some underlying causes of the states’
       fiscal problems have also been addressed. In 1998, the Brazilian Congress approved a
       Constitutional amendment that will allow states to dismiss staff, provided their personnel
       spending exceeds a threshold percentage of state revenues. Congress also approved some
       amendments to pension legislation, which help but are not yet sufficient to provide states with the
       means to respond to fiscal pressures without resorting to eventual default.”

       A key step in the reform was to design an explicit intertemporal-penalty structure in
which a state’s current opportunistic spending would reduce future transfers. A necessary
condition for this structure to work effectively is inducing the states to disclose their spending
and local finance to the federal center. Improving the data disclosure of sub-national
governments in Brazil remains a work in progress (Santos (2013)). Another necessary condition
is sufficiently large dependence of the states on transfers from the fiscal center, such that the
penalty of withholding future transfers is credible and effective. The Brazilian experience
confirms the usefulness of these intertemporal penalties in facilitating fiscal discipline.
Intriguingly, Hallerberg (2010) views the Brazilian model as a precedent that the EU could
emulate, pointing out that:

       “Lower levels of government that continue to exceed the caps are denied federal transfers in the
       following year if they do not correct them. Note that Brazilian states have a revenue structure
       that is almost ideal for this type of rule. They receive close to two-thirds of their revenue from
       their own taxes. This means that pressure on them from the central government to deal with their
       own problems is credible. At the same time, they receive about 20% of their revenues from
       central government grants. This means that the threat to cut off grants is painful – governors
       realize that they will have to make significant cuts in spending if they violate the fiscal
       responsibility law and receive the law’s punishment.”

       Indeed, the fiscal reform efforts in Brazil, which continued during the 1990s and 2000s,
substantially improved states’ fiscal performance. Pereira (2010) noted:



                                                    12
         “In 2000, Brazil implemented a hard-budget constraint legislation – the Fiscal Responsibility
        Law – which was applicable to all levels of government regardless of their prior economic
        conditions. In its relations with the state governments, a powerful president and a strong
        finance minister have managed to recentralize fiscal authority in the country, curbing state
        level fiscal autonomy. Brazil’s executive branch was able to implement its preferences
        because of its institutional prerogatives and because there were gains-from-trade in federal-
        state relations. State governors developed an interest in reforms in the wake of the approval
        of the re-election amendment and in view of the compensation mechanisms involved in the
        reform process. “Whereas all states faced a deficit prior to the law, the consolidated state
        accounts have systematically presented a surplus roughly equivalent to 4 percent of GDP
        after the law was enacted. A similar success story can be told regarding public debt. A
        succession of primary surpluses enabled the government to effectively reduce the GDP/debt
        ratio. Since 2002, when the GDP/debt ratio peaked at 55 percent, there has been a reduction
        in net debt as measured by percent of GDP, which is estimated to be below 36 percent in
        2008.”

        Yet similar to the findings of Bohn and Inman (1996) on the effectiveness of fiscal
restraints in the U.S., the Brazilian state governors have retained some ability to undertake fiscal
window-dressing and creative accounting in response to fiscal stress. This is a common feature of
most systems, as monitoring is costly and rarely immune to political pressure. Thus, Pereira (2010)
noted that fiscal responsibility laws are only part of the fiscal reform. Audit activism and political
independence seem to mitigate opportunistic fiscal behavior thereby enhancing the governance; thus
autonomy of sub-national audit institutions may be the key for long-term sustainability of fiscal
policy in Brazil.




4.      ICELAND: Towards greater fiscal discipline

        If one were to identify the main characteristic of Iceland’s fiscal policy then it would be
that it has been pro-cyclical for an extended period of time. One indication of that is the
significant positive correlation between the contribution of public consumption and public
investment to GDP growth and the output gap from 1990 to 20136 (see Figure 2). This is caused
not only by direct discretionary policy measures but also by weaknesses in the fiscal framework.


6
  A regression model of calculated contribution of public consumption and public investment on a
constant and the output gap and AR(1) shows that the output gap is highly significant at the 5%
significance level. Contribution is calculated as:

                                                    13
          Prior to the financial crisis in October 2008 it was recognized that the budget framework
had a deficit bias. Low government debt level and record surpluses created by unexpectedly
strong growth in tax revenues and revenues from privatization program7 caused politicians to
turn a blind eye to the call to rectify the budget framework. The Icelandic National Audit Office
(INAO) time and again reported on spending overruns relative to budgeted values.8 Despite
existing regulations and with few repercussions, ministries and agencies frequently overspent
their budgets. Counter-cyclicality of fiscal policy, however, is dependent on firm execution of


100*(G/G(-1)-1)*GN(-1)/GDPN(-1)+100*(IG/IG(-1)-1)*IGN(-1)/GDPN(-1) where G and GN are real
and nominal public consumption and IG and IGN are real and nominal public investment. GDPN is
nominal GDP.
               Contribution = 0.954 C + 0.146 GAP +-0.152 AR(1); R-squared is 0.35.
                       Prob: (0.000)    (0.006)      (0.544)

7
    Privatization revenue was in the amount of approximately 15 per cent of 2009 GDP.

8
 A number of INAO reports touch on this subject: most recently, for example, Implementation of the
2007 Government Budget and Annual Plan for 2008, INAO May 2008. See also Suppanz, H.,
”Controlling Public spending in Iceland“, OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 360, June
2003; ”Strengthening the Fiscal Framework“, in OECD Economic Survey: Iceland, Chapter 3, Vol.
2008/3, February 2008.

                                                    14
the budget while allowing automatic stabilizers to play their role. The full effect of automatic
stabilization was not realized, as tax rates were lowered in the presence of a large positive output
gap without sufficient counter measures. There is nothing wrong with lowering tax rates per se -
it can even be said that it is to be expected of any right-wing Government of the day. But if tax
rates are lowered when there is a large positive output gap then it is a pro-cyclical policy
measure unless there is a commensurate cut in expenditures. There is no evidence of
expenditures cuts as real public consumption growth at the time was close to 4%, double the
numerical fiscal rule growth limit, and public investment as a share of GDP was at record levels
even though the economy was booming. Despite tax cuts and spending overruns, however,
budget surpluses were larger than ever, complicating the debate on the overall fiscal policy
stance.

          This is not specific to the Government at the time. The same goes for any left-wing
Government of the day. If it wants to increase expenditure when there is a positive output gap it
has to provide for commensurate increase in tax revenues to make the policy measure acyclical.
While one may expect different policy measures in line with different policy agendas of various
political parties, avoiding pro-cyclicality requires a consensus on sticking to the rules of the
fiscal framework. The aim of a rule-based fiscal framework is not to depoliticize fiscal
appropriations but rather to subject politicians to fiscal discipline when they are deciding on
expenditures and prioritizing appropriations according to their political agenda. Such a
framework may strike a balance between achieving broad political representation and
maintaining fiscal discipline.

          The weaknesses with regard to expenditure growth were clear to most, but there were
also latent fundamental weaknesses on the revenue side. The appreciation of asset prices in
Iceland was sizable. House prices rose by 75% from 2004 to 2008, and stock prices rose by
150%. The asset price-driven real growth, fuelled by massive credit expansion, led to a
consumption boom. The revenue buoyancy was mostly the product of positive balance sheet
effects. Tax revenue elasticity was pro-cyclical. The pro-cyclical response of tax revenues to the
change in real activity as measured by the output gap was greater than could be expected unless
revenue elasticity changed in a pro-cyclical manner at the same time. A simple regression shows
that there was a much stronger relationship between the private consumption ratio of potential


                                                  15
output and total tax revenues than between the output gap and total tax revenues.9
Underestimation of the elasticity resulted in an overestimation of the structural balance, as the
cyclical component was underestimated. When asset prices tanked so did tax revenues10.




        The massive credit expansion that fuelled the asset price-driven real economic growth
came to a full stop in the first week of October 2008, when Iceland’s three major banks,

9
  A regression model of differenced total tax revenue (∆tax) on a constant, the differenced consumption
ratio of potential output (∆c_ratio) and the output gap (gap) shows that the c_ratio is highly significant,
while the gap is not, at the 10 per cent significance level.
                   ∆tax = 0.019 + 0.512 ∆c_ratio – 0.186 gap; R-squared is 0.59.
                  t-stat: (4.21)      (8.74)          (-1.44);
                   Prob.: (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.1547);
Thus, because the change in consumption ratio of potential output was greater than the change in output
gap, tax revenue elasticity turned highly pro-cyclical with respect to the output gap. The elasticity of tax
revenues relative to the output gap thus jumped in a highly pro-cyclical fashion.

10
  Morris and Schuknecht (2007) found strong asset price effects on revenue elasticity in Europe; more
specifically, they found that a 10 per cent increase in asset prices added half a per cent of GDP to
revenues. Earlier, Jaeger and Schuknecht (2004) had found that, in a European context, the cyclical
responsiveness of the budget balance doubles in asset price-driven economic cycles.


                                                      16
representing 90% of Iceland’s banking system in terms of total assets, collapsed. The banks’
large foreign currency balance sheets11, maturity mismatch and their size relative to their home
base proved a key vulnerability that contributed to their downfall. Following the banks’ collapse,
the depreciation of the króna continued until capital controls were introduced at the end of
November. In total, the króna depreciated by roughly 50% in 2008 against the euro.

        Foreign creditors, Central Bank of Iceland and the Treasury incurred massive losses on
their collapse. In addition to financial losses, tax revenues dropped at the same time as
expenditures rose. The sustainability of government finances immediately came into question.
The budget balance reversal of the central government amounted to 17% of GDP in one year.
The rating agencies were quick to downgrade Icelandic government bonds down to one grade
above junk grade.

        Currency reserves had to be increased substantially to stabilize the currency but new
foreign funding was not available at reasonable rates in the credit markets. At the end of October
2008, the Icelandic government reached an agreement with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) on an economic stabilization program, under a two-year Stand-By Arrangement (SBA)
supported by a loan of 2.1 billion US dollars. The SBA gave the economic program increased
credibility.

        From 2007 to 2011, general government gross debt rose from 28% of GDP to a peak of
100%but is projected to be close to 80% in 2016 The increase, however, was due not only to
losses on financial assets and deficit spending; it is also attributed to acquisition of assets, mainly
currency reserves and bank equity amounting to 55% of GDP, leaving net debt to increase by
only 44% of GDP.

        The SBA required, in the first review, the implementation of large fiscal consolidation in
excess of 16% of GDP. The debt position was uncertain in 2009 and was estimated at 126% of
GDP. But as the SBA progressed the debt position turned out to be more favorable and the
required consolidation came down to 10 per cent of GDP. Still the debt level turned out to be
lower than what was originally aimed for in the first review. A critical component of the SBA

11
   Their balance sheets had expanded to almost 11 times GDP, with the foreign currency part being almost
7 times GDP.

                                                   17
was a reform of the fiscal framework to ensure successful implementation of the consolidation
effort.

4.1       The pre-crisis fiscal framework
          In 1992, in line with fiscal framework reforms in other Nordic countries, a frame-
budgeting approach was introduced. A top-down orientation to fiscal policy was adopted which
served the purpose of emphasizing the policy-making role of the government and increasing
overall fiscal discipline. The frame budgeting was initially only set for the next fiscal year and
thus failed to curb the tendency towards expenditure drift. Each year in the spring expenditure
frames for the following year were to be set for each ministry by a special cabinet committee, led
by the prime minister. Each minister was then responsible for appropriating the allocated funds
to the ministry’s agencies and projects. Each October, the budget is presented to Parliament for
amendment and approval.

          In 1997 the Financial Reporting Act (FRA) and State Guarantee Acts (SGA) came into
force with the aim of improving the quality of information by shifting from traditional cash to
modified accrual budgeting, accounting, and reporting. In 2003, the frame budgeting framework
was extended to include medium-term plans, setting four-year revenue and expenditure
projections and frames for expenditure growth in real terms. By design the projections carried
little weight in the pre-crisis years. These projections were not binding cabinet-approved four-
year expenditure frames voted on in Parliament. Also adopted in 2003 was a numerical fiscal
rule that stipulated that central government public consumption may not grow by more than 2%
per year in real terms and that real transfers may not grow by more than 2.5%.

          Perhaps the best evidence of the weakness of the pre-crisis fiscal budget framework is the
way in which the numerical fiscal consumption rule adopted in 2003 was honored. It came close
in 2004, the first year the rule was in effect, when it grew by 2.1%, but after that the growth rate
kept increasing each year until, in 2008, it was completely off the mark, reaching 3.7 per cent.
The lack of discipline on the expenditure side was mostly driven by fundamentals explained by
political economy factors. An upward drift in expenditure was caused by a combination of
spending overruns, in-year discretionary initiatives, and excessive reliance on supplementary
budgets.


                                                  18
       In the years prior to the financial crisis, both the IMF and OECD missions to Iceland had
called for a fiscal reform. Here strength encompasses factors such as (1) the statutory base of
fiscal rules, procedures and controls (2-3), the nature of the bodies charged with monitoring and
enforcing the rules, (4) enforcement mechanisms and (5) media visibility of the rules. But the
necessary political constituency required to implement the reforms recommended had not been
formed. But the financial crisis of 2008 opened most politicians’ eyes for the benefits of
reforming the fiscal framework. On the five-parameter strength list, the framework of the
consumption rule scores almost no points. The rule had no statutory foundation and no one
outside of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) was in charge of monitoring and enforcing it. There
was no formal reporting requirement to Parliament if the rule was violated, and no extra
enforcement or control mechanism was available. Last but not least, media visibility of the rule
was virtually non-existent. Educating the public and the media about the merits and purpose of
the rule was not a priority when the rule was adopted, and consequently, it actually functioned
more like an internal rule of the MoF. As a result, violations of this firm numerical fiscal rule
received little or no media attention. The political opposition in Parliament did not make a
serious attempt to enforce the rule.. It may not have been to their benefitto play the role of the
enforcer of the rule. Many members of the opposition even proposed stepping up spending..
Also, real growth of public consumption is not the best target to follow. National accounts public
consumption is not a line item in the budget itself. Statistics Iceland publishes it with a time lag.
Notwithstanding this time lag the link between public consumption and corresponding items in
the budget itself was not clear. Politicians working with the budget and the media were used to
dealing with nominal amounts rather than real.

       There were also weaknesses at the local government level. Municipalities had a high
degree of autonomy regarding their spending. In the years leading to the crisis, many
municipalities let their spending rise with buoyant revenues. In 2004 to 2008, their public
consumption grew 60% faster than that of the central government. With local government
expenditure being nearly one-third of general government expenditure, this had a noticeable
effect on the overall fiscal stance.

       The Local Government Act (LGA) from 1998 contained a weakly phrased balanced
budget requirement stipulating that municipalities’ revenues aim at matching expenditure as far


                                                  19
as possible. Phrasing the restriction so loosely rendered it ineffective. When fiscal discipline was
found lacking, few sanctions for non-copliance were available short of a takeover by the central
government in the case of a municipality’s imminent default on debt. Municipal finances would
be subjected to closer scrutiny from an independent external body.

4.2     The post-crisis reforms
The fiscal impact of the financial crisis and the size of the necessary fiscal consolidation that
followed helped to build the political constituency required to implement reforms to the fiscal
framework. The IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) played a key role in the process by
providing numerous recommendations in four reports prepared by technical advisory missions.
The aim of the reports was to put the Icelandic fiscal framework at the forefront of international
budget practice. The first report came in the context of the Stand-By Arrangement in January
2009.12 Although being a very thorough report that proposed a reform schedule that emphasized
reforming the budget framework, follow up reports would move the reforms still further.
Comprehensive overhaul of Acts pertaining to the fiscal framework may help so that the end
result would be a set of progressive fiscal responsibility laws (FRLs).

In the context of the SBA and the first FAD report the MoF took some steps to tighten controls
on the execution of the 2010 budget and presented the 2011 budget within a more binding
medium-term framework. That included an introduction of a fixed two-year nominal ceiling that
covered ¾ of expenditure and a contingency reserve of approximately 1% of expenditure. Wage
negotiations in 2011, however, resulted in generous wage increases of up to 5%. The budget had
allowed for almost no wage increases so the ceiling was breached only a few months after being
set. The contingency reserve was not sufficiently large to cover the increase in wage costs. The
nominal ceiling rule has not been considered again after that. The MoF has also moved from
annual to quarterly forecasting of cash requirements which improved both expenditure control
and liquidity management. Finally, a new chapter on fiscal risks in the debt management report
was introduced and monitoring of sources of risk has been stepped up, such as Landsvirkjun and
the Housing Financing Fund. Change to the Procedural Law of Parliament nr. 55/1991 was made


12
  A technical assistance mission from the IMF‘s Fiscal Affairs Department visited Iceland in January
2009 in the context of the IMF-supported Stand-By Arrangement. The mission comprised Messrs.
Cangiano (head), Hughes (both FAD), Balassone, and Molander (both experts from the FAD panel).

                                                   20
in 2011 to the effect that the Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs shall introduce a
Statement to Parliament before April 1 each year to provide for a spring budget orientation
debate in Parliament to allow for legislative scrutiny and endorsement of the medium-term fiscal
strategy. In the Statement to Parliament projected expenditures and revenues for the next year
and the three years thereafter shall be presented and voted on. Despite it being a mandatory
obligation by law the Statement has not been presented for the last two years out of three.
Elections in spring 2013 complicated things and this year, 2014, the Statement had been prepared
but the opposition declared that they did not have time for the debate as it deemed other matters
more important. Further steps were taken but the overhaul of the Acts pertaining to the fiscal
framework came later.

4.3    First came the overhaul of the LGA
       A second FAD report was presented in October 2010 that focused on strengthening the
local government fiscal framework. In the aftermath of the crisis both central and local
governments recognized that the fiscal framework for municipalities would benefit by a
comprehensive reform that would restrict them to a rule-based fiscal policy. In comparison to
their OECD counterparts, local governments in Iceland were a large element of general
government, with a high degree of fiscal autonomy, but a volatile revenue base. At the same time
the framework for coordination, monitoring and control was among the weakest in the OECD.
       Local government reforms turned out to be quite extensive. First, two numerical fiscal
rules were adopted which provide a long-term anchor and a medium-term fiscal path that is
quantified in a required multi-year budget. Second, municipalities are subjected to a three-tiered
approach to external financial monitoring based on the principle of earned autonomy. Third,
there are sanctions, ranging from mild to severe, for violating the fiscal rules. Fourth, there is an
independent external body, the Municipal Fiscal Oversight Committee (MFOC), which has the
authority to sanction municipalities that are in breach of the rules and to make recommendation
to the Minister of Local Governments to have the fiscal powers of a municipality suspended and
vested in a financial management board. Thus, in one step, the budget framework of local
governments went from being one of the laxest in Europe to one of the more stringent ones.
These reforms are the product of joint work done by representatives from central and local
governments and are therefore not forced upon them.


                                                  21
        The two fiscal rules are clear and simple, a balanced budget rule and a debt ceiling rule
that both extend to A and B sections13 of the budget. The first rule is that municipalities are
prohibited from running operating deficits within a rolling period of three years. That is, total
expenditures must be at least equal to total regular revenues. This means that the next year’s
budget balance is a function of both the current and the previous year’s budget outcomes. The
second rule is that municipalities are subject to a maximum debt-to-revenue ratio of 150%. The
definition of debt is very broad. It includes all liabilities and obligations on the balance sheet and
the operating-lease liabilities that were previously off balance sheet but are now recognized on it.
Municipalities whose debt-to-revenue ratio already exceeds 150% are only allowed to borrow in
local currency. Municipalities whose debt-to-revenue ratio exceeds 250% are only allowed to
refinance and are subject to further controls that may include administration by the central
government or merger with another municipality.

        The MFOC is to monitor finances, including accounting practices and budget proposals,
and compare them to the criteria in the LGA and any regulations deriving therefrom. It can
initiate an inquiry into the finances and operations of a municipality and then require that the
elected council remedy any identified deficiencies in the financial administration of the
municipality within a certain time limit. The MFOC subjects municipalities to a three-tier
monitoring where municipalities are classified into one of three categories based on whether, and
by how much, they are in breach of the rules. Both the autonomy and the degree of external
monitoring to which a municipality is subjected vary depending on its category. A municipality
that is not in breach of either rule is in category 1; it has full autonomy within the limits of the
rules and is subject to minimum monitoring. A municipality that is in breach of either of the rules
is in category 2. It loses autonomy in that a five- to ten-year fiscal adjustment path must be
quantified in a MFOC-approved multi-year budget that maps out the return to compliance. The
minister and the elected council of that municipality can, on the basis of a well-founded
recommendation from the MFOC, come to an agreement on the municipality’s finances. A
municipality with a debt-to-revenue ratio in excess of 250 per cent is placed in category 3. The
same restrictions apply to category 3 municipalities as to those in category 2, but are subject to


13
  In the A section are activities operated directly through the Treasury or Municipal account while in the
B section are the operations of government owned companies.

                                                    22
even stricter oversight, the MFOC can require that the municipality report every month on its
financial position. MFOC can report on them if non-compliant in public reports, require that the
municipality seeks the advice or services of outside accountants or auditors at the municipality’s
expense, etc. They can even go as far as withholding payments from the Municipal Equalization
Fund (MEF). The municipality has then to a great extent lost its fiscal autonomy.

        The MFOC reviewed the accounts of all municipalities in 2012; right after the new LGA
entered into force on January 1 2012, and found that 39 out of 76 municipalities were in
Category 2 or 3, whereas 37 municipalities were in Category 1 and thus not in breach of either of
the fiscal rules. The MFOC wrote a letter to each of the 39 municipalities in Category 2 or 3,
instructing them to prepare a budget for a maximum of 10 years, showing how they could move
into Category 1. All aim to comply in 2016-2019. The new LGA rule-based framework has been
credited with a very positive effect on operations, cash from operations as a share of revenues
and debt ratios.
4.4     And then came the overhaul of the Financial Reporting Act (FRA)
        There are many features of the 1997 FRA that will be preserved in the 2014 FRA. Many
processes and best practice guidelineswill be elevated to a statutory base. In FAD’s third report,
requested by the MoF, there were 46 very specific recommendations made. In the new bill on
FRA legislation that now lies before Parliament most of the recommendations have been
incorporated into the bill, some with variations. It draws on the lessons learnt in recent decades,
both in Iceland and in other countries. It is a vast improvement over the current legislation and
addresses the gaps, loopholes, and inconsistencies in the current legal framework that helped
contribute to fiscal indiscipline before the crisis. Ministerial responsibilities are increased
considerably at the same time as the number of appropriations goes down drastically.
        The new bill of legislation is divided into six chapters. In the discussion that follows
major reforms in each chapter are highlighted. The Appendix provides a fuller overview of this
bill.

        Chapter 1: Objectives, coverage and definitions

        The main objective of the new legislation is to provide for sound macro-fiscal policy
based on comprehensive medium term budgeting and reporting. The new medium term fiscal
framework is designed to address gaps in the current legal framework from budget formulation

                                                  23
to execution. International evidence14 shows that, to a large extent, strong fiscal frameworks are
effective in controlling the common pool problem and introducing fiscal discipline. The main
goal of strong fiscal frameworks is to improve the processes and controls of the budget
framework so that the common pool externality can be internalized. The coverage of the Act is
increased to include all sections of the central and local government’s budgets and all public
corporations. In line with common practice in other European countries the Minister of Finance
shall prepare a long-term forecast for fiscal policy. The forecast is meant to take into account
likely demographic changes when extrapolating the fiscal position, in terms of fiscal balance and
liabilities, few decades into the future. The minister shall prepare such a forecast at least every
three years.

        Chapter 2: Fiscal policy strategy reviewed by an independent fiscal council

        The medium term fiscal framework (MTFF) set up is the cornerstone of the new Act. Its
purpose is to set up a transparent and credible MTFF that serves the purpose of mapping the
macroeconomic and fiscal policymaking. The new bill of legislation establishes a procedural
fiscal rule that maps out a five year general government fiscal path. The fiscal path conditions
are set with the following three fiscal rules:

        1. The overall result over a five-year period must always be positive, and the annual
           deficit may not exceed 2.5% of GDP.15
        2. Total debt, excluding pension obligations and accounts payable, but including cash
           balances and deposits, may not exceed 45% of GDP.16
        3. If the net debt ratio rises above 45%, the excess portion must decline by an average of
           at least 5% (1/20) per year in each three-year period.



14
   See, for example, Alesina and Perotti (1999).
15
   This fiscal rule may be too stringent. If the overall result over a five-year period is always be positive
the debt level will eventually go to zero and then become negative. It may somehow be conditioned on
the debt level. Also, fiscal policy objectives and requirements shall only be revised under extraordinary
circumstances, such as a national catastrophe or a severe economic shock.
16
   This definition of debt is an approximation of the conventional definition of net debt, where all
monetary assets are deducted from liabilities. Here, however, only cash and readily disposable monetary
assets are deducted. This definition is used in part because the Treasury has taken account of loans taken,
for example, to expand the Central Bank’s foreign exchange reserves. Those funds have not been used for
operations and are available for repayment of the loans taken. This definition gives a clearer picture of
how much debt must be paid down with cash from operations.

                                                     24
       Every new Government is obligated to formulate and submit to Parliament a Statement of
Fiscal Policy, as a proposed parliamentary resolution, setting out the five year fiscal path
according to the procedural fiscal rule. After five year plan has been voted on then throughout
the tenure of the Government the Minister of Finance shall present, each year, a fiscal plan or a
medium-term fiscal strategy (MTFS) to Parliament at the spring legislative session in the form of
a Parliamentary resolution. The Government will be subjected to independent scrutiny to review
all this increased reporting on fiscal performance. It is considered important to engage
independent experts to conduct an impartial assessment of fiscal policy implementation. As a
result, it is proposed that an independent fiscal council assess whether the fiscal policy and fiscal
plan are in line with the fundamental values and fiscal rules in the bill of legislation.

        Chapter 3: The budget proposal and appropriations

        Parliament will authorize budgetary allocations to various fields and functions, plus a
contribution to a general precautionary fund, instead of a large number of agencies. This will
reduce budget items from approximately 900 items to 150-210. The appropriations powers of
Ministers are thus increased. The Ministers are to formulate and present their policy for the next
five years for each field and function. These changes in whole aim at allowing for the debates
and votes on the budget proposal to follow a top-down sequence.

        Chapter 4: Budget execution

        Budget discipline has improved since the crisis. Overspending still takes place. Most of
the slippage happened in the election year in 2013. The 2009-2013 fiscal consolidation thus only
amounted to 8% of GDP instead of the 10% aimed for. The new FRA would abolish the
carryover of overspends to future appropriations. Carryover of underspends is also restricted and
is limited to 3% of appropriations and only if the underspend is because of economic reasons.
The Minister reallocates the underspending. When the fiscal budget is implemented, each
minister must report to the Government and the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the
implementation of the budget and the financial performance of the Treasury and compare it to
the Budget at least quarterly. The Parliamentary Budget Committee – and other committees –
may request information from each minister concerning budget implementation within the scope
of the minister’s field.


                                                  25
         Chapter 5: Accounting and fiscal reporting

         Fiscal reporting is an important part of progressive FRLs. It shows whether the
government is in compliance with the budget law, is meeting its fiscal objectives and whether the
policy is sustainable. The scope of reporting is increased significantly and reports on budget
outcome are moved forward so that last year’s outcome is available well in advance of the April
1 Statement of Fiscal Plan. It will be monitored externally by an independent fiscal council.

4.5      Conclusions
         The authorities’ intentions seem genuine – they want to move towards increased fiscal
discipline. That can be seen from the effect the 2011 LGA has had on local government finances.
The reform intent goes across party lines as the reforms are the product of both the current right-
wing Government and the previous left-wing Government.

         The FAD has played an important role in guiding the reforms forward. They had broad-
based expertise and international experience of the topic. A mission from Sweden also provided
valuable counsel. It was the Swedish counsel that recommended the establishment of the fiscal
council, the FAD was against that. But the vast majority of the recommendations the
Government received they adopted into the reforms of the 1998 LGA and 1997 FRA. If the
intent at the ministerial level was not genuine they would not have complied with them to the
extent they did. Maybe Iceland will move to a new fiscal era like Sweden has accomplished.

      5. Closing remarks

         A necessary condition for the fiscal stability of a federal union of states is imposing
proper discipline on union members. A common denominator of the case studies in this paper is
the drive to monitor and penalize the spending biases associated with “short-termism” and
overspending biases in good times. Gathering information and providing quality supervision on
the spending and revenue patterns of union members is essential. In centralized systems with
sizable tax-cub-transfer services provided by the federal system, discipline may be provided by
reducing future transfers to states that overspend or default today. The credibility of the federal
union is enhanced by preventing bailouts of states’ overspending thereby preventing
opportunistic expenditures or gambling for future resurrections via federal handouts.
Consequently, stable federal unions benefit by fiscal discipline applied across all layers of
                                                  26
decision making. Market-based mechanisms may supplement fiscal discipline by charging higher
spreads in response to larger fiscal deficits and under taxation. The credibility of such a system
requires preventing the build-up of large vulnerabilities that may tempt a bailout by the federal
system due to systemic risk concerns.

          In closing the paper we note that a chain is no stronger than its weakest link. Imposing
fiscal discipline on union members would help little if the federal center refrains from adhering
to clear and transparent fiscal discipline. The history of federal systems provides ample evidence
that imposing fiscal discipline on sub national levels is only half of the job – the federal center
may use off-budget subsidies and “creative accounting” to promote its agenda in ways that may
ultimately reduce the fiscal space at the federal level, increasing union’s susceptibility to funding
crises.




                                                  27
                                                   References

Aizenman, J. and G. Pasricha. (2011). “The Net Fiscal Expenditure Stimulus in the U.S., 2008-9: Less than What
       You Might Think, and Less than the Fiscal Stimuli of Most OECD Countries,” The Economist Voice, June.

Aizenman, J. (1998). "Fiscal discipline in a union," in The Political Economy of Economic Reforms, edited by F.
       Sturzenegger and M. Tommasi, MIT Press, 1998,pp. 185-208 [earlier version appeared as NBER WP.
       4656].

Aizenman, J. (1993). “Soft Budget Constraints, Taxes, and the Incentive to Cooperate” International Economic
       Review, November, pp. 819-832.

Alesina, A. F., R. Perotti (1999), “Budget Deficits and Budget Institutions”, NBER,
         Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance, pp. 13-36.

Bohn, H. and R.P. Inman (1996). “Balanced Budget Rules and Public Deficits: Evidence from the U.S. States”,
        NBER Working Paper,No. 5533.

California Report (2012) “Report of the State Budget Crisis Task Force,”
         http://www.statebudgetcrisis.org/wpcms/wp-content/images/SBCTF_FINALREPORT1.pdf .

Cangiano, M., R. Hughes, F. Balassone and P. Molander (2009), “Strengthening the Budget
        Framework”, IMF, Fiscal Affairs Department Report.

Corbacho, A. and G. Schwartz (2007), “Fiscal Responsibility Laws”, in T. Ter-Minassian and
       M.S. Kumar (eds.), Promoting Fiscal Discipline, pp. 19-35, IMF, Washington (D.C.).

Debrun, X., D. Hauner and M.S. Kumar (2009), “Independent Fiscal Agencies”, Journal of
        Economic Surveys, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 44-81.

Debrun, X. and M.S. Kumar (2007a), “Fiscal Rules, Fiscal Councils and All That: Commitment
        Devices, Signaling Tools or Smokescreens?”, in Banca d’Italia (ed.), Fiscal Policy: Current
        Issues and Challenges, papers presented at the Public Finance workshop held in Perugia,
        29-31 March 2007, pp. 479-512.

De Grauwe Paul and Yuemei Ji. (2013). “Self-fulfilling crises in the Eurozone: An empirical test.” Journal of
       International Money and Finance 34 (2013): 15–36.

Gros Daniel and Cinzia Alcidi. (2010). “Is Greece different? Adjustment difficulties in southern Europe,” Voxeu.

Dillinger William and Steven B. Webb. (1999). Fiscal Management in Federal Democracies: Argentina and Brazil,
         World Bank.

Fabrizio, S. and A. Mody (2006), “Can Budget Institutions Counteract Political Indiscipline?”,
         Economic Policy: A European Forum, Vol. 21, pp. 689-739.

Frankel, Jeffrey. (2011a) "A Solution to Fiscal Procyclicality: the Structural Budget Institutions Pioneered by
         Chile," Journal Economía Chilena (The Chilean Economy), Central Bank of Chile, vol. 14(2), pages 39-78,
         August.



                                                         28
____________. (2011b). "Over-optimism in forecasts by official budget agencies and its implications," Oxford
       Review of Economic Policy, Oxford University Press, vol. 27(4), pages 536-562.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. & Vegh, Carlos A. & Vuletin, Guillermo. (2013). "On graduation from fiscal procyclicality,"
         Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 100(1), pages 32-47.

Hallerberg, Mark. (2010). “Fiscal federalism reforms in the European Union and the Greek crisis” European Union
        Politics 12: 127.

Hughes, R. & T. Irwin and E.R. Karlsdottir (2010), “Strengthening the Local Government Budget Framework”,
        IMF, Fiscal Affairs Department Report.

______ (2010), “Toward a New Organic Budget Law”, IMF, Fiscal Affairs Department Report.

Hughes, R. & T. Irwin (2014), “IPSAS in Iceland: Towards Enhanced Fiscal Transparency”, IMF, Fiscal Affairs
        Department Report.

Ilzetzki Ethan and Carlos A. Vegh. (2008). Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries: Truth or Fiction?
          NBER Working Paper No. 14191.

IMF (2009), Iceland: First Review under Stand-by Arrangement, Country Report, No. 9/306.

______(2010), Iceland: Second Review under Stand-by Arrangement, Country Report,
       No. 10/95.

______(2010), Iceland: Third Review under Stand-by Arrangement, Country Report,
       No. 10/305.

______(2011), Iceland: Fourth Review under Stand-by Arrangement, Country Report,
       No. 11/16.

Jaeger, A. and L. Schuknecht (2004), “Boom-bust Phases in Asset Prices and Fiscal Policy
         Behaviour”, IMF, Working Paper, No. 04/54, Washington (D.C.).

Morris, R. and L. Schuknecht (2007), “Structural Balances and Revenue Windfalls: The Role of
        Asset Prices Revisited”, ECB, Working Paper, No. 737, Frankfurt.

OECD (2006), Economic Survey: Iceland, (Paris).

______(2008), “Strengthening the Fiscal Framework”, OECD, Economic Survey, Iceland,
       Chapter 3, Vol. 2008/3, February.

Pisani-Ferry J. (2012). “The Euro Crisis and the new impossible trinity,” Bruegel report # 674.

Pereira, Carlos. (2010). “Brazil’s Fiscal Responsibility Law and the Quality of Audit Institutions,” Manuscript,
         Brookings Institution.

Riera-Crichton Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh and Guillermo Vuletin. (2014). “Procyclical and countercyclical fiscal
        multipliers,” Manuscript.



                                                         29
Rogoff, K. (1990), “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles”, NBER,Working Paper, No. 2428.

Santos, J. de Carvalho. (2013). “Fiscal federalism in Brazil: the importance of data disclosure of subnational
         governments,” A chapter in Proceedings of the Sixth IFC Conference on Statistical issues and activities in
         a changing environment, Basel, 28-29 August 2012, 2013, vol. 36: 405-414, BIS.

Strauch, Rolf and Hagen, Jürgen von. (2001). “Formal Fiscal Restraints and Budget Processes as Solutions to a
         Deficit and Spending Bias in Public Finances: US Experience and Possible Lessons for EMU,” February 1,
         2001. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2095180 .

Suppanz, H. (2003), “Controlling Public Expenditure in Iceland”, OECD, Economics Department,
       Working Paper, No. 360, Paris.

Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos Vegh. (2005). “Tax Base Variability and Procyclicality of Fiscal Policy,” Journal of
         Development Economics 78, no. 1, 156-190.

Tornell A. and F. Westermann. (2012). “The tragedy of the commons at the European Central Bank and the next
         rescue,” Voxeu, 22 June.

von Hagen, J. (1991), “A Note on the Empirical Effectiveness of Formal Fiscal Restraints, Journal of Public
       Economics, 44, pp. 199-210.

Wallis. J. “Constitutions, Corporations, and Corruption: American States, 1842 to 1852.” Journal of Economic
         History 65 (2005): 211–56.

World Bank. (1990). Argentina: Provincial Government Finance, Washington, The World Bank.




                                                         30
                                           Appendix A
                   Overview - The 2014 Icelandic Financial Reporting Act (FRA)


          The new bill of legislation is divided into six chapters. In the discussion that follows major
reforms in each chapter are highlighted.

          Chapter 1: Objectives, coverage and definitions

The main objective of the new legislation is to provide for sound macro-fiscal policy based on
comprehensive medium term budgeting and reporting. The new medium term fiscal framework is
designed to address gaps in the current legal framework from budget formulation to execution.

          The budget cycle often has more to do with political than economic factors. Political
economy factors in Iceland are not markedly different from other countries. The political
economy’s bias towards increasing expenditure can be explained to a large extent by the common
pool problem, as well as the pro-cyclicality of that growth. It is tempting for Ministers to see pre-
crises revenue windfalls as common property that feed through to higher spending and tax cuts.
Can the autonomy of Ministers and members of Parliament be restricted? Will politicians always
find a way to nullify the effectiveness of budget procedures? International evidence17 shows that,
to a large extent, strong fiscal frameworks are effective in controlling the common pool problem
and introducing fiscal discipline. The main goal of strong fiscal frameworks is to improve the
processes and controls of the budget framework so that the common pool externality can be
internalized.

          The coverage of the Act is increased from including only the central government to include
all sections of the central and local government’s budgets and all public corporations with the aim
to improve fiscal coordination within the entire public sector. A consolidated balance sheet of the
entire public sector will be prepared to highlight the substantial fiscal risks that, for example, public
corporations can pose to central and local governments.

          In line with common practice in other European countries the Minister of Finance shall
prepare a long-term forecast for fiscal policy. The forecast is meant to take into account likely


17
     See, for example, Alesina and Perotti (1999).

                                                     31
demographic changes when extrapolating the fiscal position, in terms of fiscal balance and
liabilities, few decades into the future. The minister shall prepare such a forecast at least every
three years.

        Chapter 2: Fiscal policy strategy reviewed by an independent fiscal council

The medium term fiscal framework (MTFF) set up is the cornerstone of the new Act. Its purpose
is to set up a transparent and credible MTFF that serves the purpose of mapping the
macroeconomic and fiscal policymaking.

        The new bill of legislation intends to address weaknesses by establishing a procedural fiscal
rule that maps out a five year general government fiscal path that must uphold the conditions set
by three numerical fiscal rules and show a positive balance over the five year period.

The fiscal path conditions are set with the following three fiscal rules:


        1. The overall result over a five-year period must always be positive, and the annual deficit
            may not exceed 2.5% of GDP.18
        2. Total debt, excluding pension obligations and accounts payable, but including cash
            balances and deposits, may not exceed 45% of GDP.19
        3. If the net debt ratio rises above 45%, the excess portion must decline by an average of
            at least 5% (1/20) per year in each three-year period.




18
   This fiscal rule may be too stringent. If the overall result over a five-year period is always be positive
the debt level will eventually go to zero and then become negative. It may aim at conditioned the rule on
the debt level. Also, fiscal policy objectives and requirements shall only be revised under extraordinary
circumstances, such as a national catastrophe or a severe economic shock.

19
  This definition of debt is an approximation of the conventional definition of net debt, where all
monetary assets are deducted from liabilities. Here, however, only cash and readily disposable monetary
assets are deducted. This definition is used in part because the Treasury has taken account of loans taken,
for example, to expand the Central Bank’s foreign exchange reserves. Those funds have not been used for
operations and are available for repayment of the loans taken. This definition gives a clearer picture of
how much debt must be paid down with cash from operations.

                                                      32
With these fiscal rules and the procedural fiscal rule, an attempt is made to lay the foundations for
well-defined procedures for fiscal policy formulation. Clear debt and performance criteria are set
on the basis of defined procedure and numerical targets, aiming at imposing significant restraint
on the legislative and executive authorities.

        Every new Government is obligated to formulate and submit to Parliament a Statement of
Fiscal Policy, as a proposed parliamentary resolution, setting out the five year fiscal path according
to the procedural fiscal rule. The path is required to state the projected balance and stock of
liabilities of the general government as a share of GDP. Expenditures shall be divided by economic
and administrative category. The aim is to increase parliamentary monitoring of policy formulation
and implementation. The statement is intended to explain the measures and channels through
which fiscal policy objectives will be achieved. The Cabinet thus is obligated to formulate a self-
imposed fiscal path or rule that is in accordance with their own political agenda. The Government
is thus left with violating their own rule/fiscal path if they fail.

        After five year plan has been voted on then throughout the tenure of the Government the
Minister of Finance shall present, each year, a fiscal plan or a medium-term fiscal strategy (MTFS)
to Parliament at the spring legislative session in the form of a Parliamentary resolution. The
purpose of this plan is to seek parliamentary endorsement of the key economic, fiscal, budgetary
and policy parameters for ministries, municipalities and public corporations to use in preparing
their budgets for the coming year.

        The inclusion of municipalities and public corporations in the Statement of Fiscal Policy
and the Statement of Fiscaal Plan means that reporting between central and local governments will
be stepped up. The policy coordination committee between central and local governments will
serve as the vehicle for this increased communication. The Minister of Finance shall within eight
weeks from the end of each quarter publish the accounts of general government and compare the
results with the Statements of Fiscal Policy and Plan.

        The Government will be subjected to independent scrutiny to review all this increased
reporting on fiscal performance. It is considered important to engage independent experts to
conduct an impartial assessment of fiscal policy implementation. As a result, it is proposed that an
independent fiscal council assess whether the fiscal policy and fiscal plan are in line with the


                                                    33
fundamental values and fiscal rules in the bill of legislation. To enhance transparency, the results
of this assessment shall be made public. Such fiscal councils can be found in many of Iceland’s
neighboring countries, including Denmark, the Netherlands, and Sweden.

       Chapter 3: The budget proposal and appropriations

The budget proposal will be changed substantially to affect how the Parliament debates and votes
on the budget. When the Act passes into law, fiscal budget proposals will be presented in a new
way. Parliament will authorize budgetary allocations to various fields and functions, plus a
contribution to a general precautionary fund, instead of a large number of budget items. This will
reduce budget items from approximately 900 items to 150-210. This is a fundamental change from
previous practice. Instead of allocating funds to each governmental agency that is legally binding
and cannot be change after the fact, the bill of legislation assumes that Government ministers will
be entrusted with defining the relevant ministries’ fields and functions. Redefining budgetary
authorizations aims to support substantive discussion of the Government and Parliament’s policy
on various fields and the total contribution to each of them, instead of a discussion of budgetary
allocations to individual agencies and projects. This makes ministries the focus of discussion. The
ministers are expected to then divide the allocations among individual agencies and tasks in a
separate appendix to the fiscal budget proposal based on their prioritization within the ministries’
fields and functions. To further bolster the appropriations powers of ministers virement rules will
be instated that allow ministries to reallocate operating/capital expenditure between agencies of up
to 3-5% of the fields’ budget. The new bill of legislation also allows for unallocated reserve funds
for each function of up to 2% for temporary, unforeseeable, unavoidable and absorbable pressures.
The Ministers are also to formulate and present their policy for the next five years for each field
and function. The responsibilities of ministers are thus increased considerably. These changes in
whole aim at allowing for the debates and votes on the budget proposal to follow a top-down
sequence.

       Chapter 4: Budget execution

Budget discipline has improved since the crisis. Overspending still takes place. Most of the
slippage happened in the election year in 2013. The 2009-2013 fiscal consolidation thus only
amounted to 8% of GDP instead of the 10% aimed for.


                                                 34
        The new bill of legislation places an obligation on all public entities to manage cash
efficiently. It then abolishes the carryover of overspends to future appropriations. Carryover of
underspends is also restricted and is limited to 3% of appropriations and only if the underspend is
because of economic reasons. The Minister reallocates the underspending.

       There are 22 articles in this chapter on budget execution that better define the roles and
responsibilities for budget implementation. A vast improvement but one thing that is missing is an
article following the recommendation of the FAD that overspending can only be allowed after it
has been voted on in the supplementary budget.

       When the fiscal budget is implemented, each minister must report to the Government and
the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the implementation of the budget and the financial
performance of the Treasury and compare it to the Budget as often as needed, and at least quarterly.
The Parliamentary Budget Committee – and other committees – may request information from
each minister concerning budget implementation within the scope of the minister’s field.

       Chapter 5: Accounting and fiscal reporting

Fiscal reporting is an important part of every FRLs. It shows whether the government is in
compliance with the budget law, is meeting its fiscal objectives and whether the policy is
sustainable. Much has happened since the 1997 FRA was developed. For example, the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) has been developed. FAD
recommended full adoption of IPSAS. The FAD wrote a report, the fourth one, on the issue with
recommendations at the request of the MoF. The new bill of legislation does adopt IPSAS but not
to the full extent. The MoF plans to adopt the standard in a couple of steps.

        The scope of reporting is increased significantly as the consolidated accounts of the entire
public sector will be reported in great detail. It is important that such ex post reporting is consistent
with budgets. Therefore budgets must be prepared on the same accounting standards as ex post
reports for ease of comparison.

        In addition to adopting new accounting standards and increasing the scope the timelines of
audited financial reports are improved upon. Reports on budget outcome are moved forward so
that for example last year’s outcome is available well in advance of the April 1 Statement of Fiscal


                                                   35
Plan. Adding that to external monitoring by an independent fiscal council it becomes clear that the
transparency of public finances will vastly improve.

       Chapter 6: Various provisions- No major reforms are in this chapter.




                                                36
                                  Appendix B - Glossary of acronyms
FAD - The IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department

FRL – Fiscal Responsibility Law

FRA – The Financial Reporting Act

GDP – Gross Domestic Product

GIIPS – Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain

GFC - Global Financial Crisis

INAO - The Icelandic National Audit Office

IMF – International Monetary Fund

IPSAS – International Public Sector Accounting Standards

MEF - the Municipal Equalization Fund

MFOC - The Municipal Fiscal Oversight Committee

MoF - Ministry of Finance

OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

LGA - The Local Government Act

MTFF - The medium term fiscal framework

MTFS – Medium Term Fiscal Strategy

SBA - Stand-By Arrangement

SGA - State Guarantee Acts




                                                  37
