                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE PERCEPTION OF SOCIAL SECURITY INCENTIVES FOR LABOR SUPPLY AND RETIREMENT:
               THE MEDIAN VOTER KNOWS MORE THAN YOU’D THINK

                                             Jeffrey B. Liebman
                                              Erzo F.P. Luttmer

                                            Working Paper 20562
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w20562


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         October 2014




    This paper is the longer, working-paper version of our paper with same title, published in Tax Policy
    and the Economy, Volume 26, Jeffrey R. Brown (ed.). We thank Andrew Biggs, Jeffrey Brown, Alan
    Gustman, Edward Glaeser, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, Annamaria Lusardi, and seminar participants
    at Brookings, Harvard, the NBER Summer Institute, the NBER Tax Policy and the Economy conference,
    RAND, and the Social Security Administration for helpful comments. We thank Andra Hibbert, Victoria
    Levin, Kate Mikels, Arman Rezaee, and Joshua Wan for superb research assistance. This research
    was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1-05 to the National
    Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium as well as by the
    National Bureau of Economic Research itself. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those
    of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the
    NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
    of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2014 by Jeffrey B. Liebman and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
    to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
    © notice, is given to the source.
The Perception Of Social Security Incentives For Labor Supply And Retirement: The Median
Voter Knows More Than You’d Think
Jeffrey B. Liebman and Erzo F.P. Luttmer
NBER Working Paper No. 20562
October 2014
JEL No. D83,H55

                                              ABSTRACT

The degree to which the Social Security tax distorts labor supply depends on the extent to which individuals
perceive the link between current earnings and future Social Security benefits. Some Social Security
reform plans have been motivated by an assumption that workers fail to perceive this link and that
increasing the salience of the link could result in significant efficiency gains. To measure the perceived
linkage between labor supply and Social Security benefits, we administered a survey to a representative
sample of Americans aged 50-70. We find that the majority of respondents believe that their Social
Security benefits increase with labor supply. Indeed, respondents generally report a link between labor
supply and future benefits that is somewhat greater than the actual incentive. We also surveyed people
about their understanding of various other provisions in the Social Security benefit rules. We find
that some of these provisions (e.g., effects of delayed benefit claiming and rules on widow benefits)
are relatively well understood while others (e.g., rules on spousal benefits, provisions on which years
of earnings are taken into account) are less well understood. In addition, our survey incorporated a
framing experiment, which shows that how the incentives for delayed claiming are presented has an
impact on hypothetical claiming decisions. In particular, the traditional “break-even” framing used
by the Social Security Administration leads to earlier claiming than other presentations do.


Jeffrey B. Liebman
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_liebman@harvard.edu

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
6106 Rockefeller Center, Room 305
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Erzo.FP.Luttmer@Dartmouth.Edu


A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20562
1. Introduction
       The Social Security system creates a complex set of implicit and explicit incentives for
labor supply and retirement decisions. While previous work has found that incentives from the
Social Security system affect labor supply and retirement behavior (Coile and Gruber, 2007;
Gustman and Steinmeier, 2005a; Liebman, Luttmer, and Seif, 2009), we know little about the
extent to which people understand these incentives. In this paper, we attempt to fill this gap by
surveying individuals about their understanding of the Social Security benefit rules and their
sources of information about the system.
       There are three reasons why it is important to know how individuals perceive the
incentives of the Social Security system and how these perceptions are formed. First, it is central
to assessing the potential efficiency gains from Social Security reform. A common argument is
that investment-based Social Security reform will improve economic efficiency by increasing the
perceived link between retirement contributions and retirement benefits (Auerbach and
Kotlikoff, 1987; Kotlikoff, 1996; Feldstein and Liebman, 2002).              Under this argument,
individuals currently respond to the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI)
payroll tax as a pure tax, failing to recognize that the payment of Social Security taxes will
increase their future Social Security benefits. With personal retirement accounts or a notional
defined-contribution system, by contrast, the link between contributions and future income
would be clear, and the economic distortions would be reduced. Yet there is little evidence as to
whether people perceive the Social Security tax as a pure tax or whether they instead realize that
the effective marginal tax rate is generally lower than the nominal Social Security tax rate
because of the incremental benefits that are earned from incremental labor supply. Liebman,
Luttmer, and Seif (2009) find that labor supply responds to marginal Social Security benefits,
indicating that workers do perceive a tax-benefit link. But given the complexity of the Social
Security benefit rules and the often long lag between when Social Security taxes are paid and
when benefits are received, it would be beneficial to have direct evidence on the degree to which
workers perceive this link.
       Second, if there is a systematic misperception of the Social Security system among
voters, political reform of Social Security will likely reflect these misconceptions, contributing to
suboptimal policy choices.




                                                                                                   2
         Third, a misperception of incentives can lead to privately suboptimal decisions.1
Measuring how widespread misperceptions are gives insight into the aggregate cost of
suboptimal decision making and the potential gains from improving understanding. In addition,
the nature of the misperceptions provides useful information on how best to disseminate
information about the Social Security program. For consequential decisions like the choice of a
retirement or benefit claiming date, it is important to know whether it might be possible to
improve decision making by providing information in a different way.
         Our survey was administered to a sample of individuals aged 50 to 70 that is nationally
representative with regard to demographic characteristics. These individuals had previously
been recruited by the survey firm Knowledge Networks through random-digit dialing to become
part of its panel of respondents. These panelists agree to take a weekly survey via the Internet
using a PC or WebTV in exchange for free Internet and WebTV access.2 Our survey took about
half an hour to complete and contained five sections. First, it asked about respondents’ current
or expected level of Social Security benefits, date of retirement, and start date for claiming
benefits. Second, it measured respondents’ perceptions of Social Security’s incentives for labor
supply by asking how additional earnings or additional years of work would affect their benefits.
Third, we measured knowledge about specific provisions in the Social Security benefit rules,
such as the effect of the age of first claiming on the level of benefits, the earnings test, and the
rules on spouse and widow benefits.3 Fourth, we experimentally varied how we framed the
effect of delaying benefit claiming, and we examined whether these different frames affected
attitudes towards delayed claiming. Finally, we asked respondents about their valuation of the
Social Security annuity and collected data on a large number of background questions, which
allow us to identify factors that predict the accuracy of the perceptions. Because our survey
contained questions that could potentially be challenging for some respondents to answer, we

1
   Similarly, misperceptions of the level of benefits can lead to suboptimal savings decisions. Rohwedder and Van
Soest (2006) show that those who overestimated their benefits before retirement are worse off in terms of several
well-being measures during retirement.
2
  The WebTV option means that individuals did not need to be computer users to be recruited into the panel.
3
   Perceptions of the level of Social Security benefits have previously been studied by Bernheim (1988), Bernheim
and Levin (1989), Gustman and Steinmeier (2001, 2005b), and Dominitz and Manski (2006). The general
conclusion from this literature is that, while response rates to questions about Social Security benefit levels are low,
the median (or average) perception is reasonably accurate despite a wide dispersion of answers. Surveys that
examine knowledge about the Social Security system more generally (such as how it is funded) are reviewed in
Barabas (2011). Benítez-Silva et al. (2009) and Greenwald et al. (2010) conduct nationally representative surveys
that examine knowledge of various Social Security benefit rules. Our research adds to this literature by providing an
in depth examination of the perceived labor supply incentives provided by the Social Security benefit rules.


                                                                                                                      3
randomized the wording and numerical parameters of key questions in a way that allows us to
assess whether respondents provided meaningful responses.
       We have three main findings. First, our results indicate that a majority of respondents
perceive significant positive labor supply incentives from the Social Security benefit rules.
About two-thirds of respondents report that their benefits will increase if they work an additional
year (holding constant the age at which they start claiming benefits), and over half of
respondents state that additional earnings before claiming benefits would result in higher
benefits. Since an individual’s actual labor supply incentives are a complex function of his or
her own exact earnings history as well as his or her spouse’s earnings history, we cannot
determine with certainty whether these perceptions are correct at the individual level, but in
aggregate they are quite reasonable. Among those who report positive labor supply incentives,
the median perceived size of the incentive tends to be larger than what we would expect for a
typical worker with positive labor supply incentives.
       Second, we find that some features of the Social Security system are relatively well
understood while others are not. For example, people are very familiar with the so-called early
retirement penalty. About 85 percent of respondents correctly answer that a delay in claiming
benefits between the age of 62 and 66 will increase the benefit amount, and the median perceived
benefit increase per year of delay (5.0 percent) is reasonably close to the actual increase (6.25
percent). People are also largely aware that delays in claiming between the ages of 66 and 70
increase benefits; however, about two-thirds of respondents incorrectly believe that delays
beyond the age 70 will further increase benefits. Thus, the rules governing how the age of first
claiming affects benefit levels seem to be well understood, at least for the age range that is
relevant for most respondents (generally between ages 62 and 70 in our sample). Similarly, the
provisions regarding widow/widower benefits are relatively well understood. In particular, 52
percent believe that they would receive the same benefits if they become widowed, while 42
percent believe their benefits would rise – and the responses vary with the ratio of own to spouse
primary insurance amount in an appropriate way.
        For other features of Social Security, there is considerable heterogeneity in
understanding. For example, about half the sample incorrectly believes that his or her spouse
would not be eligible for any benefits if the spouse had never worked, not realizing that the
spouse could potentially claim benefits based on the respondent’s earnings history. However,



                                                                                                 4
among those who do believe that the spouse could receive benefits, the median respondent
perceives the spousal benefit to be 49 percent of his or her own benefit, which is quite close to
the true figure of 50 percent. Knowledge about the earnings test is also limited, with only about
40 percent correctly identifying the direction of its effect. Yet, among those who are aware of
the earnings test, the median respondent believes the threshold is $12,200, which is quite close to
the actual threshold of about $13,560. Lastly, knowledge about which years of earnings enter the
benefit formula is very low. Given a four-item multiple-choice question, only about 30 percent
indicate that some portion of the highest years of earnings count towards benefits. Further, the
median respondent believes that only the 10 highest years of earnings count, far fewer than the
actual figure of the 35 highest years.
       Third, we find that how information about the effects of delayed claiming is framed alters
retirement intentions. In particular, when we switch from the frame traditionally used by the
Social Security Administration (“the break-even frame”) to alternative frames, the fraction
favoring retirement at age 65 rather than at age 62 rises to about 70 percent from 60 percent.
Given that our respondents’ four most highly rated information sources are all communications
from the Social Security Administration, this result suggests that the way the Social Security
Administration is presenting information may be affecting retirement decisions. These results
are consistent with Dominitz, Hung, and van Soest (2007), who also found that the way
information about Social Security is presented affects people’s hypothetical claiming decisions.
More recent work by Brown, Kapteyn, and Mitchell (2014) shows that the “break-even frame”
leads to earlier hypothetical claiming behavior relative to a neutral framing.
       Taken together, our results indicate that there is widespread awareness of the incentive
effects of the Social Security benefit rules, even though some of the Social Security benefit rules
themselves are less well understood. This suggests that the potential efficiency gains from
increasing the transparency of the link between Social Security benefits and taxes are likely to be
smaller than is generally assumed. While the median response to many of our survey questions
was often very close to the true answer, the substantial heterogeneity of responses to most
questions suggests that there could be large costs associated with individuals making privately
suboptimal decisions because of misperceptions. However, to the extent that policy choices are
based on perceptions of the median voter, the additional deadweight loss associated with




                                                                                                 5
suboptimal policy decisions may be limited, since the median voter appears to be well informed
about many features of Social Security.


2. Survey Design and Sample Characteristics
       We contracted with Knowledge Networks to administer our survey instrument to a
sample of its panel of respondents. These panelists, originally recruited through random-digit
dialing, agree to take a 15-20 minute survey once a week via the Internet using a PC or WebTV
in exchange for free Internet and WebTV access.             Knowledge Networks collects basic
demographic characteristics for all of its panelists, and its panelists are roughly representative of
the adult U.S. population according to these characteristics. Administering the survey online was
beneficial because this method allowed us to ask more complicated questions than could be
asked using a phone survey, and the cost of fielding the online survey was only a fraction of
what an in-person survey would have cost.


2.1 Survey Instrument
       Our survey instrument consists of 77 questions, though the typical respondent was not
asked every question because of skip patterns present in the instrument. The complete survey
instrument, which consists of five parts, is contained in Appendix A. In the first part (Sections 1
and 2), we asked the respondents whether they are retired, when they retired or expect to retire,
whether they currently claim Social Security, when they started claiming Social Security or
expect to start claiming, and what their actual or expected level of Social Security benefit is. We
also asked married respondents to answer these questions on behalf of their spouses. The
questions in the first part of the survey are used to determine the appropriate tense, wording, and
skip patterns for later questions. For example, when asking about the effect of working one less
year on the level of Social Security benefits (Q3.1), we adjust the wording of the question
depending on whether or not the respondent already collects Social Security benefits and
whether the respondent is still working or already retired. In addition, the question wording
contains the respondent’s earlier answer about the (expected) age of retirement, the (expected)
start age of claiming Social Security, and her (expected) monthly Social Security benefit.
       The second part (Sections 3 and 4) contains questions about the perceived labor supply
incentives of the Social Security benefit rules. We asked respondents what they believe will



                                                                                                   6
happen (or would have happened) to their Social Security benefits if they were to work (or had
worked) one year less. The response to this question is the perceived incentive on the extensive
margin of labor supply.     We solicit both a qualitative answer, where respondents indicate
whether their benefits would rise, stay the same, or decline; and a quantitative answer, where
respondents specify what the resulting new level of benefits would be. We also asked about the
perceived incentive on the intensive margin, namely the perceived effect of higher earnings on
Social Security benefits. We also measure this incentive in both qualitative and quantitative
terms. The true incentives of Social Security on labor supply vary widely across individuals
because these incentives are a complex function of past earning history, marital status, and
spousal earnings history (for details, see Feldstein and Samwick 1992 on intensive-margin
incentives and Goda et al. 2009 on extensive-margin incentives).         Because we only have
approximate information about these determinants of true incentives, it is difficult to determine
whether perceived labor supply incentives correspond to actual incentives for any given
individual.   Thus, the primary purpose of these questions is to estimate the population
distribution and correlates of these perceptions, though we will also compare self-reported
perceptions are correct to our best predictor of the actual incentives given the information
available to us.
       In the third part (Sections 5-8), we asked respondents about their knowledge of five
important components of the Social Security benefits rules: (1) the effect of the age of first
claiming Social Security benefits on the level of benefits, (2) the earnings test, (3) the spousal
benefit rules, (4) the widow(er) benefit rules, and (5) which years of earnings are used in the
benefit calculation. In some cases, we ask about these rules as they pertain to the respondent
(e.g., what would happen to your benefits if you became widowed?). The advantage of tailoring
the questions to the respondent is that respondents may be more motivated to answer questions
about themselves than about hypothetical persons or about Social Security rules per se.
Moreover, we would expect that respondents are more likely to have information about features
of rules that are directly relevant to them. The drawback, however, is that it is not always
possible to ascertain the correct answer for any given respondent or whether any given
respondent understands the rule. For example, a respondent might answer that his benefits
would remain the same if he became widowed. If, in fact, this respondent’s benefit would
remain the same because his own benefits are higher than his spouse’s benefits, we cannot tell



                                                                                                7
whether he applied the rule correctly or was not aware of the rule. Moreover, to the extent that
we do not know his own exact PIA and his spouse’s true PIA, we cannot tell for sure what would
happen to his benefits if he were to become widowed. To overcome this drawback, we also ask
some questions about hypothetical persons or explicitly about Social Security rules. For these
questions, we can directly determine whether the answer is correct, which allows us to examine
the predictors of knowledge about the Social Security benefit rules.
       The fourth part (Section 9) consists of a framing experiment, in which we experimentally
vary how we present the effect of the age of claiming on the level of Social Security benefits.
We present the effect as an increase in monthly benefits for later claiming (gain frame), a
decrease in monthly benefits for early claiming (loss frame), or the first age at which the lifetime
benefits under delayed claiming exceed the lifetime benefits under early claiming (the break-
even frame). The wording of the break-even frame closely follows the wording that the Social
Security Administration currently uses on its web site to educate people about tradeoffs from
claiming earlier or later. After presenting one of these three frames, we ask a randomly selected
group of respondents whether they think a neighbor would be better off claiming early or late.
We ask the remaining respondents about their own preferred claim date, which is a
counterfactual question for those who have already claimed Social Security benefits.
       The final part of the survey (Sections 10-14) contains a variety of questions about the
respondent’s background. Some these questions, such as the ones about earnings histories, allow
us to make a rough estimate of the true incentives faced by the respondent. Other questions are
potential predictors of respondent knowledge about the Social Security system. For example, the
questions regarding sources of information about Social Security will enable us to test whether
respondents with a better understanding of Social Security rules get their knowledge from
particular sources. In a similar vein, we ask questions to gauge a respondent’s financial literacy,
which Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a, b, c) and Lusardi (2008) have shown to be very important
for decisions related to retirement. We also ask about the importance of Social Security for
retirement spending and the fraction of a respondent’s friends who are retired (and might
therefore be a source of knowledge). We ask about each respondent’s total number of siblings as
well as the number of older siblings, since siblings are a potential source of information about
the program. Finally, we ask how the respond values the annuity stream of Social Security




                                                                                                  8
benefits relative to receiving a lump-sum payment at age 62 or one year from now (whichever is
later).
          Because the survey asked many relatively hard questions, we also experimentally varied
the way some of the questions were asked to determine whether respondents could give
meaningful answers. For example, when we ask respondents how an increase in earnings would
affect their Social Security benefits, we randomly choose this increase in earnings to be $5,000
or $10,000. This allows us to test whether those who were asked about larger earnings increases
report larger benefit increases.       We included a number of such experimental variations in
question wording, and most results indicate that the respondents varied their answers in the
expected direction. This increases our confidence that many respondents were able to give
meaningful answers even to our relatively difficult questions.


2.2 Sample Characteristics
          Knowledge Networks fielded the main survey from November 6 to November 23 of
      4
2008. A total of 3255 panelists between the ages of 50 and 70 were invited to participate in our
survey. When they received their weekly invitation from Knowledge Networks to participate in
a survey, the invitees did not know the topic of the survey. Eighty-two percent of invitees (2661
respondents) chose to take the survey, at which point the subject of the survey was revealed. Of
those who began the survey, 268 failed to complete it. Thus the completion rate among those
choosing to take the survey was 90 percent. In addition, 62 respondents reported not being
eligible at all for Social Security benefits – not on their own record, nor on the record of a
spouse, ex-spouse, or late spouse. After excluding the incomplete and ineligible responses, our
analysis sample contains 2331 observations. Conditional on completing the survey, the item-
response rates were very high, generally above 95 percent. The median completion time was 32
minutes, and respondents were paid a $5 incentive because the survey length exceeded the
typical length (about 20 minutes) for Knowledge Networks’ surveys.
          We oversampled working individuals between the ages of 60 and 65 because this group is
on the verge of making retirement decisions, and refer to this group of individuals as the “older-
worker group.”      The older-worker group contains 1636 observations and has demographic


4
  About 92% of the data comes from the main survey, while 8% comes from a pilot survey that was fielded August
20, 2008, to September 9, 2008.


                                                                                                            9
characteristics that are roughly representative of all working individuals between the ages of 60
and 65. Similarly, when we weight the observations of all 2331 sample members to compensate
for oversampling among the older-worker group, the demographic characteristics are roughly
representative of all individuals between the ages of 50 and 70 nationwide.5 We refer to this
broader group as the “representative group.” Unless otherwise noted, results described in this
paper apply to the representative group.
        Table 1 shows the demographic composition of the representative group and the older-
worker group. The representative group has an average age of about 59 years, is just over half
female, and is mostly non-Hispanic white (80 percent). The majority of respondents (63 percent)
are married, and about three quarters live in one- or two-person households. The variation in
income and education across respondents generally reflects the heterogeneity of the U.S. in this
regard. About 10 percent of our respondents are high school dropouts and about 20 percent have
a household income of less than $25,000 per year. About 29 percent of the respondents have a
college degree and about 19 percent have a household income of more than $100,000 per year.
When Knowledge Networks asked respondents about their labor force status (a 7-option multiple
choice question), about 54 percent reported that they were working and about 26 percent
reported that they were retired. When we asked respondents whether they are currently working
for pay (with at least $2500 in annual earnings), about 52 percent answer affirmatively. We
classify respondents as retired if they both (i) do not currently work for pay (with at least $2500
in annual earnings) and (ii) do not expect to work for pay in the future (with at least $2500 in
annual earnings). This definition, which we use in the rest of the paper, yields a retirement rate
of 39 percent. The older-worker group is more highly educated and has higher incomes than the
representative group.6 This is not surprising since it consists only of those individuals between
the ages of 60 and 65 who were still working.


5
   Appendix Table A1 examines the representativeness of the representative group by comparing its demographic
characteristics to those of observations in the Current Population Survey (CPS) that match our sample selection
criteria of being between the ages of 50 and 70. Relative to the CPS, our sample has somewhat more whites (80%
vs. 75%), is more educated (61% with at least some college vs. 56%), is slightly less likely to be married (63% vs.
68%), and is somewhat less likely to be working (54% vs. 60%). While many of the demographic characteristics are
statistically significantly different between the CPS sample and our representative group, the economic magnitude of
these differences is moderate in size. We therefore think of the sample as broadly representative of the U.S.
population of individuals between the ages of 50 and 70.
6
   Members of the older-worker group were selected prior to the administration of the survey based on Knowledge
Networks’ work status variable, which might not always be fully current. This explains why the fraction working
(according to the question on our survey) is less than 100% for the older-worker group.


                                                                                                                10
2.3 Claim Status and Benefit Receipt
        Two important dimensions along which respondents differ are retirement status and
Social Security claim status. Retirement status matters because labor supply incentives from the
Social Security benefit rules are still relevant for future decisions only for non-retired
individuals. Social Security claim status is important since those who have already claimed
Social Security benefits have had more contact with the Social Security system and, in the
process, may have gained more knowledge about the benefit rules. About 39 percent of our
respondents currently receive some form of Social Security benefits. If we exclude the 13
percent of respondents who report receiving disability benefits after they stopped working (not
all of whom were receiving OASDI benefits), the fraction of respondents receiving Social
Security benefits becomes 31 percent. The age at which people first claim Social Security
benefits, their “claim age,” is often different from their retirement age, which is defined as the
age at which they stop working and have no intention to work in the future. Slightly over half of
our sample report a claim age that differs from their retirement age. This distinction is also
evident in Table 2, which shows that 19 percent of our sample is either still working while
receiving benefits or retired but not yet receiving benefits.
        We measure Social Security benefit levels by combining reported current benefit levels
among those who are already claiming benefits with expected benefit levels among those not yet
claiming. We adjust benefit levels to the level that they would be if each person had started
claiming (or expected to start claiming) at age 66. As shown at the bottom of Table 1, the
average adjusted benefit level reported by our representative group respondents is $1263. This
level closely matches administrative data from the Social Security Administration, which shows
                                                                                                        7
that the average PIA for retired workers making initial benefit claims in 2008 was $1259.
Table 3 shows that the characteristics of those currently receiving Social Security benefits differ
markedly from those who have yet to receive benefits. Not only are those claiming benefits on
average almost 10 years older, they also have lower levels of education, are less likely to be
married, and more likely to be female. Since there are such large demographic differences by
claim status, it will be important to control for demographic characteristics when examining


7
    See Table 6.A2 of the 2010 Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin available at
http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2010/6a.pdf.


                                                                                                      11
whether knowledge about Social Security is influenced by current claim status so as to avoid
confounding claim status and demographic characteristics. Current recipients receive benefits
that are about $200 per month (or about 18 percent) lower than the expected benefits of those not
yet claiming. However, virtually all of this difference can be explained by the fact that the
current recipients of Social Security started claiming benefits at an earlier age. If all benefits are
adjusted to the level that they would be if each person had started claiming (or expected to start
claiming) at age 66, then both current recipients and future recipients have mean (adjusted)
benefits that is within 10 dollars of the overall average of $1263 per month. Figure 1 presents
the cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the actual and adjusted Social Security benefits,
which shows that the distribution of reported benefits levels appears very plausible. Figure 2
reports the CDF of adjusted benefit levels for those already claiming and those yet to claim
Social Security benefits. This figure confirms that the distribution of benefit levels is very
similar for those groups, which indicates that, on average, those not yet receiving benefits have a
reasonably good impression of the benefits that people actually receive.8 Finally, Figure 3 shows
that the older-worker group expects higher benefits than the representative group, which is as
expected since the older-worker group has higher earnings.
         The finding that mean levels of reported benefits correspond to averages from
administrative data is consistent with respondents having unbiased perceptions of benefit levels,
but it does not establish that individuals’ perception of benefit levels are accurate. Ideally, we
would compare individual perceptions of benefits or incentives to actual benefits or incentives
based on administrative records.                 Unfortunately, we cannot link our respondents to
administrative data at the individual level. Instead, to predict individual benefits we apply the
Social Security benefit rules to each respondent’s self-reported length of work history (number
of years worked for pay), earnings in last year of work, earnings in a typical year relative to the
last year, (planned) age of first claiming benefits, and (planned) retirement age. Given that this



8
   Dominitz and Manski (2006) and Delavande and Rohwedder (2008) have gone one step further and elicited
individuals’ perceived probability distribution of their future Social Security benefits. Delavande and Rohwedder
(2008) compare people’s point estimate of their future Social Security benefits to their expected Social Security
benefits (where the expectation is based on the perceived probability distribution) and find that both figures are very
similar. This evidence suggests that the point estimates that we elicit in our survey can be interpreted as
expectations. In addition, Rohwedder and Kleinjans (2006) examine the dynamics over time of individuals’
perceived Social Security benefits and find that perceptions tend to become more accurate as people approach
retirement.


                                                                                                                   12
prediction is based on a relatively coarse description of the individual’s earnings history, our
predictor is only a rough proxy for true benefits.
       In Table 4, we regress self-reported Social Security benefits on our predictor for benefits
(in the odd columns) and vice versa (in the even columns). We limit the sample to those who
report to claim benefits on their own earnings record, because we don’t have the required
information to estimate benefits for those who (partly) claim based on the record of a current,
former, or late spouse. Columns 1 and 2 report the results for the representative group whereas
columns 3 and 4 report the results for the older-worker group. The table shows that an additional
dollar of predicted benefits is associated with increase in self-reported benefits of about half a
dollar, and that this association is highly significant. Error in our predictor will cause the
coefficient on the predictor to be biased toward zero, which may explain why the coefficient is
less than one. Particularly for those already receiving benefits, the reverse regression yields
slightly higher coefficients (but still less than 1), which is consistent with self-reported benefits
being somewhat more accurate than our predictor. The predictor is able to explain about 30
percent of variation in self-reported benefit levels. The results are similar for the representative
group and the older-worker group, and do not vary substantially by claim status. In short, Table
4 shows that the heterogeneity in self-reported benefits corresponds to what we would expect
given our information about respondents’ earnings histories and planned retirement and claiming
ages, and we therefore conclude that respondents are able to give meaningful answers regarding
Social Security benefit levels.


3. Perceptions of Social Security Incentives
       Before turning to perceptions of incentives from the complex Social Security benefit
rules, we first present perceptions of the marginal OASDI tax rate (Q3.3).


3.1 Perceptions of the Marginal OASDI Tax Rate
       In 2007, the actual OASDI marginal tax rate was constant at 12.4 percent for the first
$97,500 of earnings and was 0 percent for earnings above that amount.                 We explicitly
differentiated between and asked about the employee and the employer portion. Among the 89
percent of respondents who reported earning less than $100,000 in the last year they worked, the
median response is that the respondent and his employer combined would have paid $150 more



                                                                                                  13
in OASDI taxes if he had earned $1000 more in the last year he worked. In other words, the
median perception of the OASDI tax is 15.0 percent, which is quite close to the true figure of
12.4 percent.9      A number somewhat above 12.4 percent could arise if some respondents
mistakenly included the 2.9 percentage point Medicare payroll tax in their answer. Moreover,
about three quarters of the non-self-employed respondents with earnings less than $100,000
correctly report that the employee and the employer share the OASDI tax equally. Figure 4
shows the distribution of perceived marginal OASDI tax rates among those subject to the tax on
the margin. The figure confirms that that the median perception is very close to the actual rate
but also shows that there is a fair amount of dispersion around this median, with an interquartile
range from 7 to 30 percent.


3.2 Perceptions of Incentives to Work Additional Years
         We measured perceptions of extensive margin incentives by asking two questions (Q3.1
and Q3.2). First, we asked respondents what would happen to their Social Security benefits if
they had stopped working for pay earlier than they did, but had started collecting Social Security
at the age that they actually did. Note that this question is hypothetical for those who have
already retired. For those still working, the question asks about the effect of stopping work
earlier than the age they had indicated as their expected retirement age. We asked a random third
of respondents about the effects of retiring one year earlier, another third about retiring two years
earlier, and a final third about retiring five years earlier. The question explicitly held the claim
age constant so as not to measure the effect of the claim age on benefits.
         We decided to ask about retiring earlier rather than about working additional years
because respondents should have a better idea about their earnings during years that actually took
place or that they expect to take place than about earnings in years when they did not work or do
not expect to work. Moreover, if we had asked about working longer while keeping the claim
age constant, there is a greater possibility that answers would have reflected the earnings test
(which temporarily reduces benefits) rather than the effect of additional work on long-run
benefits. The question was divided into two parts. We first asked whether benefits would
increase, stay the same, or decrease if they had stopped working earlier. Then, for respondents



9
    The median response among respondents earning more than $100,000 was a marginal OASDI tax rate of 0%.


                                                                                                            14
who reported that retiring earlier would change their benefit level, we asked what the resulting
new amount of their benefits would be.
        Table 5 reports individuals’ perceptions of the incentives for working longer as provided
by the Social Security benefit rules. We recoded the answers from the original question (which
asked about working fewer years) so that higher numbers correspond to positive labor supply
incentives. Panel A shows that 31 percent of respondents believe that working additional years
would have no effect on their benefits and that 65 percent believe that this would increase their
benefits. Social Security rules dictate that extra years of work will either increase or not change
a person’s benefits, depending upon (i) whether or not the person claims solely on his or her own
record and (ii) whether the additional year will be part of the 35 highest years that enter the
AIME calculation. About 10 percent of respondents do not claim solely on their own record, so
for them working an additional year should not affect benefits. Moreover, of those claiming on
their own record, about 75 percent indicate that they will have an earnings history of at least 35
years at their retirement age. Thus, it is plausible that for some fraction of this latter group, the
last year of work would not be included in the 35 highest years. The results in Panel A therefore
suggest that, overall, people appear to be well aware that more years of work generally lead to
higher Social Security benefits. This perception is somewhat stronger among those not yet
receiving benefits compared to those already receiving benefits.
        Panel B of Table 5 examines the perceived percentage increase in Social Security
benefits from working one additional year among the subsample of respondents who believe that
benefits will be strictly higher if they work an additional year. The median response is 6.7
percent per year of additional work with an interquartile range of 4.0 to 10.0 percent. The CDF
of the responses is shown in Figure 5.
        Because we are asking respondents a relatively complicated question, we built in random
variation in our instrument that allows us examine the quality of the responses. In particular, the
reported total reduction in benefits should be strongly related to the randomly selected number
(1, 2, or 5) of reduced work years. This is indeed what we find. The median response of those
asked about working one fewer year is a 9.1 percent (s.e.: 0.4) reduction in benefits, whereas the
comparable figures for those asked about 2 and 5 fewer years of work are respectively a 15.0
percent (s.e.: 0.6) and a 21.8 percent (s.e.: 1.0) decline in benefits.




                                                                                                  15
       The actual incentive on the extensive margin varies across individuals and depends on the
person’s exact earnings history. As an illustration, consider an individual who in the last year of
work had indexed earnings of twice her average yearly income and who had an earnings history
such that the lowest year of earnings among her 35 highest years was half her average earnings.
By replacing the lowest year by the current year, her AIME would rise by 100*(2-0.5)/35 = 4.3
percent. If she is on the 32 percent segment of the AIME-PIA schedule, and her PIA/AIME ratio
is 50 percent, then the 4.3 percent increase in her AIME would translate into a 4.3×0.32/0.50 =
2.7 percent benefit increase. We performed more refined calculations of typical incentives by
calculating the effect of working one additional year on a sample of Health and Retirement Study
(HRS) respondents between the ages of 50 and 70, and for whom linked administrative earnings
histories are available. Hence, for this sample, we can accurately calculate the effect on benefits
of an additional year of work. We find that the median return is 3.3 percent, with an interquartile
range of 2.2 to 4.5 percent. When combined with our survey results, these calculations suggest
that individuals’ perceptions of the extensive margin incentives are somewhat higher than true
incentives.
       To explore whether the spread in self-reported incentives on the extensive margin
represents heterogeneity in true incentives or misperception, we predicted for each individual
whether they have a positive or zero incentive for working additional years. This predictor is
based on the individual's own earnings history, spouse's earnings history, planned retirement
date, and whether the individual plans to claim benefits in part on the earnings record of a
current, late, or former spouse. Table 6 compares the self-reported qualitative perceptions on the
extensive margin to our predictor. The first two columns limit the sample to those perceiving
zero or positive incentives for working more years, while the last two columns also includes
those perceiving negative incentives and adjusts the predictor to take the earnings test into
account. We find that we can statistically significantly predict the qualitative perceptions of
extensive margin incentives, but the coefficient on the predictor is far below 1 and the R2 is quite
low. We suspect the low predictive power is in large part due to the coarse information about
earnings histories available to us, but we cannot rule out that widespread misperceptions of the
incentives also contributed to this finding.


3.3 Perceptions of Incentives to Earn More


                                                                                                 16
        We used two different frames for the questions that measure incentives on the intensive
margin, monthly and lifetime, and randomized respondents into one of the two frames. In the
monthly frame, each respondent indicated what would happen to her monthly benefits if she had
earned a given amount more in the last year she worked (Q4.1 and Q4.2).10 The lifetime frame
asks each respondent what would happen to the total Social Security benefits that she receives
over her lifetime if she had earned more, and as a result, she and her employer combined had
paid $1000 more in Social Security taxes in the last year that she worked (Q4.3 and Q4.5). Both
frames asked first for a qualitative answer and subsequently solicited a quantitative answer. The
benefit of the monthly frame is that the question is more concrete and does not implicitly ask
respondents to calculate the expected present discounted value of the benefit increase. However,
when applying the lifetime frame, we can interpret people’s responses to these questions as the
fraction of the Social Security tax that is returned in the form of higher benefits; in other words,
the question yields a direct estimate of the perceived effective Social Security tax rate.
        Panel A of Table 7 presents the qualitative responses. Combining the qualitative answers
from both frames in the first column, we find that 57 percent of respondents believe that higher
earnings in the last year that they worked would have resulted in higher benefits, while 37
percent of respondents believe that higher earnings would not have affected their benefit level.
As was the case with the extensive margin incentives, the actual intensive margin incentives
depend in a complex way upon the individual’s earnings history, marital status, and spouse’s
earnings history. In particular, future benefits remain the same if (i) the individual does not
claim benefits solely off of her own earnings record, (ii) the individual earns more than the
maximum taxable amount of about $100,000, or (iii) the higher earnings occur in a year that will
not be among the 35 highest years of earnings when benefits are determined. Given these rules,
it is quite plausible that for a substantial portion of respondents the true intensive margin
incentive is indeed zero. Using a sample of HRS respondents between the ages of 50 and 70 for
whom linked administrative earnings histories are available, we calculate that approximately 79

10
     We randomly selected the hypothetical increase in earnings to be $5,000, or $10,000 to test whether the
respondents’ answers vary in the expected direction to the amount mentioned in the question. A few respondents in
the pilot survey were also asked about a hypothetical $1,000 earnings increase, but we didn’t ask this in the main
survey because a $1,000 earnings increase has only a very small impact on benefits for a typical respondent. We
also randomized the number of years over which the hypothetical earnings increase happened between one year or
five years. In the main survey, we made sure to ask only about combinations of the annual increase and the number
of years over which the increase took place that yielded a total increase (annual increase × number of years) in
lifetime earnings of at least $10,000.


                                                                                                               17
percent of this sample should have strictly positive intensive-margin incentives. Hence, the
fraction of respondents perceiving strictly positive intensive-margin incentives is about 22 (=79-
57) percentage points lower than the true fraction having strictly positive incentives. The 2nd and
3rd columns show that the fraction perceiving strictly positive incentives on the intensive margin
is similar among those not yet receiving benefits and those already receiving benefits. Columns
(4) and (5) show that perceptions of the intensive margin incentives are 18 percentage points
more likely to be positive with the monthly frame than with the lifetime frame. This should
serve as a reminder that respondents find these questions challenging and that answers may
depend on the way in which we solicit their perceptions.
       In Panel B, we present the quantitative results for this question using the monthly frame.
We report the perceived dollar increase in the monthly Social Security benefit per $1000 of
hypothetical additional earnings and limit the sample to those who indicate strictly positive
benefit increases. The median respondent perceives $1000 in extra earnings to result in a $4.0
increase in monthly benefits, with an interquartile range from $2 to $8. The full distribution of
responses is shown in Figure 6a. As a benchmark, consider a worker who is on the 32 percent
segment of the AIME-PIA schedule. A $1000 yearly earnings increase corresponds to an $83
(=1000/12) increase in monthly earnings for the year in question, which in turn would cause the
AIME to increase by $83/35=$2.40, assuming this year would be part of the 35 highest years of
earnings. On the 32 percent AIME-PIA segment, this $2.40 increase in the AIME would raise
the PIA by 0.32×$2.40 = $0.75. On the 15 percent AIME-PIA segment the PIA would increase
by $0.36. A more refined calculation based on HRS observations ages 50-70 with administrative
earnings records shows that the median increase in monthly benefits per $1000 of additional
earnings is $0.64, with an interquartile range of $0.53 to $0.86. Clearly, the median perceived
response to the intensive margin incentive is multiple times larger that the actual incentive for a
typical worker.
       To examine the quality of the responses we randomly varied the amount and duration of
the hypothetical additional earnings. If respondents are able to meaningfully answer the question
about incentive margin incentives, they should report larger benefit increases in response to
larger earnings increases. As the hypothetical earnings increase rises from $10,000 to $25,000,
the median expected increase in Social Security benefits goes from $50/month (s.e.: 3) to
$100/month (s.e.: 1), indicating that respondents do pay attention to the size of the hypothetical


                                                                                                18
earnings increase.       However, when we further raise the hypothetical earnings increase to
$50,000, we see no further rise in the expected benefit increase, which suggests that the question
about intensive margin incentives was challenging for many respondents.
        Panel C examines the quantitative responses from the lifetime frame. Among those who
perceive a strictly positive intensive-margin incentive, the median person believes that for $1000
in additional Social Security taxes paid, she will receive an additional $1000 in benefits over the
course of her lifetime.11 The interquartile range for the responses spans $100 to $3000, and the
full distribution is shown in Figure 6b. As a benchmark, the $1000 in extra earnings for the
worker considered above would have resulted in $124 in additional OASDI tax payments.
Assuming the worker had a life expectancy of 20 years and a discount rate of 5 percent, the value
of the extra $0.75 per month paid over his lifetime would have been $131. Thus, this worker
would indeed over the course of her lifetime receive the additional Social Security taxes paid
back in the form of higher benefits. This admittedly crude calculation is consistent with the
much more refined calculations presented in Liebman, Luttmer, and Seif (2009), where we show
that Health and Retirement Study participants, whose average age of 60 is the same as that of the
respondents to our survey, receive additional Social Security benefits over their lifetimes that on
average have an expected present discounted value of $560 for $1000 in additional taxes paid.
This average includes individuals who do not receive higher benefits when they pay more tax
(e.g., because they claim spousal or widow benefits). Thus, in contrast to the monthly frame, the
lifetime frame yields measures of perceived incentives on the intensive margin that are roughly
similar to the actual incentives.
        To explore the heterogeneity in self-reported incentives on the intensive margin, we
predicted for each individual whether they have a positive or zero incentive for increasing their
earnings on the margin. This predictor is based on the earnings history, the spousal earnings
history, the planned retirement date, whether current earnings exceed the Social Security
earnings limit, and whether the individual plans to claim benefits in part on the earnings record
of a current, late, or former spouse. Table 8 compares the self-reported qualitative perceptions
on the intensive margin to our predictor. The first two columns limit the sample to those
perceiving zero or positive incentives for working more years, while the last two columns also

11
   It conceivable, however, that a $1000 benefit increase became a focal point for answers because the question
asked about a $1000 tax increase. To the extent this is the case, the lifetime frame question may not have elicited
actual perceptions of the incentive on the intensive margin.


                                                                                                                19
includes those perceiving negative incentives and adjusts the predictor to take the earnings test
into account.      Similar to our earlier investigation of the predictability of extensive-margin
incentives, we find a statistically significantly effect of our predictor on the qualitative
perceptions of intensive margin incentives, but the coefficient on the predictor is far below 1 and
the R2 is quite low. We suspect the low predictive power is in large part due to the fact that it is
hard to predict intensive-margin incentives accurately with the limited information about
earnings history available to us, but, as before, we cannot rule out that widespread
misperceptions of the incentives also contributes to the low correlation.


3.4 Perceptions of Incentives to Claim Later
         Next, we examine respondents’ perceptions of the incentives for delaying the claiming of
Social Security benefits. Strictly speaking, these incentives are not related to labor supply since
the claim decision is separate from the retirement decision. However, in practice, many people
are likely to see these decisions as connected, especially if people mistakenly believe that the
earnings test removes any incentive to work after claiming Social Security benefits. We asked
two questions about incentives for delaying claiming. First, we asked respondents what they
believe would happen to their own Social Security benefits if they were to delay claiming
benefits by one year, holding constant the age at which they stop working (Q5.1).12 The
advantage of this question is that it asks about a delay in the claim decision around the age at
which the respondent actually claims or expects to claim benefits. The drawback, however, is
that we do not learn about the respondent’s perceptions of the incentive to delay claiming at
other ages. To overcome this drawback, we also asked all respondents about the benefits that a
hypothetical person would receive if the person claimed benefits at ages 62, 66, 70, and 74
(Q5.2). In this question, we randomized between listing the hypothetical person’s benefits at
claim age 62 at $1000/month and listing the benefits at claim age 66 at $1000/month. The
respondents had to fill out their best estimate of the hypothetical person’s benefits at the
remaining three claim ages.



12
   For those reporting a claim age between 63 and 69, we ask about a one-year delay in claiming to a random half of
the sample and ask the other half about claiming one year earlier. For those reporting a claim age of 62 or lower, we
always ask about a one-year delay in claiming and for those reporting a claim age of 70 or higher, we always ask
about claiming one year earlier.


                                                                                                                  20
          Table 9 presents the responses for both questions. Because benefits do not in fact depend
on marginal variations in the claim age beyond age 70, we show the results for those who report
(expected) claim ages that are valid and in the range where benefits vary with claim age. The
first column of Panel A shows that only 60 percent believe that a delay in claiming would raise
their benefits, while 34 percent believe that their benefits would remain the same. This result is
consistent with results by Dominitz et al. (2007), who ask a similar question to respondents in the
RAND American Life Panel and find that 61 percent of respondents report that benefits would
increase with the age of claiming.
          For respondents with reported claim ages between 63 and 69, we randomized whether we
asked about the effect of claiming one year earlier or one year later. This randomization gives us
an indication of the quality of the answers. Respondents generally paid attention to whether the
question was about earlier or later claiming. When asked about claiming earlier, 76 percent of
respondents claiming on their own earnings record said this would lower their monthly benefit
and only 5 percent said it would increase their benefit. When asked about claiming later, only 4
percent said this would lower their benefit and 58 percent said this would increase their benefit.
However, the percentage saying their benefits would remain the same increases from 19 to 38
percent when we switch from asking about claiming earlier to claiming later. This difference is
statistically significant and indicates that about a fifth of respondents with (planned) claim ages
between 63 and 69 and who claim on their own earnings record believe to be claiming at a kink
point in the benefit schedule, even though in fact there are no such kink points at those claim
ages.13
          In columns 3 through 5 of Table 9, we examine the respondents’ perceptions of the effect
of delayed claiming for a hypothetical person. Here, 86 percent correctly answer that delaying
claiming from age 62 to age 66 would increase benefits, and 84 percent correctly respond that a
delay from age 66 to age 70 would raise benefits. However, 69 percent mistakenly believe that
claiming at age 74 instead of at age 70 would lead to higher benefits when in fact this delay has
no effect on benefits. Thus, a large majority appears to be aware that benefits rise with claim age
between the ages of 62 to 70, but just under a third understands that this increase does not occur
beyond the age of 70. The finding that a large majority is aware of the incentives to delay


13
   We limit the sample here to those claiming on their own record, because there is no return to delaying claiming
after the full-benefit age for those claiming benefits (partly) on their spouse’s record.


                                                                                                               21
claiming (at least between the ages of 62 and 70) is consistent with evidence from Coile et al.
(2002) who find that that the observed pattern of claim decisions generally corresponds to the
pattern predicted by these incentives.
       Panel B of Table 9 presents respondents’ perceptions of the percentage increase in
monthly benefits per year of delay in claiming. We limit the sample to respondents who
perceive strictly positive returns from delaying and express the increases as a percentage of the
benefits at the full-benefit age. For delays in claiming between the ages of 62 and 66, the median
response is that each year of delay leads to a 5.0 percent increase in monthly benefits, which is
slightly below the true figure of 6.25 percent. The median perceived increase in monthly
benefits as a result of delaying claiming between the ages of 66 and 70 is also 5 percent, whereas
the true figure is 8 percent. While this median perceived benefit increase is still relatively close
to the actual figure, most people are apparently unaware that benefit increases from delaying
claiming are higher between the full-benefit age (generally age 66 in our sample) and age 70 than
between age 62 and the full-benefit age. Finally, the last column of panel B shows that the
median perceived monthly benefit increase from delaying claiming from age 70 to age 74 is still
5.0 percent per year when in truth there is no effect at that point. Of course, since most people
claim benefits well before age 70, there is little incentive for most people to acquire information
about that aspect of the delayed claiming rules. Figures 7a and 7b show the full distribution of
perceived returns to delaying claiming by one year for the three age ranges considered. Figure
7a shows the perceptions for the representative group and Figure 7b shows them for the older-
worker group. The sample in Figure 7a and 7b is limited to those who perceive strictly positive
returns to delaying claiming benefits.
       The perceived percentage increase in monthly benefits per year of delayed claiming were
only minimally affected by whether we randomly pre-filled the benefits amount at claim age 62
or at claim age 66 at $1000. Generally, perceived percentage increases were about half a
percentage point lower when the benefit amount was pre-filled at age 62. While this difference
is statistically significant, economically the size of the effect is limited, and we see this as an
indication that respondents were not strongly affected by anchoring.




                                                                                                 22
4. Knowledge about Provisions of the Social Security Benefit Rules
       In this section, we examine the extent to which respondents are aware of four important
provisions in the Social Security rules: (i) the earnings test, (ii) spousal benefits, (iii) widow(er)
benefits, and (iv) which years enter into the AIME calculation. The degree of respondents’
awareness of these provisions is helpful for understanding why perceived incentives for labor
supply vary across individuals with different earnings histories and marital statuses. It is also
relevant for thinking about how well voters are informed about Social Security.


4.1 Knowledge of the Earnings Test
       The earnings test is a provision in the Social Security rules that reduces benefits for some
people who continue to work after claiming benefits. Specifically, it applies to people who claim
benefits before the full-benefit age (generally 66 for our respondents) and have current annual
earnings above a certain threshold ($13,560 in 2008). For people satisfying these criteria,
current monthly benefits are reduced by $1 for every $2 in earnings above the threshold.
However, upon reaching the full-benefit age, the benefit level is recalculated, treating the sum of
benefit reductions due to the earnings test as equivalent to deciding to claim at a later date,
thereby raising subsequent benefit levels. Because of this benefit recalculation, the earnings test
effectively shifts the benefit payments to a later age but does not substantially affect the total
lifetime benefits paid to an average person. If, as evidence by Van Soest and Michaud (2007)
suggests, people view the earnings test as a pure tax on earnings (and do not recognize that
foregone benefits in the short-term are returned in the form of higher future benefits), then the
earnings test will create an incentive to retire immediately upon reaching the earliest eligibility
age (age 62) or to reduce earnings from age 62 to 65 so that they are below the earnings test
threshold.
       We asked respondents to consider the (possibly) hypothetical situation that they had
stopped working at age 62 and also had started claiming benefits in that year. We then asked a
random 50 percent of them to consider what would happen to their benefits at age 64 if they
return to work for one year at that age and earn $20,000 that year (Q5.3). Since the $20,000
exceeds the earnings threshold and 64 is below the full-retirement age, the correct answer is that
benefits in that year would be reduced. For the other 50 percent, we asked the same question but
replaced age 64 by age 68. Because age 68 exceeds the full-benefit age, the earnings test would



                                                                                                   23
not be applied, and the correct answer is that benefits would stay the same. The first column of
Panel A in Table 10 shows the distribution of answers for those asked about earnings at age 64,
while the second column pertains to age 68. In each column, a plurality of the representative
group chooses the correct answer, but this plurality consists of only 40-43 percent of the
respondents. Among those in the older-worker group (columns 3 and 4), awareness of the
earnings test is slightly greater with about 47-53 percent choosing the correct answer in each
column.    Thus, while many respondents have some knowledge of the earnings test, this
awareness is far from pervasive.
       Next, we examine the perceived level of the earnings threshold among those respondents
who possibly believe a threshold exists (namely, those answering that benefits would remain the
same or be reduced as a result of the earnings test). For the exact wording, see Q5.4a and Q5.4b.
Column 1 of Panel B shows that the median perceived level of the earnings test for earnings at
age 64 is $12,200, which is very close to the actual value of $13,560. For earnings at age 68, the
median perceived threshold is $21,000 (see column 2). The fact that that median response is
higher for age 68 than for age 64 reflects the fact that a greater proportion of respondents
indicate that there is no threshold for earnings at age 68, which we coded as a threshold of
infinity. Still, the median perception is that earnings at age 68 are subject to an earnings test and
that the threshold for this test is not very high. Members of the older-worker group have more
accurate perceptions of the earnings threshold, with a median response of $13,000 at age 64 and
of “no limit” at age 68. Figures 8a and 8b show the full distribution of perceived levels of the
earnings test for the representative group and the older-worker group, respectively. The sample
for these figures is limited to those who answered that earnings while receiving benefits would
either reduce current benefits or would not affect them.
       As a follow-up, we asked those who believe an earnings threshold exists (namely, those
who stated that earnings at age 64 above some limit will cause Social Security benefits to be
reduced) whether future benefits would increase if current benefits were reduced due to the
earnings test. Only 40 percent believed this to be the case, with 52 percent answering that future
benefits would be unaffected and the remaining 8 percent answering that future benefits would
also be cut. Thus, people appear to have little awareness of the provision that benefits received
after the full-benefit age will be increased to roughly compensate for the benefits lost due to the
earnings test.



                                                                                                  24
4.2 Knowledge of Spousal Rules
         A married individual collects benefits equal to either 100 percent of the benefits based on
the individual's own PIA or 50 percent of the benefits based on his or her spouse’s PIA.14 This
provision has important implications for labor supply incentives. A worker whose benefits are
determined by her spouse’s PIA will have no incentive on the margin to earn more since
additional earnings will not affect her benefits. On the other hand, a worker whose spouse
claims benefits on his record has an additional incentive to earn more since these additional
earnings will increase not only his own benefits but also those of his spouse. Whether or not it is
optimal to claim spousal benefits depends on the ratio of the spouse’s PIA to the respondent’s
PIA. If this ratio is smaller than 0.5, then it is optimal for a respondent’s spouse to claim benefits
on the respondent’s record. If the ratio is larger than 2.0, then it is optimal for the respondent to
claim on his spouse’s record. For each respondent we calculate this PIA ratio by adjusting the
reported own and spousal benefits for reported claim ages and taking the ratio of the adjusted
benefit amounts.
         Table 11 examines individuals’ awareness of the spousal benefit rules by asking the
respondent what would happen to his or her spouse’s benefit if the respondent had worked more
and therefore received benefits that are $100 greater than they actually are (Q6.1 and Q6.2). The
correct answer is that there would be no change if the spousal to own PIA ratio exceeds 0.5 and
that the spouse’s benefits would increase by $50 if the PIA ratio is less than 0.5. The first two
columns of Panel A present the answers of all married respondents from, respectively, the
representative group and the older-worker group while the remaining four columns split out the
answers from the representative group by PIA ratio. Overall, we find that 83 percent of all
respondents believe that an increase in their benefits (caused by working more) would not affect
the benefits their spouses receive. Even among those respondents whose spouses likely claim
benefits off the respondent’s record (because the PIA ratio is less than 0.5), 61 percent
nonetheless believe that their spouse’s benefits would not be affected if their own benefits were
to rise. While our estimated PIA ratio undoubtedly has measurement error, this measurement


14
   Technically, everyone first receives their own (“retired worker”) benefits and then is eligible for spousal benefits
to make up any difference between their own benefits and 50% of the benefits based on the spouse’s PIA. Divorced
individuals who have not remarried can claim benefits based on their ex-spouse’s record if they were married to that
spouse for at least 10 years.


                                                                                                                   25
error would need to be quite severe to account for 61 percent that perceive no effect. Among
those with spousal to own PIA ratios exceeding 0.5, 81 percent to 93 percent correctly believe
that own benefits increases caused by working more will not affect their spouse’s benefits. Thus,
the percentage of respondents who believe that extra earnings do not affect spousal benefits
increases from 81 percent among those with a PIA ratio between 0.5 and 1 to 93 percent among
those with a PIA ratio higher than 2. This finding indicates that there is some understanding of
the spousal benefit rules, but this understanding is far from complete.
         In Panel B, we examine the magnitude of the perceived impact of increased own benefits
(due to working more) on spousal benefits for the subset of respondents who believed this impact
was not zero. The median perceived effect is $50, which is the correct answer if the spouse
claims benefits based on the respondent’s earnings record.
         Because the linkage between the respondent’s additional earnings and the spouse’s
benefits may be somewhat subtle and hard to understand, we asked a second question to assess
spousal benefits. We asked the respondent what his or her spouse’s benefit level would be if the
spouse had never worked (Q6.3). The correct answer is that the spouse’s claim-age adjusted
benefits would be 50 percent of the respondent’s claim-age adjusted benefits. We asked this
question of all respondents with a PIA ratio of less than 2.0 and asked the reverse question,
namely what would happen to the respondent’s benefit if he or she had never worked, to those
with a PIA ratio above 2.0. Panel C of Table 11 shows that 53 percent of all respondents believe
that their spouse would still receive some benefits even if their spouse had never worked. Panel
D shows that, among those who believe their spouse would receive some benefits, the median
respondent believes that the adjusted benefits for the spouse in that case would be 49 percent of
the respondent’s own adjusted benefits. This answer is quite close to the true figure of 50
percent, and the responses are reasonably tightly distributed around the median, as Figure 9
shows.
         Of course, given that some people may mistakenly feel that everyone is entitled to a
minimum Social Security benefit, the finding above does not necessarily imply that a respondent
realizes that his spouse’s benefits can be based on his earnings record. To investigate this
possibility, we regress the spouse’s adjusted benefits for the case that she had never worked on
the respondent’s own adjusted benefit using the subsample of respondents who reported that
their spouse would receive some positive amount.          We find a strong, highly statistically



                                                                                              26
significant, positive effect of the respondent’s benefit. The estimated coefficient is 0.35, which
indicates that an increase in $100 of the respondent’s adjusted benefits is associated with a $35
increase in the spouse’s adjusted benefits for the case where the spouse had never worked. This
is reasonably close to the actual increase of $50 per $100 of higher own benefits.


4.3 Knowledge of Widow(er) Rules
        Widowed individuals receive benefits that are the maximum of the benefits available
based from their own PIA and those based on their deceased spouse’s PIA. Thus, whenever the
ratio of spousal PIA to own PIA exceeds unity, it is optimal to claim widow(er) benefits. This
provision strengthens the labor supply incentives for the spouse with the higher PIA.
        We examine whether respondents understand this provision by asking what would
happen to their Social Security benefits if they were to become widowed (Q7.2). The correct
answer is that their benefits would not be affected if the spousal to own PIA ratio is less than
unity and that benefits would rise if the PIA ratio is greater than one. Columns 1 and 2 of Panel
A of Table 12 show the responses for all married individuals from, respectively, the
representative group and the older-worker group, while the remaining four columns break out the
responses from the representative group by PIA ratio. We find that 52 percent of all respondents
believe they would receive the same benefits if they became widowed while 42 percent believe
that their benefits would rise. Consistent with a widespread awareness of the widow(er) rules,
the fraction that believes that benefits would remain the same drops monotonically from 84
percent for those with PIA ratios less than 0.5 to just under 13 percent for those with PIA ratios
greater than 2.0. Conversely, the fraction that believes benefits would increase rises as the PIA
ratio increases. This apparent awareness of widow(er) benefits is also evident in Panel B, which
shows the perceived widow(er) benefit if the respondent became widowed as a percentage of her
own current benefit. Those with a PIA ratio less than one would continue to claim their own
benefits if they became widowed, and this percentage should therefore be 100, while those with a
PIA ratio greater than one would now claim widow(er) benefits based on their spouse’s PIA and
have a percentage greater than 100. The table shows that the median response indeed follows
this pattern.
        We also asked the respondent what would happen to her spouse’s benefits if her spouse
were to become widowed (Q7.3). When the spousal to own PIA ratio exceeds one, the spouse’s



                                                                                               27
benefit would not be affected if the respondent died; while for PIA ratios less than one, the
spouse’s benefits would increase. As panel C shows, this prediction is clearly borne out by the
responses. The fraction of respondents who believe that their spouse’s benefit would increase if
their spouse were to become widowed declines from 78 percent for a PIA ratio less than 0.5 to
about 29 percent for those with a PIA ratio greater than 2.0. Panel D shows that the median
benefit for a widowed spouse as a fraction of the spouse’s current benefit also follows the
expected pattern. Thus, overall, Table 12 shows that respondents appear to be well aware of the
widow(er) provisions in the Social Security benefit rules.


4.4 Knowledge of the 35-Year Rule and Two Other Factual Questions
       Social Security benefits are based on the average of the 35 highest years of indexed
earnings (including zeros if the person has worked fewer than 35 years). This implies that the
return to working an additional year is lower for those with more than 35 years of earnings
because an additional year of working replaces an earlier year of nonzero earnings in the
average. To find out whether people are aware of this provision, we gave them a multiple choice
question that asked which years of earnings determine the benefits of a person with a 40-year
work history who claims benefits on his or her own record (Q8.1). Respondents could choose
from four options: (a) based on the average of the ___ most recent years of earnings, (b) based
on the average of the ____ highest years of earnings, (c) based on the average earnings between
the ages of 16 and _____, or (d) based on the total number of years that the person had earnings
exceeding $2500 between the ages of 16 and _____. We asked respondents to choose one option
and to fill in the corresponding blank. The correct option is option (b), and 35 should be entered
into the corresponding blank. Panel A of Table 13 shows that option (a) was chosen most often
with about 34 percent of respondents selecting it. Only about 32 percent of respondents correctly
answered option (b), which is not much higher than the fraction that would choose this by pure
chance. Thus, relatively few people seem to be aware of which years are taken into account. It
is true that for people with fewer than 35 years of earnings or with a strictly increasing earnings
profile, the highest years are also the most recent years, so options (a) and (b) coincide, and that
for most others the difference between options (a) and (b) might in practice be very minor.
However, respondents also have large misperceptions about the number of years of earnings that
are considered. For options (a) and (b), the median response is that 8 to 10 years are considered



                                                                                                 28
and even the 75th percentile is only 10 years. Thus, most respondents seem to think that the
benefits are based on relatively few years of earnings.
        These figures could explain why we found that perceived incentives on both the
extensive margin and the intensive margin were higher than actual incentives; if the average is
taken over only a few years, then increasing earnings in a single year has a greater impact on the
overall average than if that average is taken over many years. In theory, it might also imply that
people view the payroll tax as a pure tax for most of their careers, but we find that individuals
between the ages of 30 and 49 also perceive significant positive labor supply incentives from the
Social Security benefit formula, and their perceived incentives are quantitatively similar to those
of the representative group.15
        We also asked respondents two other factual questions about the Social Security system:
the portion of earnings that are subject to the Social Security (OASDI) tax, and the earliest age at
which one can claim Social Security retired worker benefits. Since we considered these less
crucial aspects of knowledge, we asked each question only to a random third of respondents in
order to limit the total duration of the survey. Panels B and C show the responses to these
questions. We find that 62 percent of respondents mistakenly believe that the OASDI tax applies
to all earnings, while 30 percent correctly answer that only earnings below a certain limit are
subject to the OASDI tax. However, among this 30 percent the perception of the level of the
limit is very accurate, with a median response of $99,000 and an interquartile range of $90,000
to $102,000. The actual figure for 2008 was $102,000. Among those reporting earning $85,000
or more, 54 percent know that there is an upper limit on earnings subject to the OASDI tax. This
indicates the individuals are better aware of rules that are more likely to be relevant for
themselves. Finally, Panel C shows that 70 percent of respondents answer exactly 62 in an open-
ended question about the earliest age at which one can start receiving Social Security retired
worker benefits. In other words, individuals are well aware of the Social Security benefit
eligibility age.




15
   We collected a small additional sample of 216 individuals between the ages of 30 and 49 to investigate whether
younger workers perceive the Social Security tax-benefit linkage. This sample was collected at the same time as our
main survey using the same survey instrument. Among the younger workers, 72% (s.e.: 3%) perceive positive
extensive-margin incentives and 58% (s.e.: 3.5%) perceive positive intensive-margin incentives.


                                                                                                                29
4.5 Predictors of Misperceptions
       In order to design interventions to correct misperceptions about Social Security, it would
be helpful to identify population subgroups in which misperceptions are particularly common
and to understand the mechanisms through which people come to have either accurate or
inaccurate perceptions.
       Table 14 presents our predictors of knowledge about Social Security. The variable
Financial Literacy is constructed as the number of correct answers to four multiple-choice
questions on general financial literacy asked at the very end of the survey (Q14.2-Q14.6). On
average, respondents give 2.6 correct answers to these four questions. The financial literacy
questions have been asked before in the Health and Retirement Study or in the RAND American
Life Panel (ALP). Respondents in the Knowledge Networks sample answer the question about
diversification roughly as well as HRS respondents, but do substantially better on the numeracy
question, though this latter difference may be due to the fact that our instrument was
administered online but the HRS was administered in-person. In general, Knowledge Networks
respondents are somewhat less financially literate than ALP respondents. These comparisons
indicate that our sample is not unusual in terms of financial literacy. The variable Knowledge
about Social Security is a self-assessed measure of the respondent’s understanding of Social
Security measured on a 5-point scale. The variable Reliance on Social Security measures on a 4-
point scale the importance of Social Security income for retirement spending. The variables
Share of Friends Retired (on a 4-point scale) and Fraction of Siblings Older are measures of
potential amount of knowledge about Social Security in the respondent’s social network.
       Our measure of misperceptions in the level of Social Security benefits is the difference
between the respondent’s self-reported (expected) level of benefits and our predictor of benefits.
It is important to keep in mind that the predictor of benefits is merely a proxy for true benefits, so
our measure of misperceptions can partly be driven by variation in the accuracy of the predictor.
Table 15 presents regressions of our measure of misperceptions of benefits on measures of
knowledge and demographic characteristics. The first two columns show the results for the
representative group, and the latter two those for the older-worker group. The results are further
split between those not yet receiving benefits (odd columns) and those already receiving benefits
(even columns). We generally find misperceptions are lowest for those with higher levels of
self-assessed knowledge about Social Security, for those saying they rely more on Social



                                                                                                   30
Security for retirement spending, and for those with lower levels of education. The latter finding
could be explained by Social Security being a more important source of retirement income for
those with less education but could potentially also be caused by our predictor of benefits being
more accurate for that group.
       In Table 16, we examine correlates of misperceptions of the effect of delaying claiming
on the monthly benefit level. We measure these misperceptions as the absolute difference of the
perceived percentage increase in benefit levels from one year’s delay in claiming and the true
percentage increase. We find that misperceptions about the effect of delayed claiming are
statistically significantly lower for those with higher levels of financial literacy and with higher
self-assessed levels of knowledge about Social Security. Among members of the older-worker
group, we find in addition that misperceptions are lower if the respondent has a higher fraction of
older siblings, indicating that older siblings may be a source of accurate information.
       We saw in Tables 6 and 8, that our predictors of extensive- and intensive-margin
incentives only explain a small fraction of perceived labor supply incentives. We suspect that
this low predictive power is due in part to noise in our predictor, which is based only on the
relative crude information on earnings history available to us. This means that correlates of
misperceptions of extensive- and intensive-margin incentives could very well be picking up
correlates of the accuracy of our predictor, and for that reason we believe analyzing these
correlates is somewhat less informative. Keeping the caveat of the accuracy of our predictor in
mind, we find among older-worker group members significantly lower misperceptions of labor
supply incentives among those with higher self-assessed Social Security knowledge, those
relying more on Social Security, and those with a higher fraction of older siblings. In other
words, the pattern of correlations is roughly similar to earlier results. For the interested reader,
we included these correlations as Appendix Tables A2 and A3. The knowledge that benefits are
based on the 35 highest years of indexed earnings is an important piece of information for
understanding the labor supply incentives of Social Security. Therefore not understanding the
role of earnings history in the determination of benefits should be a reasonable proxy for
misperceiving labor supply incentives. Table 17 presents a regression of a dummy for not
correctly answering a multiple-choice question on how earnings history is used to determine
benefits.   We find misperceptions about the role of earnings history area are statistically
significantly lower among those with higher self-assessed knowledge about Social Security. The



                                                                                                 31
effect is also meaningful in size; those with the highest levels of self-assessed knowledge are 16
to 18 percentage points less likely to give a wrong answer than those with the lowest levels of
self-assessed knowledge. Financial literacy marginally significantly reduces misperceptions of
the role of earnings history, while misperceptions are marginally significantly higher amount
those relying more on Social Security for their retirement spending.
       Overall, we notice that the tables on correlates of misperceptions (Tables 15, 16, 17, A2,
and A3) provide a reasonably consistent set of results. The predictive power of knowledge
measures and demographic characteristics is generally quite low, implying that we cannot easily
predict who misperceives features of the Social Security system. Nevertheless, individuals are to
some extent aware of their own lack of understanding.          Individuals who self-report being
knowledgeable about Social Security are less likely suffer from misperceptions about particular
features of Social Security. We also find that financial literacy is negatively correlated with
misperceptions after controlling for self-assessed knowledge, indicating that self-assessed
knowledge is not a sufficient statistic for actual knowledge. Finally, we find that misperceptions
are less common among those for whom Social Security is an important source of retirement
income, which is consistent with people investing more in uncovering the correct information
when the costs of misperceptions are high.


5. Further Results


5.1 Marginal Valuation of Annuity Stream of Social Security Benefits
       Except for the lifetime frame of our measure of intensive-margin labor supply incentives,
all our measures of perceptions of incentives are expressed as effects on the stream of Social
Security benefits. Thus, when acting on these incentives, individuals trade off a stock quantity
(e.g., income or leisure in a given year) for changes in the stream of Social Security benefits. It
is therefore important to understand how much individuals value the fact the Social Security
benefits are paid out as an annuity.
       To measure value of the Social Security annuity, we offered respondents an hypothetical
choice between receiving a permanent $100/month increase in their own Social Security benefits
or receiving a one-time lump-sum amount of $X at age 62 or one year from now (whichever
occurs later). We specified that the lump sum would at age 62 because that is when individuals



                                                                                                32
can start claiming Social Security retired-worker or spouse benefits, but required that the lump
sum would be paid at least one year in the future (relevant for those age 62 or older) to avoid
having the estimate be driven by any present bias. Formally, our annuity value question elicits
bounds on the equivalent variation of a permanent $100 increase in Social Security benefits. The
equivalent variation is bounded from below by the lump-sum amounts that the respondent
rejected and bounded from above by those accepted.
         We asked the annuity question to each respondent for four values of X. If the increase in
the Social Security benefits was chosen over the lump-sum amount, we offered a higher value of
X the subsequent time the question was asked. Likewise, if the lump-sum amount was chosen, X
was lowered the subsequent time. Thus by asking the question four times, we were able to place
each individual’s valuation in one of 16 (=24) brackets. The brackets spanned a range from 0 to
$200,000, and were narrower at low values and wider for high values. Two-thirds of the
respondents ended up in a bracket that spanned $5000 or less. The first value of X was
randomized between $15,000 and $40,000 to allow us to test whether the starting value of X
affected respondents’ reported answers, but we made sure that that the final set of possible
brackets spanned the same range.
         Figure 10 presents the cumulative distribution of the marginal valuation for the
representative group of a permanent $100 increase in Social Security benefits. The figure shows
that the upper bound (red line on the left) and the lower bound (blue line on the right) form
relatively tight bounds on the valuation for most respondents. The median valuation of a
permanent $100 increase in Social Security benefits is $17,500, which is reasonable close to the
market price of a $100 annuity for a typical 62 year-old individual.16 This means that the median
individual values incentives that operate through a permanent change to the Social Security
benefit stream roughly as one would expect based on the market value of an annuity of the same
size. The figure, however, also shows a substantial amount of dispersion, with the interquartile
range of the annuity value ranging from approximately $10,000 to $70,000.
         The random variation in the starting value of X allows us to examine to what extent
respondents had true underlying valuations that, by definition, are insensitive to the starting


16
  Brown, Kapteyn, Luttmer, and Mitchell (2014) do a much more extensive study of valuations of the Social
Security annuity, and their focus is the role of cognitive constraints on people’s ability to value annuities. They use
respondents of the American Life Panel and one of their annuity valuation questions is similar to the version we ask.
For this version of their question, they find a somewhat lower median valuation ($12,500).


                                                                                                                    33
value and to what extent individuals let their answers be guided by how we asked the question.
If people have true underlying valuations of the Social Security annuity, they should be more
likely to reject the first lump sum offered if the first lump sum offered is $15,000 rather than
$40,000. This is indeed the case, respondents are a highly statistically significant 13 percentage
points less likely to accept the first lump sum offered if the first lump sum offered is the low
amount. Hence, we can reject that no respondents had a true underlying valuation. Yet, the
starting value did matter for some fraction of respondents. The midpoint of the final bracket
selected was a statistically significant 48 log points higher when the higher starting point was
offered. As a point of comparison, a respondent who would randomly give answers would on
average end up in a bracket that is 83 log points higher when the higher starting value is offered.
Thus, if we were to categorize respondents into one of the two extremes of either having an
immutable underlying valuation or giving purely random answers to our question, we would
classify 58 percent (=48/83) as pure randomizers and just 42 percent as having a true underlying
valuation.   Even if this classification is not literally true because many respondents are
somewhere in between having an immutable underlying valuation and completely randomizing,
this finding indicates that a substantial fraction of respondents has trouble reporting their
valuation of the Social Security annuity. The median reported value, however, does not vary
significantly by starting value; the higher starting value raises the median by $5000 (p-value
0.12). Thus, it appears that those who behave as if they are randomizing end up sufficiently
often in the tails of the distribution so that the median is not affected much. We therefore place
more confidence in the median reported valuation of the Social Security annuity than in the
entire distribution of reported valuations.


5.2 A Framing Experiment about Benefit Claiming
       People’s decisions about when to claim benefits may be sensitive to how this choice is
framed. To the extent that people link their retirement age to their claim decision, the framing of
when to claim will also affect retirement behavior.       People who consider claiming Social
Security often visit a Social Security office or the Social Security website or call the Social
Security Administration. As we will show in Section 5.3 below, the four most useful sources of
Social Security information according to our respondents all come from the Social Security




                                                                                                34
Administration. Mastrobuoni (2010) presents further evidence that information from the Social
Security Administration has a causal impact on knowledge about Social Security benefits.
        At the time of our experiment, the Social Security website presented the choice of a
benefit claiming date in a break-even frame: the age “at which the accumulated value of higher
benefits (from postponing retirement) will start to exceed the accumulated value of lower
benefits (from choosing early retirement).” Traditionally, Social Security employees have also
been instructed to use this break-even frame when counseling clients about when to start
claiming benefits. Alternatively, this decision could be presented with a gain frame (the increase
in monthly benefits from postponing claiming) or with a loss frame (the decrease in monthly
benefits from claiming early). Because a delay in claiming is likely to induce people to work
longer, it will alleviate fiscal pressure associated with population aging. Thus, if a simple change
in framing has an effect on the claim decision, it could provide a useful tool for policy makers
who wanted to encourage people to claim later.17
        To examine whether the choice of framing has the potential to affect claim decisions, we
randomly assigned one of the three frames to each respondent. In particular, we used the
following wording for the three frames:


        Loss frame:
        The amount of someone’s Social Security benefits depends on the age at which the person
        starts collecting Social Security benefits.

        In particular, if a person starts claiming Social Security benefits at age 62 rather than at
        age 65, all his/her future benefits will be cut by 20% for as long as he/she lives.

        Gain frame:
        The amount of someone’s Social Security benefits depends on the age at which the person
        starts collecting Social Security benefits.

        In particular, if a person starts claiming Social Security benefits at age 65 rather than at
        age 62, all his/her future benefits will be increased by 25% for as long as he/she lives.

        Break-even frame:
        The amount of someone’s Social Security benefits depends on the age at which the person
        starts collecting Social Security benefits.

17
   SSA is now using a more neutral presentation of the tradeoffs on its web site. It is unclear to what extent there
has been a change in how field staff describe the claiming choice. We know of two recent benefit applicants, and
both were encouraged to claim early by SSA employees using the break-even framing.


                                                                                                                 35
       In particular, a person who postpones claiming benefits from age 62 to age 65 has a
       break-even age of 76 years and 11 months. This means that at 76 years and 11 months,
       the accumulated value of higher benefits (from postponing retirement) will start to exceed
       the accumulated value of lower benefits (from choosing early retirement). Note: interest
       is not considered in the calculation.

       We measured the respondent’s attitude towards early claiming in one of two ways. We
either asked the respondent whether a neighbor would be better off first claiming benefits at age
62 rather than at age 65 (Q9.2), or we asked the respondent at which age the respondent him or
herself would start claiming if given the choice between claiming at age 62 or 65 (Q9.3).
       Table 18 shows how respondents’ attitudes towards claim behavior responded to the
frame manipulations. Panel A shows that about 74 percent of the respondents who saw the gain
frame or the loss frame said that the neighbor would be better off claiming at age 65 than at age
62. In contrast, only 67 percent of those who were exposed to the break-even frame thought that
the neighbor would be better off claiming at age 65. Compared to the gain or the loss frame, the
break-even frame reduces the fraction of respondents who believe it is best to delay claiming by
7 percentage points, which is statistically significant at the 10-percent level. Panel B examines
the effect of framing on respondents’ own hypothetical claim decisions. Here we find that 56
percent of those who saw the loss frame favor delaying claiming and 64 percent of those who
saw the gain frame favor delaying claiming, but that delay is only favored by 46 percent of those
who saw the break-even frame. Thus, as with the advice to neighbor question, only under the
break-even frame does a majority of respondents favor claiming early. Relative to the gain or
loss frame, the break-even frame reduces the fraction of respondents who favor delaying
claiming by 14 percentage points, which is statistically significant at the 5-percent level. Finally,
Panel C combines the responses from Panels A and B. Not surprisingly, the combined results are
a weighted average of those in Panels A and B, with the break-even frame causing a 9 percentage
point reduction in the fraction of respondents who favor later claiming. A probit regression
shows that the impact of the break-even frame is statistically significant at the 1-percent level.
These results are consistent with results by Dominitz, Hung, and van Soest (2007), who in a
similar experiment find that the framing of the benefit of delayed claiming can affect
hypothetical claim decisions.     More recent work by Brown, Kapteyn, and Mitchell (2014)
confirms that gain and loss framing leads to later hypothetical claiming behavior relative to



                                                                                                  36
break-even framing. It further shows that neutral framing leads to later hypothetical claiming
than does break-even framing.


5.3 Usefulness of Information Sources
       Table 19 shows which information sources respondents report using to gain knowledge
about their Social Security benefits. For each source of knowledge, we asked respondents to rate
that source’s usefulness on a 5-point scale, where 1 corresponds to “not useful at all” and 5
indicates “very useful.” The table shows that mailings from Social Security are the most
frequently consulted source with 92 percent answering that they use this source. Mailings are
followed by consulting with one’s spouse (81 percent) or with another relative (71 percent). A
visit to the Social Security office and a mailing from Social Security are tied at the first place in
terms of the usefulness as a source of knowledge, with an average rating of 4.19 on a five-point
scale. In fact, the four most useful sources of knowledge are the various forms of information
provided by the Social Security administration (in person visit, phone call, web site, and
mailings). The fifth most useful information source is information gained by talking to a
financial advisor. Eldred (1977) also surveyed individuals about their sources of knowledge
about the Social Security system.       While his methodology was somewhat different, it is
nevertheless interesting to note that about thirty years ago only a small minority (17 percent)
listed information from the Social Security administration as their most important source of
knowledge about the program.


6. Discussion
       The Social Security benefit formula implicitly provides positive incentives for labor
supply by rewarding higher earnings and additional years of earnings with higher future Social
Security benefits. By fielding a survey about Social Security among a random sample of 50 to
70 year-old individuals, we have gained a better understanding of how Americans perceive the
incentives that Social Security benefit rules provide for labor supply. We find that a clear
majority of individuals understand that increased labor supply leads to higher future benefits.
Indeed, the median response suggests that people perceive their benefits to be more sensitive to
labor supply than is actually the case. These results indicate that it is incomplete to merely
consider the disincentive effects from the Social Security tax without taking into account the



                                                                                                  37
Social Security benefit rules that provide a positive incentive for work. Moreover, the potential
efficiency gains from increasing the transparency of the link between Social Security benefits
and taxes are likely to be smaller than is generally assumed in Social Security reform
discussions. We also find that there is considerable dispersion in the perceived incentives and
that many people misperceive these incentives. Since misperceptions can lead to privately
suboptimal labor supply decisions, better information about the link between labor supply and
future Social Security benefits would be valuable to individuals.
       In our survey, we also asked about people’s understanding of various features of the
Social Security benefit rules.     We find high levels of understanding of the provisions on
widow(er) benefits and the rules governing how the age at which benefits are claimed affects
benefit levels. However, understanding of the earnings test and of the rules on spousal benefits
is much more limited. We also find that the Social Security Administration is the most important
source of information about Social Security benefits for most people.
       Since it is the most important information source, the way the Social Security
Administration presents its information may affect people’s decisions.        Indeed, we found
suggestive evidence that this is the case from an experiment where we changed the frame of the
effects of delayed claiming. The experiment shows that the frame that was traditionally used by
the Social Security Administration (“the break-even frame”) significantly increases the fraction
favoring retirement at an early age compared to alternative frames.
       The fact that people perceive a link between current work and future benefits when
responding to a survey does not necessarily imply that they think about this link when they make
labor supply decisions. However, recent research suggests that they do. In Liebman, Luttmer,
and Seif (2009), we find that, at least on the extensive margin, labor supply does respond to the
tax-benefit link. Moreover, in Liebman and Luttmer (2014), we present results from a field
experiment in which a random subsample of older workers was given information about key
Social Security provisions, while a control group was not. We found that our relatively mild
intervention (sending an informational brochure and an invitation to a web tutorial) significantly
increased labor force participation one year later. Thus, understanding about Social Security can
affect actual decisions, not just hypothetical ones.




                                                                                               38
References

Auerbach, Alan, and Lawrence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
Barabas, Jason. 2011 “Social Security Knowledge,” in Financial Decisions Across the Lifespan,
       ed. D. Lambin, Springer Press.
Benítez-Silva, Hugo, Berna Demiralp, and Zhen Liu. 2009. “Social Security Literacy and
       Retirement Well-being.” University of Michigan Retirement Research Center Working
       Paper 2009-210.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1988. “Social Security Benefits: An Empirical Study of Expectations
       and Realizations,” in Rita Ricardo-Campbell and Edward P. Lazear (eds.), Issues in
       Contemporary Retirement, Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, pp. 312-345.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Lawrence Levin. 1989. “Social Security and Personal Saving: An
       Analysis of Expectations,” American Economic Review, 79(2), pp. 97-102.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Arie Kapteyn, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. “Framing and Claiming: How
       Information-Framing Affects Expected Social Security Claiming Behavior,” Journal of
       Risk and Insurance. Forthcoming.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Arie Kapteyn, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. “Cognitive
       Constraints on Valuing Annuities,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Coile, Courtney, Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber, and Alain Jousten. 2002. “Delays in
       Claiming Social Security Benefits,” Journal of Public Economics, 84(3), pp. 357-385.
Coile, Courtney, and Jonathan Gruber. 2007. “Future Social Security Entitlements and the
       Retirement Decision.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2), pp. 234-246.
Delavande, Adeline, and Susann Rohwedder. 2008. “Eliciting Subjective Expectations in
       Internet Surveys,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 72(5), pp. 866-891.
Dominitz, Jeff, Angela Hung, and Arthur van Soest. 2007. “Future Beneficiary Expectations of
       the Returns to Delayed Social Security Benefit Claiming and Choice Behavior,”
       Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 2007-164.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski. 2006. “Measuring Pension-benefit Expectations
       Probabilistically,” Labour, 20(2), pp. 201-236.
Eldred, Gary. 1977. “Does the Public Support the Social Security Program?” The Journal of
       Risk and Insurance, 44(2), pp. 179-191.
Feldstein, Martin S., and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2002. “Social Security,” in Handbook of Public
       Economics, volume 4, Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Feldstein, Martin S., and Andrew A. Samwick. 1992. “Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax
       Rates,” National Tax Journal, 45(1), pp. 1-22.
Goda, Gopi Shah, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2009. “Removing the Disincentives
       in Social Security for Long Careers,” in David A. Wise (ed.), Social Security Policy in a
       Changing Environment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Greenwald, Mathew, Arie Kapteyn, Olivia Mitchell, and Lisa Schneider. 2010. “What Do
       People Know About Social Security?” Pension Research Council Working Paper.
Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L., 2001. “What People Don’t Know About Their
       Pensions and Social Security,” in William G. Gale, John B. Shoven, and Mark J.
       Warshawsky (eds.), Public Policies and Private Pensions. Brookings Institution,
       Washington, DC.




                                                                                             39
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2005a. “The Social Security Early Retirement
       Age in a Structural Model of Retirement and Wealth,” Journal of Public Economics,
       89(2-3), pp. 441-463.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2005b. “Imperfect Knowledge of Social Security
       and Pensions,” Industrial Relations, 44(2), pp. 373-97.
Kotlikoff, Laurance J. 1996. “Privatizing Social Security: How It Works and Why It Matters,”
       Tax Policy and the Economy, 10, pp. 1-32.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2014. “Would People Behave Differently If They
       Better Understood Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment,” American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy. Forthcoming.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and David G. Seif. 2009. “Labor Supply Responses to
       Marginal Social Security Benefits: Evidence from Discontinuities,” Journal of Public
       Economics, 93(11-12), pp. 1119-1284.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2008. “Household Saving Behavior: The Role of Financial Literacy,
       Information, and Financial Education Programs,” NBER Working Paper No. 13824.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007a. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
       Role of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 54(1), pp. 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. 2007b. “Financial Literacy and Retirement
       Preparedness. Evidence and Implications for Financial Education,” Business Economics,
       42(1), pp. 35-44.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007c. “Financial Literacy and Retirement
       Planning: New Evidence from the RAND American Life Panel,” Michigan Retirement
       Research Center Working Paper No. 2007-157.
Mastrobuoni, Giovanni. 2010. “The Role of Information for Retirement Behavior: Evidence
       based on the Stepwise Introduction of the Social Security Statement,” Journal of Public
       Economics, 95(7-8), pp. 913-925.
Rohwedder, Susann, and Kristin J. Kleinjans. 2006. “Dynamics of Individual Information about
       Social Security.” Unpublished Manuscript, RAND.
Rohwedder, Susann, and Arthur van Soest. 2006. “The Impact of Misperceptions about Social
       Security on Saving and Well-Being.” MRRC Working Paper No. 2006-118.
Van Soest, Arthur, and Pierre-Carl Michaud. 2007. “How Did the Elimination of the Earnings
       Test above the Normal Retirement Age Affect Retirement Expectations?” IZA
       Discussion Paper No. 2868.




                                                                                           40
                                                             Figure 1: CDF of Social Security Benefits

                                  1

                                             Median Value,
                                             Monthly Benefits

                               0.75
      Cumulative Probability




                                                                                               Adjusted Monthly Benefits
                                                                                               (adjusted to claim age of 66)

                                0.5

                                          Monthly Benefits
                                          (at actual claim age)
                               0.25
                                                                                      Median Value,
                                                                                      Adjusted Monthly Benefits


                                  0
                                      0        250     500        750   1000   1250   1500   1750   2000    2250    2500       2750   3000
                                                                        Benefit Level (Dollars per Month)




                                           Figure 2: CDF of Adjusted Social Security Benefits by Claim Status
                                 1
                                                                                  Currently Receiving
                                                                                  Benefits
                                                 Median Value, Not Yet
                                                 Receiving Benefits
                               0.75
Cumulative Probability




                                0.5




                               0.25
                                          Not Yet Receiving
                                          Benefits
                                                                                      Median Value, Currently Receiving Benefits


                                 0
                                      0       250     500       750     1000   1250   1500   1750   2000    2250   2500    2750       3000
                                                 Adjusted Benefit Level (Dollars per Month, Adjusted to Claim Age of 66)
                                     Figure 3: CDF of Adjusted Social Security Benefits by Sample Group
                            1

                                              Median Value,
                                              Representative Group

                          0.75
Cumulative Probability




                                                                                             Older-Worker
                                                                                             Group

                           0.5

                                 Representative Group


                          0.25


                                                                                     Median Value, Older-Worker Group

                            0
                                 0      250    500    750      1000   1250    1500    1750    2000   2250   2500   2750   3000
                                           Adjusted Benefit Level (Dollars per Month, Adjusted to Claim Age of 66)




                                     Figure 4: CDF of Perceived Marginal Social Security (OASDI) Tax
                             1

                                                               Older-Worker
                                                               Group

                          0.75
                                                                                                  Representative Group
 Cumulative Probability




                           0.5




                          0.25


                                     Median Value,
                                     Older-Worker Group         Median Value, Representative Group
                             0
                                 0        5     10        15    20     25      30       35      40     45     50     55    60
                                                               Perceived OASDI Tax (Percentage)
                                        Figure 5: CDF of Perceived Incentive to Work an Extra Year
                           1




                         0.75


                                    Older-Worker Group                     Representative Group
                                    (thin line)                            (thick line)
                          0.5


                                                                        Median Value, Older-Worker Group




Cumulative Probability
                         0.25
                                                                        Median Value, Representative Group



                           0
                                0         2        4       6        8       10       12       14      16      18       20
                                         Perceived Increase in Benefits from Working an Additional Year (Percentage)
                                    Figure 6a: CDF of Perceived Incentive to Earn More (Monthly Frame)
                           1


                                                    Older-Worker
                                                    Group
                                                                                     Representative Group
                         0.75
Cumulative Probability




                          0.5




                         0.25

                                                         Median Value, Both Groups


                           0
                                0       2       4         6        8     10     12      14     16      18      20      22
                                      Perceived Increase in Benefits per $1000 of Extra Earnings (Dollars per Month)




                                     Figure 6b: CDF of Perceived Incentive to Earn More (Lifetime Frame)
                           1




                                                Older-
                         0.75
                                                Worker
Cumulative Probability




                                                Group

                                                                       Representative Group

                          0.5




                         0.25

                                                         Median Value, Both Groups


                           0
                                0      500   1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 5,000 5,500 6,000

                                Perceived Increase in Lifetime Benefits per $1000 in Additional OASDI Taxes Paid ($)
                            Figure 7a: Perceived Incentive to Delay Claiming Benefits, Representative Group

                               1




                            0.75
   Cumulative Probability




                                                                             Claim at Age 74 Instead of at Age 70
                                                                             Claim at Age 70 Instead of at Age 66
                                                                             Claim at Age 66 Instead of at Age 62
                             0.5




                            0.25

                                                                   Median Value, Age 74
                                                                   Median Value, Age 70
                                                                   Median Value, Age 66
                               0
                                   0    2         4        6       8        10       12       14       16         18        20
                                            Perceived Increase in Benefits (Percent Increase per Year of Delay)




                            Figure 7b: Perceived Incentive to Delay Claiming Benefits, Older-Worker Group

                              1




                            0.75
Cumulative Probability




                                                                                     Claim at Age 74 Instead of at Age 70
                                                                                     Claim at Age 70 Instead of at Age 66
                                                                                     Claim at Age 66 Instead of at Age 62
                             0.5




                            0.25

                                                                    Median Value, Age 74
                                                                    Median Value, Age 70
                                                                    Median Value, Age 66
                              0
                                   0    2         4        6       8        10       12       14       16         18        20
                                            Perceived Increase in Benefits (Percent Increase per Year of Delay)
                         Figure 8a: Knowledge of the Existence of the Earnings Test, Representative Group

                           1
                                Median Value, Asked                                                  Asked about Age 64
                                about Age 64

                         0.75
Cumulative Probability




                          0.5
                                                                                                     Asked about Age 68



                         0.25

                                                                                     Median Value, Asked about Age 68


                           0
                                0    5,000   10,000   15,000    20,000   25,000   30,000    35,000    40,000    45,000    50,000
                                     Perceived Level of Earnings before Benefits Are Reduced (Dollars per Year)




                         Figure 8b: Knowledge of the Existence of the Earnings Test, Older-Worker Group
                           1
                                                               Median Value, Asked         Asked about Age 64
                                                               about Age 64


                         0.75
Cumulative Probability




                                                                                           Asked about Age 68

                          0.5




                         0.25




                           0
                                0    5,000   10,000   15,000    20,000   25,000   30,000    35,000    40,000    45,000    50,000
                                     Perceived Level of Earnings before Benefits are Reduced (Dollars per Year)
                                         Figure 9: CDF of Perceived Spousal Benefits for a Nonworking Spouse

                                1

                                                                             Representative Group
                                                                             (thick line)
                                                                                                     Older-Worker
                              0.75                                                                   Group
Cumulative Probability




                                                                                                     (thin line)



                               0.5




                              0.25
                                                                                         Median Value, Both Groups


                                0
                                     0      10     20      30      40      50       60        70     80      90      100   110
                                           Spouse's Benefits if Spouse Had Never Worked (Percentage of Own Benefits)




                                             Figure 10: CDF of Valuation of the Social Security Annuity
                                 1
                                                                Median Value,
                                                                Representative Group

                              0.75
     Cumulative Probability




                                                                                Upper Bound
                                                                                Lower Bound
                               0.5




                              0.25




                                 0
                                     0       10     20     30      40      50       60        70     80      90      100   110
                                                    Equivalent Variation (in $ '000) of a Permanent $100/month
                                                               Increase in Social Security Benefits
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
                                                Mean                                      Mean
                                        (representative group)                    (older-worker group)
Age                                              59.0                                     62.0
Female                                           0.54                                     0.55
Black                                            0.07                                     0.05
White                                            0.80                                     0.88
Other                                            0.13                                     0.08
Marital Status
Married                                           0.63                                     0.65
Widowed                                           0.04                                     0.06
Divorced                                          0.18                                     0.19
Separated                                         0.02                                     0.01
Never Married                                     0.08                                     0.05
Living with a Partner                             0.05                                     0.04
Household Size
1 Person                                          0.27                                     0.28
2 People                                          0.46                                     0.55
3 + People                                        0.27                                     0.18
Education Level
High School Dropout                               0.10                                     0.02
High School Degree                                0.29                                     0.15
Some College                                      0.32                                     0.34
College Degree                                    0.29                                     0.49
Household Income
$24,999 or less                                   0.20                                     0.07
$25,000-$49,999                                   0.25                                     0.21
$50,000-$74,999                                   0.21                                     0.24
$75,000-$99,999                                   0.16                                     0.20
$100,000+                                         0.19                                     0.28
Work Status
Working                                           0.52                                     0.87
Retired                                           0.39                                     0.09
Disabled                                          0.13                                     0.01
Unemployed                                        0.03                                       0
Not Working                                       0.05                                       0
Region
Northeast                                         0.19                                     0.19
Midwest                                           0.23                                     0.26
South                                             0.34                                     0.29
West                                              0.25                                     0.26

Social Security Benefits
Actual or Expected Claiming Age                   63.7                                      65.1
Actual or Expected Retirement Age                 61.3                                      66.2
Receiving Benefits                                0.31                                      0.18
Adjusted Monthly Benefit Level                   1,263                                     1,359
N                                                2331                                      1636
Note: The representative group includes respondents age 50 to 70, whether working or not, and the older-worker group
includes only respondents aged 60-65 who are currently working (according to Knowledge Networks’ definition of working).
The Knowledge Networks definition of working reflects the respondents' reported work status as of the most recent date when
Knowledge Networks collected demographic information; our definition is based on the answer to survey Q1.11. Respondents
indicating that they currently work for pay were coded a 1 on our Working variable.
Table 2: Distribution of Retirement Status and Claim Status
                                                            Retirement Status
Social Security Status                   Not Retired               Retired                  Total
Not Yet Receiving Benefits                 60.1%                    9.2%                   69.3%
                                           (1.8%)                  (1.1%)                  (1.7%)
Currently Receiving Benefits                9.6%                    21.2%                  30.7%
                                           (1.0%)                   (1.5%)                 (1.7%)
Total                                      69.7%                    30.3%                  100%
                                           (1.7%)                   (1.7%)
Note: N=2215. Each entry shows the percentage of respondents in the corresponding cell. Standard errors
reported in parentheses. Sample is representative of individuals aged 50-70 who do not receive disability
benefits. Responses based on Q1.4, Q1.11, and Q1.12; see Appendix A for details on question wording.
Table 3: Demographics and Social Security Benefit Levels by Claim Status
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)                (10)     (11)     (12)
                                                                Representative Group Age 50-70                                           Older-Worker Group
                                      All Respondents               Receiving Benefits         Not Yet Receiving Benefits                  All Respondents

                                  Mean      S.D.    Median       Mean      S.D.     Median         Mean       S.D.     Median         Mean      S.D.     Median
Age                                58.9     5.99      58          65.5     4.26       67            56.0      4.03       56            62.0     1.66       62
Married                            0.65     0.48       1          0.60     0.49        1            0.67      0.47        1            0.64     0.48        1
Female                             0.53     0.50       1          0.60     0.49        1            0.50      0.50        1            0.54     0.50        1
High School Dropout                0.07     0.26       0          0.10     0.30        0            0.06      0.24        0            0.01     0.12        0
High School Degree                 0.29     0.46       0          0.36     0.48        0            0.26      0.44        0            0.15     0.34        0
Some College                       0.32     0.47       0          0.33     0.47        0            0.32      0.46        0            0.34     0.48        0
College Degree                     0.31     0.46       0          0.21     0.41        0            0.36      0.48        0            0.49     0.50        0
Claim Age                          63.7      5.1      64          60.6      6.6       62            65.0       3.6       65            65.1      3.2       65
Retirement Age                     61.3     12.8      65          58.9     16.4       62            62.4      10.7       65            66.2      7.2       66
Receiving Benefits                 0.31     0.46       0            1        0         1              0         0         0            0.18     0.39        0
Retired (our definition)           0.30     0.46       0          0.69     0.46        1            0.13      0.34        0           0.083     0.28        0
Monthly Benefit Level             1,136     605     1,000         989      443       1000          1,201      654      1,200          1,289     621      1,200
Adjusted Monthly Benefit Level    1,263     626      1231        1,246     539       1262          1,271      661      1,204          1,359     605      1,336

N                                            2215                            492                            1723                                1621
Note: Sample is restricted to respondents who do not receive disability benefits. The Adjusted Monthly Benefit Level is the actual or expected benefit level
adjusted to hold the age of benefit claiming constant at age 66.
Table 4: Predictability of Self-Reported Benefits
                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
                                                       Representative Group                Older-Worker Group
                                                  Dep. Variable: Dep. Variable:       Dep. Variable: Dep. Variable:
                                                  Self-Reported       Predicted       Self-Reported     Predicted
                                                     Benefits         Benefits           Benefits        Benefits
                                                    ($/month)        ($/month)          ($/month)       ($/month)
Panel A: All Respondents
 Predicted Benefits ($/month)                          0.533***                            0.517***
                                                      (0.039)                             (0.517)
 Self-Reported Benefits ($/month)                                       0.574***                             0.576***
                                                                        (.042)                              (0.028)

R2                                                     0.306             0.306             0.298             0.298
Root MSE ($/month)                                      508               527               521               551
N                                                      1935              1935              1452              1452

Panel B: Not Yet Receiving Social Security
 Predicted Benefits ($/month)                          0.547***                            0.523***
                                                      (0.045)                             (0.028)
 Self-Reported Benefits ($/month)                                        0.547***                            0.523***
                                                                        (0.047)                             (0.030)

R2                                                     0.299             0.299             0.274             0.274
Root MSE ($/month)                                      538               539               543               543
N                                                      1581              1581              1220              1220

Panel C: Receiving Social Security
 Predicted Benefits ($/month)                          0.494***                            0.396***
                                                      (0.066)                             (0.057)
 Self-Reported Benefits ($/month)                                        0.609***                            0.572***
                                                                        (0.081)                             (0.075)

R2                                                      0.301            0.301               0.227            0.227
Root MSE                                                 396              439                 386              464
N                                                        354              354                 232              232
Note: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Predicted benefits are calculated by applying the Social
Security benefit rules to the individual’s self-reported earnings history and age of first claiming benefits. * indicates
p-value<.10, **indicates p-value<.05, ***indicates p-value<.01. Sample limited to non-disabled, claiming at age
62+, claiming on their own record.
Table 5: Incentives on the Extensive Margin by Claim Status
                                   (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                          Representative Group                     Older-Worker
                                                                                      Group
                                  All           Receiving         Not Yet               All
                              Respondents        Benefits        Receiving         Respondents
                                                                  Benefits
Panel A: Qualitative Results
Perceived Effect of Working Longer on Benefits
 Lower                          4.5%            8.3%               2.9%                 3.9%
                               (0.8%)          (1.9%)             (0.7%)               (0.5%)
 Same                            31.1%            32.7%           30.4%                32.8%
                                 (1.7%)           (3.2%)          (2.0%)               (1.2%)
 Higher                          64.5%            59.0%           66.7%                63.2%
                                 (1.7%)           (3.4%)          (2.0%)               (1.2%)

N                                 2179             472             1707                 1605

Panel B: Quantitative Results
Perceived Percentage Increase in Benefits per Year of Extra Work
 25th Percentile                  4.00            3.10          4.00                    4.00
                                 (0.25)          (0.25)        (0.16)                  (0.11)
 Median                           6.67             5.06            6.67                 6.25
                                 (0.21)           (0.57)          (0.22)               (0.20)
 75th Percentile                 10.00            10.00           11.11                10.00
                                 (0.41)           (0.58)          (0.69)               (0.27)

N                                  1348           259            1089                    989
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. Sample is restricted to respondents who do not
receive disability benefits. The sample in Panel B is further limited to those reporting an increase
in benefits in response to working more years. Responses based on Q3.1 and Q3.2; see Appendix
A for details on question wording.
Table 6: Predicting Extensive-Margin Labor Supply Incentives
                                             (1)                 (2)                      (3)                (4)
                                             Earnings Test Ignored:                  Earnings Test Accounted For:
                                        Dep. Variable is Dummy for Self-            Dep. Variable is Self-Reported
                                           Reported Positive Incentive                Incentive (-1, 0, 1 variable)
                                       Representative     Older-Worker              Representative      Older-Worker
                                          Group               Group                     Group              Group
Predicted Incentive                    0.152***(0.041)    0.107***(0.029)            0.143***(0.041)   0.060**(0.026)
R2                                         0.022                0.010                    0.016              0.004
N                                          2045                 1527                     2129               1590
Self-Reported Incentives
 Positive Incentive (+1)                   67.8%               65.8%                     65.2%             63.3%
 No Incentive (0)                          32.2%               34.2%                     30.9%             32.8%
 Negative Incentive (-1)                                                                  3.9%              3.9%
Predicted Incentives
 Positive Incentive (+1)                     69.7%              74.6%                      68.6%             71.0%
 No Incentive (0)                            30.4%              25.4%                      30.2%             24.5%
 Negative Incentive (-1)                                                                    1.2%              4.6%
Note: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. * indicates p-value<.10, **indicates p-value<.05, ***indicates
p-value<.01. All regressions exclude respondents claiming disability benefits or (planning on) claiming before age
60. In the regressions in columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is a dummy for the respondent’s self-reported
positive extensive-margin labor supply incentive and the sample excludes those reporting a negative incentive. The
predicted incentive variable does not take the earnings test into account and is therefore only zero or positive. In
columns (3) and (4), the sample includes those reporting a negative incentive. The dependent variable takes on one
of three values, -1 for those reporting a negative incentive, 0 for those reporting no incentive, and +1 for those
reporting a positive incentive. The predicted incentive variable does take the earnings test into account and is
measured on the same scale as the dependent variable. Predicted incentives are calculated by applying the Social
Security benefit rules to the self-reported own and spousal earnings history and the self-reported (planned) retirement
date. When taking the earnings test into account, the prediction is in addition based on the self-reported age of
(planned) first claiming Social Security benefits and on the earnings at the time the incentive is measured.
Table 7: Effect of Higher Earning in Most Recent Year of Earnings on Benefits
                            (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)                   (6)
                                                Representative Sample                               Older-Worker
                                                                                                        Group
                           All     Receiving          Not Yet      Monthly       Lifetime          All Respondents
                       Respondents Benefits          Receiving      Frame         Frame
                                                      Benefits
Panel A: Qualitative Results
Benefit Levels in Response to Additional Earnings
 Lower                    5.8%          9.0%            4.5%         3.8%          7.5%                  4.9%
                         (0.9%)        (2.0%)          (0.9%)       (1.1%)        (1.4%)                (0.5%)
 Same                     37.4%         35.3%          38.3%        30.0%         43.8%                 39.7%
                          (1.8%)        (3.4%)         (2.2%)       (2.6%)        (2.6%)                (1.2%)
 Higher                   56.8%         55.7%          56.7%        66.2%         48.7%                 55.4%
                          (1.9%)        (3.6%)         (2.2%)       (2.6%)        (2.6%)                (1.3%)
N                          2105           446           1659         1006         1099                   1584

Panel B: Quantitative Results (Monthly Frame)
Monthly Benefit Increase in Dollars per $1000 of Total Earnings Increase
 25th Percentile            2.0           0.9          2.0                                                2.0
                           (0.1)         (0.5)         (..)                                             (0.03)
 Median                     4.0           3.5            4.0                                              4.0
                           (0.2)         (0.8)           (..)                                            (0.2)
 75th Percentile            8.0           5.5           10.0                                              6.0
                           (1.5)         (1.2)          (0.9)                                            (0.6)
N                           644           126           518                                              494

Panel C: Quantitative Results (Lifetime Frame)
Lifetime Benefit Increase in Dollars per $1000 in Additional OASDI Taxes Paid
 25th Percentile            100            50          150                                               100
                            (38)          (53)        (171)                                              (35)
 Median                    1,000         1,000          1,000                                           1,000
                            (..)         (342)           (93)                                            (..)
 75th Percentile           3,000         2,000          4,200                                           3,000
                          (1,156)        (985)          (859)                                           (643)
N                           432           76            356                                              343
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. (..) indicates that the mass of observations clustered around the
percentile in question is sufficiently large that the standard error is estimated as zero. The sample is restricted to
respondents who do not receive disability benefits. The sample in Panels B and C is further limited to those who
perceive a strictly positive increase. The frame type used in columns 4 or 5 is randomly assigned. Responses in Panel
A are based on Q4.1 and Q4.3, in Panel B on Q4.2, and in Panel C on Q4.5A,B; see Appendix A for details on
question wording.
Table 8: Predicting Intensive-Margin Labor Supply Incentives
                                            (1)               (2)                    (3)               (4)
                                          Earnings Test Ignored:                Earnings Test Accounted For:
                                     Dep. Variable is Dummy for Self-           Dep. Variable is Self-Reported
                                       Reported Positive Incentive               Incentive (-1, 0, 1 variable)
                                     Representative Older-Worker               Representative Older-Worker
                                         Group             Group                  Group              Group
Predicted Incentive                   0.104**(0.041)   0.184***(0.027)          0.082*(0.043)    0.166***(0.027)

R2                                        0.010             0.031                  0.005             0.026
N                                         1961              1499                   2061              1573

Self-Reported Incentives
 Positive Incentive (+1)                  60.7%             58.2%                  57.4%             55.5%
 No Incentive (0)                         39.3%             41.8%                  37.2%             39.8%
 Negative Incentive (-1)                                                            5.4%              4.7%

Predicted Incentives
  Positive Incentive (+1)                 63.6%              65.8%                   63.1%            63.8%
  No Incentive (0)                        36.4%              34.2%                   35.1%            31.8%
  Negative Incentive (-1)                                                             1.8%             4.4%
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. * indicates p-value<.10, **indicates p-value<.05, ***indicates
p-value<.01. All regressions exclude respondents claiming disability benefits or (planning on) claiming before
age 60. In the regressions in columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is a dummy for the respondent’s self-
reported positive intensive-margin labor supply incentive and the sample excludes those reporting a negative
incentive. The predicted incentive variable does not take the earnings test into account and is therefore only
zero or positive. In columns (3) and (4), the sample includes those reporting a negative incentive. The
dependent variable takes on one of three values, -1 for those reporting a negative incentive, 0 for those
reporting no incentive, and +1 for those reporting a positive incentive. The predicted incentive variable does
take the earnings test into account and is measured on the same scale as the dependent variable. Predicted
incentives are calculated by applying the Social Security benefit rules to the self-reported earnings history and
the self-reported (planned) retirement date. When taking the earnings test into account, the prediction is in
addition based on the self-reported age of (planned) first claiming Social Security benefits and on the earnings
at the time the incentive is measured.
Table 9: Perceived Incentive to Delay Claiming Social Security Benefits
                             (1)                   (2)                            (3)                  (4)                (5)
                     Effect of Claiming Later on Own Benefits            Effect of Claiming Later on Hypothetical Person’s Benefits
                    Claim between Ages Claim between Ages                  Claim at Age 66     Claim at Age 70     Claim at Age 74
                         62 and 70,            62 and 70,                     Instead of           Instead of         Instead of
                       Representative        Older-Worker                     at Age 62            at Age 66          at Age 70
                           Group                 Group
Panel A: Qualitative Results
Perceived Effect of Delayed Claiming on Level of Benefits
 Lower                    6.0%                  3.1%                             2.8%                 1.7%                 1.3%
                         (0.9%)                (0.4%)                           (0.7%)               (0.5%)               (0.5%)
 Same                      33.7%                  27.3%                         11.1%                14.3%                29.8%
                           (1.8%)                 (1.1%)                        (1.3%)               (1.4%)               (1.9%)
 Higher                    60.3%                  69.6%                         86.1%                83.9%                69.0%
                           (1.9%)                 (1.2%)                        (1.4%)               (1.5%)               (1.9%)
N                           2067                   1539                          1764                 1745                 1729

Panel B: Quantitative Results
Perceived Increase in Benefits per Year of Delay in Claiming as a Percentage of Benefits at the Full-Benefit Age (FBA)
 Actual Increase                                                                 6.25                  8.0                   0
    th
 25 Percentile                                                                    3.8                  3.6                  2.5
                                                                                 (0.2)                (0.5)                 (..)
 Median                                                                           5.0                  5.0                  5.0
                                                                                 (0.1)                (0.1)                 (..)
 75th Percentile                                                                  7.1                  7.5                  7.5
                                                                                 (0.4)                (0.2)                 (..)
N                                                                                  1559                 1462               1135
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. (..) indicates that the mass of observations clustered around the percentile in question
is sufficiently large that the standard error is estimated as zero. The sample is restricted to respondents who do not receive disability
benefits. The sample in Panel B is further limited to those who perceived a strictly positive incentive to delay. The sample in
columns (1) and (2) is restricted to those planning to claim between the ages of 62 and 70. This restriction eliminates 8.8% of
observations from the representative group and 3.7% of observations from the older-worker group. Responses in Columns 1 and 2
are based on Q5.1, with a randomly assigned condition for claiming either one year earlier or one year later, and responses in
Columns 3-5 are based on Q5.2; see Appendix A for details on question wording.
Table 10: Knowledge of the Earnings Test
                             (1)                     (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                                Representative Group                          Older-Worker Group
                     Asked about Effect      Asked about Effect     Asked about Effect   Asked about Effect
                        of Earnings             of Earnings            of Earnings          of Earnings
                         at Age 64               at Age 68              at Age 64            at Age 68
Panel A: Qualitative Perceptions of Social Security Benefits
Effect on Current Benefits of Earning $20,000 while Receiving Benefits
 Lower                      39.7%                  32.9%                 47.0%                   25.2%
                            (2.5%)                 (2.5%)                (1.8%)                  (1.5%)
 Same                      35.4%                  42.6%                  34.7%                   52.7%
                           (2.5%)                 (2.5%)                 (1.7%)                  (1.8%)
 Higher                    24.9%                  24.5%                  18.3%                   22.1%
                           (2.3%)                 (2.2%)                 (1.4%)                  (1.5%)
N                           1075                   1095                    785                    810

Panel B: Quantitative Perceptions
Maximum Allowable Earnings while Receiving Benefits before a Reduction in Benefit Levels
 25th Percentile          3,500                7,500                    5,000                    12,000
                         (1,330)              (1,919)                 (1,608)                     (735)
 Median                    12,200                 21,000                 13,000               “No Limit”
                            (439)                 (3,063)                 (136)                  (..)
 75th Percentile           40,000               “No Limit”               30,000               “No Limit”
                          (26,929)                 (..)                  (2,122)                 (..)
N                           849                     836                     636                    624
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. The question in Panel B was asked only of the subsample who
answered that earning $20,000 while receiving benefits would lower benefits or keep them the same. Responses are
based on Q5.4 and Q5.5a,b; see Appendix A for details on question wording.
Table 11: Spousal Benefits
                                (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                                All               All
                           Respondents,      Respondents,        By Ratio of Spousal Adjusted Benefits to Own
                           Representative    Older-Worker           Adjusted Benefits, Representative Group
                              Group             Group            ≤ 0.5       0.5 - 1        1-2           >2
Panel A: Qualitative Perceptions of Relation between Own and Spouse’s Social Security Benefits
What Happens to Spouse’s Benefits if Own Benefits Increase by $100/month (Due to Working More)?
 Change                       17.2%            14.1%          38.6%       19.0%       10.8%               7.1%
                              (1.7%)           (1.1%)         (5.5%)      (3.0%)      (2.4%)             (2.9%)
 No Change                     82.8%             85.9%          61.4%        80.9%         89.2%         92.9%
                               (1.7%)            (1.1%)         (5.5%)       (3.0%)        (2.4%)        (2.9%)
N                               1408              1006            229          498           494           187


Panel B: Quantitative Results For Those Reporting A Change
Size of Spouse’s Benefit Increase if Own Benefits Increase by $100/month (Due to Working More)?
 25th Percentile                   5                10            15        -100          40               100
                                 (36)              (32)          (11)       (42)         (69)             (289)
 Median                          50                50             50           50            100          100
                                 (4)               (3)            (7)          (7)           (25)         (76)
 75th Percentile                 100              100             50           100           100           200
                                 (27)             (13)           (43)          (31)          (41)         (248)
N                                208               138            72            88           37            11

Panel C: Qualitative Perception of Spousal Benefits if Spouse Had Never Worked
Perceived Spousal Benefit Level if Spouse Had Never Worked
 Zero                         48.3%            51.4%         54.5%      45.9%              48.4%
                              (2.5%)           (1.7%)        (6.0%)     (3.8%)             (3.8%)
 Some Positive Amount          52.7%             48.6%          45.5%        54.0%         51.6%
                               (2.5%)            (1.7%)         (6.0%)       (3.8%)        (3.8%)
N                               1190               870            211          492           484

Panel D: Quantitative Results For Those Reporting Some Positive Amount
Adjusted Perceived Spousal Benefits if Spouse Had Never Worked as Percentage of Own Adjusted Benefits
 25th Percentile               35.2              35.6        27.6          33.3        41.7
                               (1.6)            (1.5)        (3.5)        (2.4)       (3.6)
 Median                         48.9              50.0           37.6         43.7          61.5
                                (1.1)             (0.4)          (5.4)        (3.0)         (3.3)
 75th Percentile                66.7              66.6           48.9         55.0          87.5
                                (4.0)             (1.7)          (1.2)        (5.3)         (9.0)
N                                 590              423            108           256         224
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. The sample is restricted to respondents who do not receive disability
benefits. The sample in Panel B is limited to those who respond their spouse’s benefits would change if their own
benefits would increase. The questions of Panels C and D were not asked if the ratio of spousal adjusted benefits to
own adjusted benefits was greater than 2 because in those cases the respondent typically was the secondary earner.
The sample in Panel D is further limited to those who answered that the spouse would receive some positive
amount. Responses are based on Q6.1 (Panel A) , Q6.2 (Panel B), Q6.3 (Panel C), and Q6.4 (Panel D); see
Appendix A for details on question wording.
Table 12: Widow Benefits
                             (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                             All               All
                                                           By Ratio of Spousal Adjusted Benefits to Own Adjusted
                        Respondents,      Respondents,
                                                                       Benefits, Representative Group
                        Representative    Older-Worker
                           Group             Group            ≤ 0.5         0.5 - 1         1-2             >2
Panel A: Own Widow Benefits, Qualitative Results
Effect of Becoming Widowed on Own Benefits
 Lower                   6.8%            5.2%                 4.8%          11.1%           5.2%           2.7%
                        (1.1%)          (0.7%)               (2.4%)         (2.4%)         (1.7%)         (1.7%)
 Same                       51.6%            59.0%           83.7%          65.0%          41.5%          12.5%
                            (2.2%)           (1.5%)          (4.2%)         (3.6%)         (3.8%)         (3.5%)
 Higher                     41.7%            35.8%           11.5%          23.9%          53.3%          84.9%
                            (2.2%)           (1.5%)          (3.6%)         (3.2%)         (3.8%)         (3.8%)
N                            1437             1022             229            498            488            189

Panel B: Own Widow Benefits, Quantitative Results
Own Widow Benefits as Percentage of Own Current Benefits
 25th Percentile         100.0           100.0           100.0               100.0          100.0         142.9
                          (0.5)          (0.6)           (3.7)               (0.8)          (0.9)         (15.2)
 Median                     100.0             100.0           100.0          100.0          111.1         220.0
                             (..)             (0.8)           (4.1)          (0.9)          (6.1)         (11.6)
 75th Percentile            142.9             128.6           100.0          100.0          147.1         330.8
                            (6.0)             (3.6)           (5.2)          (3.6)          (6.8)         (58.7)
N                           1437              1022             229            498            488           189

Panel C: Spouse’s Widow Benefits, Qualitative Results
Effect of Spouse’s Becoming Widowed on Spouse’s Benefits
 Lower                     7.0%           5.2%            1.7%               7.1%          10.7%           4.2%
                          (1.1%)         (0.7%)          (1.4%)             (2.0%)         (2.4%)         (2.1%)
 Same                       48.5%            49.4%           20.4%          34.3%          66.2%          66.9%
                            (2.2%)           (1.6%)          (4.5%)         (3.6%)         (3.6%)         (5.1%)
 Higher                     44.5%            45.4%           77.9%          58.5%          23.1%          28.9%
                            (2.2%)           (1.6%)          (4.7%)         (3.7%)         (3.2%)         (4.9%)
N                            1407             1004             229            496            491            191

Panel D: Spouse’s Widow Benefits, Quantitative Results
Spouse’s Widow Benefits as Percentage of Spouse’s Current Benefits
 25th Percentile          100.0            100.0          106.7              100.0          100.0          100.0
                            (..)           (0.2)          (14.5)             (1.2)          (0.4)          (0.1)
 Median                     100.0             100.0           200.0          117.1          100.0          100.0
                            (0.5)             (0.3)           (21.8)         (6.2)          (0.4)          (0.2)
 75th Percentile            144.4             150.0           311.1          156.6          100.0          104.5
                            (5.1)             (3.0)           (29.8)         (6.1)          (4.3)          (5.5)
N                            1407             1004            229              496          491            191
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. The sample is restricted to respondents who do not receive disability
benefits. Responses are based on Q7.2 (Panels A and B) and Q7.3 (Panels C and D); see Appendix A for details on
question wording.
Table 13: Three Factual Questions about Social Security Rules
                                                 (1)          (2)               (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                                                 Answer to Fill-in Value X,
                                                                                    Representative group
                                            Representative   Older-
                                               Group         Worker             25th                    75th
                                                             Group           Percentile   Median     Percentile
Panel A: Which Years of Earnings Are Used to Compute Benefits?
 (a) The X Most Recent Years               33.7%       32.1%                     5           8           10
                                          (1.7%)       (1.2%)                  (0.6)       (2.0)        (0.9)
 (b) The X Years with Highest Earnings         31.5%         36.0%               5          10           10
                                               (1.7%)        (1.2%)             (..)       (2.6)        (2.4)
 (c) Years between Ages 16 and X               10.2%         10.6%              62          64           65
                                               (1.1%)        (0.8%)            (1.0)       (1.3)        (1.3)
 (d) Years between Ages 16 and X               24.5%         21.3%              62          65           65
    with Earning Exceeding $2500               (1.5%)        (1.1%)            (0.6)       (0.3)        (0.3)
N                                               2149          1528

Panel B: What Portion of Earnings is Subject to the Social Security (OASDI) Payroll Tax?
 (a) This tax applies to all earnings       61.8%           48.6%
                                            (3.6%)          (2.2%)
 (b) This tax applies to earnings above X       8.3%          8.9%             1,600       3,390       12,000
                                               (2.1%)        (1.3%)            (477)      (3,501)     (14,801)
 (c) This tax applies to earnings below X      29.8%         42.5%            90,000      99,000      102,000
                                               (3.3%)        (2.2%)           (6,621)     (1,235)     (10,021)
N                                                628          506

Panel C: Earliest Eligibility Age for Social Security Retirement Benefits?
 (a) Answer was 61 or less                     13.8%          7.5%
                                               (2.4%)        (1.1%)
 (b) Answer was exactly 62                     70.2%         84.6%
                                               (3.2%)        (1.6%)
 (c) Answer was 63, 64, or 65                  14.1%          5.8%
                                               (2.5%)        (1.0%)
 (d) Answer was 66 or higher                    2.0%          2.1%
                                               (1.0%)        (0.6%)
N                                                687          533

Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The questions in Panel B and Panel C were each asked to a
random 3rd of the non-disabled sample. The question for Panel C was an open-ended question; we grouped the
answers into the four categories. Responses based on Q8.1 (Panel A), Q4.6 (Panel B), and Q5.7 (Panel C); see
Appendix A for details on question wording.
Table 14: Predictors of Knowledge

                                          Representative Group      HRS          ALP          Older-Worker Group
                                            Mean         S.D.       Mean         Mean           Mean      S.D.
Financial Literacy (0-4)                     2.57        1.20                                    3.02       1.03
 Numeracy Question Correct                   0.74                    0.44                        0.83
  Compound Interest Question Correct         0.61                                0.78            0.75
 Inflation Question Correct                  0.59                                0.80            0.67
 Diversification Question Correct            0.64                    0.61        0.83            0.76
Knowledge about SS (1-5, self-assessed)      3.00        1.03                                    3.25       0.90
Reliance on SS (1-4)                         2.84        1.05                                    2.64       1.00
Share of Friends Retired (1-4)               1.79        1.03                                    1.77       0.91
Fraction of Siblings Older (0-1)             0.46        0.38                                    0.40       0.40
Notes: 'Financial Literacy' ranges from 0 to 4 and correspondents to the number of correct answers on a financial
literacy quiz (Q14.2-Q14.6). Knowledge about Social Security' is self reported and ranges from 1 to 5, representing
'not at all knowledgeable,' 'less than knowledgeable,' 'somewhat knowledgeable,' 'relatively knowledgeable,' and
'very knowledgeable' respectively (Q1.3). 'Reliance on Social Security ' indicates the importance of income from
Social Security for retirement spending, and ranges from 1 to 4, representing 'Not so important (<25% of spending),'
'Important (25-50% of spending,' 'Very Important (50-75% of spending,' and 'Extremely Important (>75% of
spending),' respectively (Q12.1). 'Share of Friends Retired' is a 1 to 4 indicator, representing 'Relatively few
(<25%),' 'Many (25-50%),' 'Most (50-75%),' 'By far most (>75%),' respectively (Q12.3). 'Share of Siblings Older' is
a continuous ratio (Q12.4)
          The representative group, HRS, and ALP samples are limited to individuals 50 to 70 years of age. The
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) numeracy question data was extracted from the 2006 HRS Core survey file and
the HRS diversification question data was extracted from the 2004 HRS Core survey file. The American Life Panel
(ALP) data was extracted from the ALP public data file for the ‘Well Being 64’ survey from March 2009. The
Knowledge Networks means and standard deviations come for the representative group, are weighted to correct for
oversampling of working individuals between the ages of 60 and 65. The HRS means and standard deviations are
weighted to match the CPS. The number of observations in the HRS is 10,079 for the numeracy question and 787
for the diversification question. The number of observations in the ALP is 774 for the compound interest and
inflation questions and 407 for the diversification question.
Table 15: Determinants of Absolute Difference Between Predicted and Reported Benefits
Dependent Variable:                           (1)              (2)                        (3)              (4)
Absolute difference between                 Representative Group                          Older-Worker Group
predicted and self-reported Social   Does Not Receive Receives Social             Does Not Receive Receives Social
Security benefits ($/month)           Social Security      Security                Social Security      Security
Financial Literacy (0-4)                  -0.5      (28.0)    -21.0      (26.3)     -18.5      (17.1)    -48.1      (32.3)
Knowledge about SS (1-5)                 -24.0      (22.6)    -32.1      (24.6)     -60.5***   (16.1)     -8.9      (22.6)
Reliance on SS (1-4)                       8.6      (21.6)    -50.1*     (28.9)     -51.7***   (16.6)    -59.4***   (22.2)
Share of Friends Retired (1-4)            19.1      (31.5)      3.8      (24.4)      -0.2      (17.3)     33.8      (21.6)
Fraction of Siblings Older (0-1)          81.6      (55.6)     50.2      (68.1)     -49.5      (31.2)     89.7      (55.6)
Retired                                  -82.9      (62.3)    -68.4      (54.9)      30.9      (80.4)     -0.6      (49.4)
Age (65-70 omitted)
 50 to 54                               125.5*      (75.3)
 55 to 59                                95.8       (71.9)
 60 to 64                                75.3       (62.7)    -39.4      (54.5)
Education Level (College+ omitted)
 High School Dropout                    -136.0 (100.9)       -138.8 (114.5)        -233.7*** (60.4)      -46.7   (110.5)
 High School Degree                     -137.2** (60.2)      -140.7* (77.9)        -131.9*** (39.6)     -129.9*   (70.3)
 Some College                            -35.3   (49.7)        -7.6  (76.0)         -41.7    (29.6)     -150.8** (61.2)
Household Income (0-25k omitted)
 25k - 50k                                14.5      (64.0)    -69.4      (78.5)      74.3      (55.0)     41.8      (68.3)
 50k - 75k                                30.6      (72.9)     50.7      (88.7)      55.4      (56.7)     15.8      (72.1)
 75k - 100k                              -38.9      (67.4)   -116.4      (90.9)     166.3***   (60.8)    -76.3      (80.2)
 100k +                                   62.3      (71.4)    -37.6      (91.3)     126.7      (63.0)     70.7      (85.0)
Female                                  -33.6       (42.5)   -125.4**    (56.0)     -11.4      (27.3)   -113.3**    (48.1)
Non-Hispanic black                      106.3      (105.6)     -2.3      (98.0)      76.6      (78.8)      7.8      (82.8)
Other race / ethnicity                   36.9       (69.1)     16.6      (77.9)      58.0      (60.6)    100.2      (92.4)
Married                                  32.2       (42.8)     64.7      (60.5)     -13.6      (29.6)      3.9      (58.7)

R2                                               0.041                0.173                 0.059                0.154
Number of Respondents (N)                        1581                  354                  1220                  232
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. * indicates p-value<.10, **indicates p-value<.05, ***indicates p-
value<.01. In all cases, the dependent variable is the absolute prediction error, calculated as the difference between
the predicted and reported Social Security benefit levels (in $/month) for each respondent. See the note to Table 14
for the definitions of the explanatory variables. Missing values are dummied out.
Table 16: Misperceptions in the Return to Delayed Claiming
Dependent Variable:                                             (1)                      (2)
Absolute value of the difference between the
actual and the perceived return to delaying
claiming Social Security benefits                Representative Group         Older-Worker Group
                                                           **
Financial Literacy (0-4)                          -0.271          (0.107)       -0.373***   (0.077)
Knowledge about SS (1-5)                          -0.360***       (0.106)       -0.213***   (0.077)
Reliance on SS (1-4)                               0.010          (0.103)       -0.009      (0.073)
Share of Friends Retired (1-4)                    -0.058          (0.122)        0.011      (0.080)
Fraction of Siblings Older (0-1)                  -0.005          (0.254)       -0.404**    (0.166)
Receives Social Security                           0.571          (0.392)        0.275      (0.195)
Retired                                           -0.256          (0.295)        0.017      (0.275)
Age (50-54 omitted)
 55 to 59                                          0.430          (0.276)
 60 to 64                                          0.068          (0.221)
 65 to 70                                         -0.095          (0.410)
Education Level (College+ omitted)
 High School Dropout                              -0.174          (0.507)        0.704      (0.625)
 High School Degree                               -0.118          (0.270)        0.260      (0.229)
 Some College                                      0.106          (0.242)        0.144      (0.157)
Household Income (0-25k omitted)
 25k - 50k                                        -0.010          (0.367)       -0.181      (0.317)
 50k - 75k                                        -0.722**        (0.367)       -0.169      (0.313)
 75k - 100k                                       -0.561          (0.378)        0.207      (0.335)
 100k +                                           -0.664          (0.398)       -0.070      (0.330)
Female                                             0.019          (0.203)       -0.171      (0.141)
Non-Hispanic black                                 0.395          (0.442)        0.167      (0.345)
Other race / ethnicity                             0.101          (0.296)        0.191      (0.233)
Married                                           -0.010          (0.228)       -0.124      (0.158)
R2                                                         0.093                      0.051
N                                                          1731                       1284
Mean of the Dependent Variable                            3.0                            2.7
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. * indicates p-value<.10, **indicates p-value<.05,
***indicates p-value<.01. In all cases, the dependent variable is a measure of the misperception of
the return to delaying claiming Social Security benefits. It is calculated as the absolute percentage
point difference between the perceived annual return to delaying claiming to age 66 from age 62.
The absolute difference is topcoded at 10. See the note to Table 14 for the definitions of the
explanatory variables. Missing values are dummied out.
Table 17: Misunderstanding of Role of Earnings History
Dependent Variable:                                   (1)                              (2)
Dummy for giving incorrect answer regarding
the years of earnings that determine benefits Representative Group          Older-Worker Group
                                                         *
Financial Literacy (0-4)                        -0.029       (0.016)          -0.024*     (0.013)
Knowledge about SS (1-5)                        -0.045***    (0.016)          -0.041***   (0.014)
Reliance on SS (1-4)                             0.030*      (0.017)           0.025*     (0.014)
Share of Friends Retired (1-4)                  -0.029       (0.019)          -0.020      (0.014)
Fraction of Siblings Older (0-1)                 0.023       (0.040)           0.042      (0.031)
Receives Social Security                         0.022       (0.052)          -0.050      (0.035)
Retired                                         -0.066       (0.045)          -0.003      (0.046)
Age (50-54 omitted)
 55 to 59                                        0.026       (0.044)
 60 to 64                                       -0.021       (0.043)
 65 to 70                                       -0.054       (0.061)
Education Level (College+ omitted)
 High School Dropout                             0.159** (0.068)               0.086      (0.096)
 High School Degree                              0.073   (0.049)              -0.003      (0.039)
 Some College                                    0.096** (0.043)               0.012      (0.029)
Household Income (0-25k omitted)
 25k - 50k                                      -0.070       (0.049)          -0.018      (0.051)
 50k - 75k                                      -0.073       (0.054)          -0.029      (0.053)
 75k - 100k                                      0.052       (0.058)          -0.016      (0.056)
 100k +                                          0.002       (0.061)          -0.058      (0.058)
Female                                          -0.009       (0.033)          -0.064**    (0.026)
Non-Hispanic black                              -0.003       (0.068)           0.090      (0.056)
Other race / ethnicity                           0.087*      (0.047)           0.041      (0.045)
Married                                         -0.075**     (0.035)          -0.041      (0.029)
R2                                                       0.088                      0.033
N                                                        2149                       1528
Mean of the Dependent Variable                            0.68                       0.64
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses. * indicates p-value<.10, **indicates p-value<.05,
***indicates p-value<.01. The dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if the
respondent did not give the correct answer (option b in Table 13) to the multiple-choice question
(Q8.1) on which years of earnings determine Social Security benefits. See the note to Table 14 for
the definitions of the explanatory variables. Missing values are dummied out.
Table 18: Effect of Framing on Timing of Benefit Claiming
                         (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)                         (5)

                                                       By Frame Type                         Effect of Break Even
                       All                 Loss                        Break Even            Frame Relative to the
                   Respondents            Frame      Gain Frame          Frame                Other Two Frames
Panel A: Advice to Neighbor
 Retire at 62         28.4%              25.6%         26.4%             33.1%
                     (1.9%)              (3.1%)        (3.4%)            (3.5%)
 Retire at 65          71.6%             74.4%         73.6%             66.9%                        -7.1%
                       (1.9%)            (3.1%)        (3.4%)            (3.5%)                      (4.2%)
N                       1495               512           472              511                         1495

Panel B: Own Hypothetical Retirement Decision
 Retire at 62      44.3%            43.4%              36.1%             53.9%
                   (2.9%)           (5.1%)             (4.8%)            (5.1%)
 Retire at 65          55.7%             56.1%         63.9%             46.1%                       -14.0%
                       (2.9%)            (5.1%)        (4.8%)            (5.1%)                      (6.2%)
N                        782               254           263              265                         782

Panel C: Advice to Neighbor and Own Hypothetical Decision Combined
 Retire at 62         33.9%         31.6%       30.2%          40.0%
                     (1.6%)         (2.7%)      (2.8%)         (3.0%)
 Retire at 65          66.1%             68.4%         69.8%             60.0%                        -9.1%
                       (1.6%)            (2.7%)        (2.8%)            (3.0%)                      (3.5%)
N                       2277                766          735                 776                       2277
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All results are for the representative group. Disabled individuals
were not asked about the hypothetical own retirement decision. The frames are randomly assigned. A random 67%
of the sample was asked about advice to a neighbor while the remaining 33% was asked about the own hypothetical
retirement decision. Responses based on Q9.1 (the frame manipulation), Q9.2 (Panels A and C), and Q9.3 (Panels B
and C); see Appendix A for details on question wording
Table 19: Information Sources
                                            (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)

                                           Representative Group                      Older-Worker Group
                                                            Mean                                     Mean
                                      Fraction Who        Usefulness           Fraction Who       Usefulness
Source of Knowledge                    Use Source         of Source             Use Source         of Source
Visiting a Social Security Office     61.5% (1.7%)       4.19 (0.05)          52.2% (1.2%)        4.00 0.045
Phone Call to Social Security         61.3% (1.7%)       3.60 (0.06)          52.0% (1.2%)        3.43 0.049
The Social Security Website           56.7% (1.7%)       3.71 (0.06)          59.0% (1.2%)        3.79 0.039
A Mailing from Social Security        91.5% (1.0%)       4.19 (0.04)          93.7% (0.6%)        4.25 0.026
Information from Your Employer        65.2%    (1.6%)     3.04     (0.06)     63.0%         (1.2%)   2.80         0.043
Information from the AARP             63.8%    (1.6%)     3.23     (0.06)     63.1%         (1.2%)   3.18         0.038
An On-Line Financial Calculator       49.8%    (1.7%)     2.86     (0.06)     49.8%         (1.2%)   3.00         0.044
Other Internet Websites               48.3%    (1.7%)     2.82     (0.06)     46.1%         (1.2%)   2.80         0.043
Talking to a Financial Advisor         56.6% (1.7%)       3.55 (0.06)          60.4% (1.2%)          3.57 0.041
Talking to a Coworker                  64.0% (1.6%)       2.62 (0.05)          64.8% (1.2%)          2.51 0.036
Talking to Friends                     70.5% (1.6%)       2.79 (0.05)          74.1% (1.1%)          2.71 0.033
Talking to Your Spouse                 81.3% (1.7%)       3.42 (0.06)          84.0% (1.1%)          3.25 0.043
Talking to A(nother) Relative          70.8% (1.6%)       2.94 (0.05)          69.7% (1.1%)          2.82 0.036
Newspapers and Magazines               67.5% (1.8%)       2.62 (0.05)          71.5% (1.1%)          2.71 0.035
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The usefulness scale is defined as the average of all non-missing
responses, ranging from 1 (not useful at all) to 5 (very useful). Responses based on Q10.1; see Appendix A for
details on question wording.
