                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INVESTMENT HANGOVER AND THE GREAT RECESSION

                                        Matthew Rognlie
                                        Andrei Shleifer
                                          Alp Simsek

                                       Working Paper 20569
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20569


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




We thank Giacomo Ponzetto for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Matthew Rognlie, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investment Hangover and the Great Recession
Matthew Rognlie, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 20569
October 2014
JEL No. E22,E32,E4

                                                ABSTRACT

We present a model of investment hangover motivated by the Great Recession. In our model, overbuilding
of residential capital requires a reallocation of productive resources to nonresidential sectors, which
is facilitated by a reduction in the real interest rate. If the fall in the interest rate is limited by the zero
lower bound and nominal rigidities, then the economy enters a liquidity trap with limited reallocation
and low output. The drop in output reduces nonresidential investment through a mechanism similar
to the acceleration principle of investment. The burst in nonresidential investment is followed by an
even greater boom due to low interest rates during the liquidity trap. The boom in nonresidential investment
induces a partial and asymmetric recovery in which the residential sector is left behind, consistent
with the broad trends of the Great Recession.


Matthew Rognlie                                        Alp Simsek
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics, E17-244
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                  MIT
mrognlie@mit.edu                                       77 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                       Cambridge, Ma. 02139
Andrei Shleifer                                        and NBER
Department of Economics                                asimsek@mit.edu
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
1         Introduction

Since 2008, the US economy has been going through the worst macroeconomic slump
since the Great Depression. Real GDP per capita declined from more than $49,000
in 2007 (in 2009 dollars) to less than $47,000 in 2009, and surpassed its pre-recession
level only in 2013. The civilian employment ratio, which stood at about 63% in
January 2008, fell below 58% by January 2010, and remains below 59% in June 2014.
        Recent macroeconomic views emphasize the burst of the housing bubble— and its
e¤ects on …nancial institutions, …rms, and households— as the main culprit for these
developments. The collapse of home prices arguably a¤ected the economy through at
least two principal channels. First, it triggered the …nancial crisis, which led …nancial
institutions that su¤ered losses related to the housing market to cut back their lending
to …rms and households (Brunnermeier (2008), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010)). Second,
the reduction in home prices also generated a household deleveraging crisis, in which
homeowners that su¤ered leveraged losses from their housing equity cut back their
consumption so as to reduce their outstanding leverage (Guerrieri and Lorenzoni
(2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Mian and Su… (2014)). Both crises reduced
aggregate demand, plunging the economy into a Keynesian recession. The recession
was exacerbated by the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate, also known
as the liquidity trap, which restricted the ability of monetary policy to counter these
demand shocks (Hall (2011), Christiano, Eichenbaum, Trabandt (2014)).
        A growing body of empirical evidence shows that these views are at least par-
tially correct: the …nancial and the household crises both appear to have played a
part in the Great Recession.1 But these views also face a challenge in explaining the
    1
    Several recent papers, such as Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2010) and Chodorow-Reich
(2014), provide some evidence that …nancial crisis a¤ected …rms’ investment before 2010. Mian,
Rao, Su… (2013) and Mian and Su… (2012) provide evidence that household deleveraging reduced


                                              1
nature of the recovery after the Great Recession. As Figure 1 illustrates, the recovery
has been quite asymmetric across components of aggregate private spending. Non-
residential investment and consumption— measured as a fraction of output— reached
or exceeded their pre-recession levels by 2013, while residential investment remained
depressed. One explanation for this pattern is that households are unable to buy
houses due to ongoing deleveraging. But the left panel of Figure 1 casts doubt on
this explanation: sales of durable consumption goods such as cars— which should
also be a¤ected by household deleveraging— rebounded strongly in recent years while
residential investment has lagged behind.
   In this paper, we supplement the two accounts of the Great Recession with a third
channel, which we refer to as the investment hangover, which could help explain the
asymmetric recovery. Our key observation is that the housing bubble was an invest-
ment bubble as much as an asset price bubble. Overbuilding during the bubble years
created excess supply of housing capital by 2007, especially certain types of capital
such as owner occupied housing. Between 1996 and 2006, the share of US households
living in their own homes rose from about 65% to about 69%. The homeownership
rate fell back below 65% in 2014, suggesting that the housing capital might have been
in excess for many years after 2007. The excess housing capital lowers residential in-
vestment and slows down economic activity.
   Our argument so far is similar to the Austrian theory of the business cycle, in which
recessions are times at which excess capital built during boom years is liquidated
(Hayek (1931)). The Hayekian view, however, faces a challenge in explaining how
low investment in the liquidating sector reduces aggregate output and employment.
As noted by Krugman (1998), the economy has a natural adjustment mechanism
household consumption and employment between 2007 and 2009.




                                            2
Figure 1: The plots illustrate di¤erent components of aggregate demand as a fraction
of GDP between 1999 and 2004. The data is quarterly and reported as the seasonally
adjusted annual rate. Source: St. Louis Fed.




                                         3
that facilitates the reallocation of labor (and other productive resources) from the
liquidating sector to other sectors. As the interest rate falls during the liquidation
phase due to low aggregate demand, other sectors expand and keep employment from
falling. This reallocation process can be associated with some increase in frictional
unemployment. But it is unclear in the Austrian theory how employment can fall in
both the liquidating and the nonliquidating sectors, which seems to be the case for
major recessions such as the Great Recession. To …t that evidence, an additional—
Keynesian— aggregate demand mechanism is needed.
   Accordingly, we depart from the Hayekian view by emphasizing that, during the
Great Recession, the aggregate reallocation mechanism was undermined by the zero
lower bound constraint on monetary policy. If the initial overbuilding is su¢ ciently
large, then the interest rate hits a lower bound and the economy enters a liquidity
trap. As this happens, low investment in the residential sector cannot be countered
by the expansion of other sectors. Instead, low investment reduces aggregate demand
and output, contributing to the Keynesian slump.
   We also illustrate how overbuilding of residential capital can actually reduce non-
residential investment and consumption through two channels. First, the Keynesian
slump reduces the return to nonresidential capital such as business equipment. We
show that this can generate an initial reduction in nonresidential investment and
capital, despite the low interest rate and the low cost of capital. The nonresidential
investment response in turn aggravates the recession as emphasized by the previous
literature on the acceleration principle of investment (see Samuelson (1939)). Sec-
ond, the Keynesian slump also reduces the income of many individuals— for instance,
those who work in the residential sector. If those individuals have relatively high mar-
ginal propensities to consume (MPC) out of income, then overbuilding also reduces



                                           4
aggregate consumption. The consumption response further aggravates the recession
through a Keynesian income multiplier.
       Our model explains the asymmetric recovery depicted in Figure 1. As the economy
liquidates the excess residential capital, nonresidential investment gradually recovers
in anticipation of a recovery in output. In fact, the initial burst in nonresidential
investment is followed by an even greater boom due to low interest rates, leaving
the economy with a high level of capital at the end of the liquidity trap episode. It
follows that, from the lens of our model, the recession can be roughly divided into two
phases. In the …rst phase, both types of investment as well as consumption decline,
generating a severe slump. In the second phase, residential investment remains low
but nonresidential investment is high. The increase in nonresidential investment also
mitigates the slump and induces a partial recovery in output and consumption. Hence,
the residential sector is left behind in the recovery, as in Figure 1.

       Our paper is part of a large macroeconomic literature that attempts to identify
the mechanisms of the Great Recession.2 Two features di¤erentiate our analysis from
recent accounts that also emphasize demand shocks and the liquidity trap. First, mo-
tivated by the asymmetric recovery depicted in Figure 1, we emphasize overbuilding
of residential capital as a key driving factor of the recession. In contrast, Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012) emphasize a consumption shock due to household deleveraging,
and Christiano, Eichenbaum, Trabandt (2014) emphasize a nonresidential investment
shock due to …rms’…nancial frictions (as well as a consumption shock). Second, we
   2
    In addition to the above mentioned papers, see Gertler and Karadi (2011), Jermann and Quadrini
(2012), He and Krishnamurthy (2014), Midrigan and Philippon (2011) for quantitative dynamic
macroeconomic models that emphasize either banks’, …rms’, or households’…nancial frictions during
the Great Recession. There is also a vast theoretical literature that analyzes the ampli…cation
mechanisms that could have exacerbated the …nancial crisis (see Brunnermeier, Eisenbach, Sannikov
(2013) for a survey). Another theoretical literature investigates the liquidity trap and its policy
implications (see Korinek and Simsek (2014) and the references therein).


                                                5
illustrate how the problems in the residential investment sector can spread to non-
residential investment and consumption, even without …nancial shocks to …rms or
households. We do not claim that …nancial shocks were unimportant during the
Great Recession. Rather, our point is that overbuilding was also an important con-
tributing factor, with implications that confound …nancial shocks, especially earlier
in the recession. These confounding e¤ects should be taken into account by empirical
analyses of the Great Recession.
   Our paper is also related to a macroeconomic literature that investigates the
role of reallocation shocks relative to aggregate shocks in generating unemployment
‡uctuations (see Lilien (1982), Abraham and Katz (1986), Blanchard and Diamond
(1989), Davis and Haltiwanger (1990)). Our paper shows how reallocation shocks
can endogenously turn into aggregate shocks. In our model, expanding sectors are
constrained due to nominal rigidities and constrained monetary policy, which restricts
reallocation and triggers a Keynesian recession. Caballero and Hammour (1996) alter-
natively emphasize a supply-side channel by which reallocation is restricted because
the expanding sectors are constrained due to a hold-up problem.
   As we have noted, our paper makes contact with the Austrian (or Hayekian) theory
of the business cycle. As DeLong (1990) discusses, liquidationist views along these
lines were quite popular before and during the Great Depression, but were relegated to
the sidelines with the Keynesian revolution in macroeconomics. Our paper illustrates
how Hayekian and Keynesian mechanisms can come together to generate a recession.
The Hayekian mechanism …nds another modern formulation in the recent literature
on news-driven business cycles. A strand of this literature argues that positive news
about future productivity can generate investment booms, occasionally followed by
liquidations if the news is not realized (see Beaudry and Portier (2013) for a review).



                                          6
This literature typically generates business cycles from supply side considerations (see,
for instance, Beaudry and Portier (2004), Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009)), whereas we
emphasize demand shortages as the key mechanism by which liquidations trigger a
recession.
   In recent work, Beaudry, Galizia, Portier (BGP, 2014) also investigate channels
by which overbuilding can induce a recession driven by demand shortages. Their
paper is complementary to ours in the sense that they use di¤erent ingredients and
emphasize a di¤erent mechanism. In BGP, aggregate demand a¤ects employment
due to a matching friction in the labor market, whereas we obtain demand e¤ects
through nominal rigidities. In addition, BGP emphasize how overbuilding increases
the (uninsurable) unemployment risk, which exacerbates the recession due to house-
holds’ precautionary savings motive. In contrast, we emphasize how overbuilding
reduces the return to other (nonresidential) types of capital, which exacerbates the
recession due to the endogenous investment response. We also apply our model to
explain the asymmetric recovery from the Great Recession.
   Our paper is also related to the literature on the acceleration principle of in-
vestment (see Clark (1917)). This principle posits that the target level of capital is
proportional to output, so that investment is driven by changes in output. Samuel-
son’s (1939) famous multiplier-accelerator analysis shows that this principle can also
aggravate business cycles driven by demand shocks. The acceleration principle fell
out of fashion partly because it relies on mechanical relations between investment and
output, without considering changes in the cost of capital (see Caballero (1999)). In
our model, a version of the acceleration principle emerges endogenously from agents’
optimizing behavior. Intuitively, the liquidity trap keeps the cost of capital constant,
resuscitating the acceleration principle and some of its macroeconomic implications.



                                           7
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the basic envi-
ronment, de…nes the equilibrium, and establishes the properties of equilibrium that
facilitate subsequent analysis. The remaining sections characterize the dynamic equi-
librium starting with excess residential capital. Section 3 presents our main result that
excessive overbuilding induces a recession, and establishes conditions under which this
outcome is more likely. Section 4 investigates the nonresidential investment response
and discusses the relationship of our model with the acceleration principle. Section 5
investigates the consumption response in a version of the model in which some agents
have high MPCs out of income. Section 6 concludes.



2     Basic environment and equilibrium

The economy is set in in…nite discrete time t 2 f0; 1; :::g with a single consumption
good, and three factors of production: residential capital, nonresidential capital, and
labor. For brevity, we also refer to nonresidential capital as “capital.”A neoclassical
production function F (kt ; lt ) converts kt units of capital and lt units of labor into
F (kt ; lt ) units of consumption good. Residential capital produces housing services
according to a separate neoclassical production function G (ht ).
    One unit of the consumption good can be converted into one unit of residential or
nonresidential capital without any adjustment costs. Thus, the two types of capital
evolve according to


                                                     h
                                 ht+1 = ht 1             + iht                           (1)
                                                     k
                             and kt+1 = kt 1             + ikt .


                                                                                   h
Here, iht (resp. ikt ) denote residential (resp. nonresidential) investment, and       (resp.


                                            8
 k
     ) denotes the depreciation rate for residential (resp. nonresidential) capital.
      As we will see, absent shocks, the economy will be at a neoclassical steady state
in which the two types of capital are kept at …xed levels denoted by h and k . We
will analyze situations in which the economy starts with excess residential capital,
h0 > h (see Eq. (12) below). This assumption can be thought of as capturing an
unmodeled overbuilding episode that took place before the start of our model. We
are agnostic about the reason for overbuilding, which could be driven, among other
things, by optimistic beliefs (or news) in the past that were ultimately corrected. Our
focus will be on understanding how the economy decumulates the overbuilt capital.
      The demand side is captured by a representative household that makes residential
investment, saving, and labor supply decisions. The household invests in residential
capital directly (for simplicity), and invests in physical capital indirectly by holding
…nancial claims on competitive investment …rms. In particular, the real interest rate
between dates t and t + 1 is given by


                                                                   k
                                             rt+1 = Rt+1               ,                       (2)


where Rt+1 denotes the rental rate of capital.
      The household has a utility function over consumption, labor, and housing services
   ct ; lt ; G (ht )). She takes the interest rate rt+1 and the wage level wt at any date t
U (~
as given, and solves:

                                              X
                                              1
                                                     t
                            max                          U (~
                                                            ct ; lt ; G (ht ))                 (3)
                         ct ;kt ;ht ;lt gt
                        f~
                                               t=0
                                                             h
                          s.t. ht+1 = ht 1                       + iht and

                    c~t + kt+1 + iht = lt wt + kt (1 + rt ) +                t   for each t.



                                                         9
Here,    t   denotes pro…ts from …rms that are described below.
    We adopt the following speci…c functional form for the household’s utility function


                    U (~
                       ct ; lt ; ht ) = u (~
                                           ct     v (lt )) + uh 1 [G (ht )   G (h )] .              (4)

Here, the function u ( ) is strictly increasing and concave.                             The expression
1 [G (ht )     G (h )] is equal to 1 if G (ht )             G (h ) and zero otherwise, and uh is
a large constant.
    The speci…cation in (4) entails two simplifying assumptions. First, the utility term
for housing services implies that, starting with any h0 , the household accumulates or
decumulates its residential capital as quickly as possible so as to reach and stay at the
level h . Hence, we refer to h as the target level of residential capital. This assumption
considerably simpli…es the residential investment part of the model, and enables us
to focus on the e¤ect of overbuilding on the rest of the equilibrium allocations.
    The second simpli…cation in (4) is the functional form u (~
                                                              ct                 v (lt )), which implies
that the household’s labor supply decision does not depend on its consumption (see
Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu¤man (1988)). In particular, the e¢ cient supply of
labor and output depend only on the capital stock, which is predetermined within a
period. This speci…cation enables us to isolate the demand e¤ects as deviations from
the e¢ cient supply, which facilitates the exposition.

    The supply side of the model is Keynesian, and uses the equilibrium concept
introduced in Korinek and Simsek (2014). The key ingredient is that there is a lower
bound on the real interest rate, which we normalize to 0 to simplify the notation:


                                           rt+1      0 for all t.                                   (5)



                                                      10
The lower bound on the real rate follows from two assumptions. First, we assume
the nominal interest rate is bounded from below by 0%, because households can
guarantee 0% return by simply hoarding cash. Second, we assume that nominal
prices are completely sticky, which turns the bound on the nominal rate into the
bound in (5). Since December 2008, the 3-month nominal interest rate in the US has
been constant at 0% and the core in‡ation has been relatively stable between 1.5%
and 2%, providing some empirical support for our assumptions.
   When the constraint in (5) binds, the real interest rate is too high relative to its
market clearing level. Since the interest rate is the price of current consumption good
(in terms of the future consumption good), an elevated interest rate leads to a demand
shortage for current goods and a rationing of supply. We capture the possibility of
rationing via a competitive …nal goods sector that solves


            t   = max F (kt ; lt ) Rt kt wt lt                                                         (6)
                   kt ;lt
                          8
                          >
                          <               kt ; lt 0                                  if rt+1 > 0
                  s.t.                                                                             .
                          >
                          : kt ; lt 0 and F (kt ; lt )       c~t +   ikt   +   iht   if rt+1 = 0


When the real interest rate is above the lower bound, the sector optimizes as usual.
When the interest rate is at its lower bound, rt+1 = 0, the sector is subject to an
additional constraint that supply cannot exceed the aggregate demand for goods. In
this case, the equilibrium output is determined by aggregate demand at the bounded
interest rate, rt+1 = 0.

De…nition 1. The equilibrium is a path of allocations, c~t ; kt ; lt ; iht ; ikt ; et t , and real
prices and pro…ts, fwt ; Rt ;   t ; rt+1 gt ,   such that the household allocations solve problem
(3), the …nal good sector solves problem (6), investment sector optimizes so that Eq.


                                                    11
(2) holds, residential and nonresidential capital evolve according to (1) and markets
clear.

      Our equilibrium notion is similar to the rationing equilibria analyzed by a strand
of the Keynesian macroeconomics literature, e.g., Barro and Grossman (1971), Mal-
invaud (1977). We focus on the special case in which there is rationing in the goods
market if rt+1 = 0, but no rationing in the labor market. We put the rationing in
the goods market not because we think it is more realistic, but because it features
the minimally required departure from a Walrasian equilibrium to capture a liquid-
ity trap. Adding wage rigidities and rationing to the labor market could exacerbate
the outcomes, but it would not change our qualitative conclusions. As described in
Korinek and Simsek (2014), our equilibrium concept is also very similar to a New-
Keynesian model with monopolistic competition in which …rms’prices are completely
sticky. The rationing equilibrium captures the real e¤ects of a liquidity trap without
introducing nominal variables and monopolistic competition, thereby simplifying the
exposition.

      We next establish basic properties of equilibrium that will be useful in subsequent
analysis. In view of the speci…cation in (4), we work with net consumption ct =
c~t    v (lt ), that is, consumption net of the disutility of labor. We also de…ne the net
output as
                                                                k
                    Yt = ct + kt+1 + iht , where kt+1 = kt 1        + ikt .           (7)

Note that net output includes not only investment but also nondepreciated capital,
which simpli…es the notation. It is also useful to de…ne the maximum supply as the




                                            12
maximum level of net output the economy can obtain,


                                                                           k
                       S (kt ) = max F (kt ; lt )     v (lt ) + 1              kt ,                (8)
                                     lt



and the e¢ cient labor supply lt as the solution to problem (8). The economy is then
subject to the resource constraints


                                                               k
                                Yt   S (kt ) and Yt      1          kt .                           (9)


The following lemma describes the possibilities for equilibrium within a period.

Lemma 1. (i) If rt+1 > 0, then Yt = S (kt ) and lt = lt .
   (ii) If rt+1 = 0, then Yt satis…es (9). The labor supply is the unique solution to


                                                k
            Yt = F (kt ; lt )    v (lt ) + 1        kt , over the range lt 2 [0; lt ] .           (10)


   The …rst part shows that, if the interest rate is unconstrained, then the economy
utilizes its resources e¢ ciently. Net output is maximized and labor supply is at its
e¢ cient level.
   The second part describes the liquidity trap scenario in which the interest rate
is at its lower bound. In this case, net output satis…es the resource constraints in
(9) but it is otherwise unrestricted. The actual level of net output is determined
by the aggregate demand at date t as illustrated by Eq. (7). Given Yt , the level
of employment is found as the solution to (10) and satis…es lt                        lt . Intuitively,
the economy features a demand-driven recession with potentially low output and
employment. For future reference, it is also useful to characterize the gross return to
capital.


                                               13
Lemma 2. The gross return to capital is given by
                                           8
                                           >
                                           <
                                   k
                                                      S 0 (kt )           if rt+1 > 0,
              1 + rt = 1 + Rt          =
                                           >
                                           : s (kt ; Yt )     S 0 (kt )   if rt+1 = 0,


where the function s (kt ; Yt ) is strictly decreasing in kt and strictly increasing in Yt .

   Absent a liquidity trap, capital earns its marginal contribution to supply, S 0 (kt ).
In a liquidity trap, capital’s return is lower and given by a function s (kt ; Yt ). Intu-
itively, the shortage of demand reduces factor returns. Higher Yt increases the return
to capital due to higher demand, while higher kt reduces it due to diminishing returns.
   Combining Lemma 2 with the lower bound in (5) also implies a maximum level of
capital k, de…ned as the solution to


                                           S 0 k = 1.                                    (11)


In particular, starting with k0        k, capital in this economy cannot reach above k
since this would lead to a gross real return below 1. It is also useful to de…ne the
steady state level of capital k as the solution to


                                            S 0 (k ) = 1.


We next turn to the characterization of the dynamic equilibrium.




                                                 14
3     Investment hangover and the Keynesian reces-

      sion

We characterize the equilibrium under the assumption that the economy starts with
too much residential capital


                                 h0 = (1 + b0 ) h , where b0 > 0.                       (12)


This assumption can be thought of as capturing an unmodeled investment bubble
that took place before the start of our model. The parameter b0 measures the degree
of overbuilding as a fraction of the steady-state stock of residential capital h . Our
main result, which we present in this section, shows that this type of overbuilding
can induce a recession.
    Given (4), the residential investment level at date 0 is


                                          h          h              h
                     ih0 = h        1         h0 =       b0 1           h.              (13)

Note that the residential investment is below the level required to maintain the target
                            h
residential capital ih0 <       h . Hence, overbuilding represents a negative shock to the
residential investment demand relative to a steady state. The equilibrium depends
on how the remaining components of aggregate demand— nonresidential investment
and consumption— respond to this shock.
    To characterize this response, we solve the equilibrium backwards. Suppose the
economy reaches date 1 with h1 = h and some capital level k1                 k. Consider
                                                                               h
the continuation equilibrium. Residential investment is given by iht =             h . Since
there are no further demand shocks, the equilibrium does not feature a liquidity trap,


                                                15
that is, rt+1 > 0 for each t    1. Labor and output are then at their e¢ cient levels,
respectively given by lt and S (kt ). The equilibrium path fct ; kt+1 g1
                                                                       t=1 is characterized

as the solution to the neoclassical system


                                        h
                        ct + kt+1 +         h   = S (kt )                             (14)

                                    u0 (ct ) =       S 0 (kt ) u0 (ct+1 ) ,


along with a transversality condition. For the rest of the analysis, we make the
following assumption, which ensures that the economy is able to a¤ord the required
residential investment at the initial period as well as the steady state.
                                                     h
Assumption 1. min (S (k0 ) ; S (k )) > k +               h , and

Under this assumption, there is a unique solution to the system in (14) that converges
to a steady state (c ; k ) characterized in the appendix. The initial consumption can
be written as c0 = C (kT ), where C ( ) is an increasing function.
   Next consider the equilibrium at date 0. The key observation is that both nonres-
idential investment and consumption are bounded from above due to the lower bound
on the interest rate. Recall that capital cannot exceed its maximum level, k1        k [cf.
Eq. (11)]. This also implies a bound on nonresidential investment


                                                         k
                                  ik0       k    1           k0 .                     (15)


Intuitively, there are only so many projects that can be undertaken without violating
the lower bound on the interest rate. Consumption is similarly bounded. Combining
the inequality c1    C k with the lower bound on the interest rate implies


                         c0    c0 , where u0 (c0 ) = u0 C k             .             (16)

                                                16
Intuitively, the household can be incentivized to consume only so much without vio-
lating the interest rate bound.
       Combining the bounds in (15) and (16) with the demand shock in (13), the ag-
gregate demand (and output) at date 0 is also bounded from above, that is


                                                      h            h
                         Y0    Y0     k + c0 +            b0 1         h.              (17)


The equilibrium depends on the comparison between the maximum demand and the
maximum supply, i.e., whether Y 0 < S (k0 ). This in turn depends on whether the
amount of overbuilding b0 exceeds a threshold level,

                                        h
                                            h + k + c0 S (k0 )
                                b0                  h
                                                               .                       (18)
                                               1      h

Proposition 1 (Overbuilding and the Liquidity Trap). Consider the model with
b0 > 0 (and thus h0 > h ). Suppose Assumption 1 holds.
       (i) Suppose b0   b0 . Then, the date 0 equilibrium features


                               r1    0; Y0 = S (k0 ) and l0 = l0 .


       (ii) Suppose b0 > b0 . Then, the date 0 equilibrium features a liquidity trap with


                        r1 = 0; k1 = k; Y0 = Y 0 < S (k0 ) and l0 < l0 .


Moreover, output Y0 and labor supply l0 are decreasing in the amount of overbuilding
b0 .
       In either case, starting date 1, the economy converges to the steady state (k ; c )
according to the system in (14).


                                                 17
          0.2                                       6
            0
        -0.2                                        4
        -0.4
        -0.6                                        2
        -0.8
                                                    0




        2.58
                                                   5.8
        2.56
        2.54                                       5.6
        2.52                                       5.4
         2.5
                                                   5.2
        2.48




         3.4                                        1

         3.3                                       0.9

         3.2                                       0.8

         3.1                                       0.7

           3                                       0.6
                0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2              0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2




Figure 2: Date 0 equilibrium variables as a function of the initial overbuilding b0
(measured as a fraction of the target residential capital stock, h ), starting with
k0 = k .

     Part (i) describes the equilibrium for the case in which the initial overbuilding is
not too large. In this case, the economy does not fall into a liquidity trap. Residential
disinvestment is o¤set by a reduction in the interest rate and an increase in nonresi-
dential investment and consumption, leaving the output and employment determined
by productivity. The left part of the panels in Figure 2 (the range corresponding to
b0    b0 ) illustrate this outcome. This is the Austrian case.
     Part (ii) of Proposition 1, our main result, characterizes the case in which the
initial overbuilding is su¢ ciently large. In this case, the demand shock associated
with residential disinvestment is large enough to plunge the economy into a liquidity
trap. The lower bound on the interest rate prevents the nonresidential investment



                                              18
and consumption sectors from expanding su¢ ciently to pick up the slack aggregate
demand. As a consequence, the initial shock translates into a Keynesian recession
with low output and employment. Figure 2 illustrates this result. A greater initial
residential shock— driven by greater overbuilding— triggers a deeper recession. This
is the Keynesian case of our model.


3.1    Comparative statics of the liquidity trap

We next investigate the conditions under which a given amount of overbuilding b0
triggers a liquidity trap. As illustrated by Eq. (18), factors that reduce aggregate
demand at date 0, such as a higher discount factor       (that lowers c0 ), increase the in-
cidence of the liquidity trap in our setting. More generally, other frictions that reduce
aggregate demand during the decumulation phase, such as household deleveraging or
the …nancial crisis, are also complementary to our mechanism.
   Perhaps less obviously, Eq. (18) illustrates that a higher initial level of nonresi-
dential capital stock k0 also increases the incidence of a liquidity trap. A higher k0
a¤ects the equilibrium at date 0 through two main channels. First, it increases output
F (k0 ; l0 ) for any given amount of labor, which makes it more likely that aggregate
demand will fall short of the maximum supply. Second, a higher k0 also reduces
nonresidential investment at date 0, which in turn lowers aggregate demand. Hence,
overbuilding of the two types of capital is complementary in terms of triggering a
liquidity trap.

   A distinguishing feature of residential capital is its high durability relative to other
types of capital. A natural question is whether high durability is conducive to trigger-
ing a liquidity trap in our setting. Our model so far is not well suited to address this
                                                   h
question, since changing the depreciation rate         creates general equilibrium e¤ects

                                           19
that are orthogonal to the question (for instance, it changes the steady-state compo-
sition of output between consumption, residential, and nonresidential investment).
   To isolate the e¤ect of durability, consider a slight variant of the model in which
there are two types of residential capital denoted by hd and hn , each of which has a
target level h =2. The key di¤erence is their depreciation rate, which are respectively
                hd          hn             hd           hn
given by             and         , with            <         . Thus, type d (durable) residential capital
has a lower depreciation rate than type n (nondurable) residential capital. Suppose
  hd       hn              h
       +         =2 =            so that the average depreciation rate is the same as before.
Let hd0 = 1 + bd0 (h =2) and hn0 = (1 + bn0 ) (h =2), so that bd0 and bn0 capture the
overbuilding in respectively durable and nondurable capital relative to their target
levels. Suppose also that bd0 + bn0 =2 = b0 so that the total amount of overbuilding
is the same as before. The case with symmetric overbuilding, bd0 = bn0 = b0 , results in
the same equilibrium as in the earlier model. Our next result investigates the e¤ect
of overbuilding one type of capital more than the other.

Proposition 2 (Role of Durability). Consider the model with two types of res-
idential capital with di¤erent depreciation rates.                          Given the average overbuilding
b0 = bd0 + bn0 =2, the incidence of a liquidity trap 1 [l0 < l0 ] is increasing in over-
building of the more durable residential capital bd0 .

   To provide an intuition, consider the aggregate demand at date 0, which can be
written as


                                           h                       hd   h            hn   h
                     Y0     k + c0 +           h       bd0 1                 bn0 1          .         (19)
                                                                        2                 2

                      hd            hn
Note that 1                >1            , and thus, overbuilding of the durable residential capital
(relative to the nondurable capital) induces a greater reduction in aggregate demand


                                                              20
      0.2                                        2.6
        0
                                                 2.4
     -0.2
     -0.4                                        2.2
     -0.6
                                                   2

            2                                    1.8

                                                 1.6
            1                                    1.4


            0


            2                                    6.5

                                                   6
      1.5
                                                 5.5

                                                   5
            1
                                                 4.5

      0.5                                          4

                                                 3.5
            0




                                                 1.4
      3.5
                                                 1.2

                                                   1
            3
                                                 0.8

      2.5                                        0.6

                                                 0.4

            2                                    0.2

                                                   0
                0   1       2       3                  0      1       2       3




Figure 3: The evolution of equilibrium variables over time, starting with b0 > b0 and
k0 = k .

at date 0. Intuitively, depreciation helps to “erase” the overbuilt capital naturally,
thereby inducing a smaller reduction investment. When the capital is more durable,
there is less natural erasing. This in turn leads to lower investment and aggregate
demand, and makes a liquidity trap more likely. This result suggests that overbuilding
is more of a concern when it hits durable capital such as residential investment,
structures, or infrastructure (e.g., railroads), as opposed to less durable capital such
as equipment or machinery.




                                          21
3.2    Aftermath of the recession

We next investigate the equilibrium behavior in the aftermath of the liquidity trap.
Figure 3 plots the full dynamic equilibrium in the original model with single residential
capital (and in the liquidity trap scenario). The initial shock generates a temporary
recession, followed by a neoclassical adjustment after the recession.
   The interest rate gradually increases during the aftermath of the recession, and
might remain below its steady-state level for several periods. This is because the
economy accumulates capital during the liquidity trap thanks to low interest rates.
The economy decumulates this capital only gradually over time, which leaves the
rate of return low after the recession. These low rates are reminiscent of the secular
stagnation hypothesis, which was recently revived by Summers (2013). According to
this hypothesis, the economy could permanently remain depressed with low interest
rates due to a chronic demand shortage (see Eggertsson and Mehrota (2014) for a
formalization). In our model, the economy eventually recovers. But the low rates in
the aftermath suggest that the economy remains fragile to another demand shock,
even though it does not feature secular stagnation.
   Figure 3 illustrates further that, while there is a recession at date 0, several compo-
nents of aggregate demand— especially nonresidential investment— actually expand.
The recession is con…ned to the residential investment sector in which the shock orig-
inates. This feature is inconsistent with facts in major recessions, such as the Great
Recession, in which all components of aggregate demand decline simultaneously. To
resolve this puzzle, we next analyze the investment and consumption responses in
more detail.




                                           22
                   0.1


                     0


                  -0.1


                  -0.2


                  -0.3


                  -0.4
                             0          1          2          3




Figure 4: The evolution of net return to capital over time, starting with h0 > h0 and
k0 = k .

4     Nonresidential investment response and the ac-

      celeration principle

This section investigates the investment response in a slight variant of the model in
which the liquidity trap persists over multiple periods. We show that overbuilding of
residential capital can induce an initial burst in nonresidential investment followed by
a boom. We also discuss the relationship of our model to the acceleration principle
of investment.
    The analysis is motivated by Figure 4, which illustrates the evolution of the net
                         k
return to capital Rt         corresponding to the equilibrium plotted in Figure 3. The
near-zero return during the recovery phase re‡ects the high level of capital (and low
interest rates). The …gure illustrates that the net return at date 0 is even lower— in
fact, in negative territory— even though the initial capital level is not high (we use
k0 = k in simulations). Intuitively, the recession at date 0 lowers not only the output
but also factor returns, including the return to capital (see Lemma 2). This suggests
that, if nonresidential investment could respond to the shock during period 0, it could
also fall.
    To investigate this possibility, we modify the model so that the residential disin-


                                            23
vestment is spread over many periods. One way to ensure this is to assume that there
is a lower bound on housing investment at every period.

                                                                h
Assumption 2. iht         ih for each t, for some ih <              h.

For instance, the special case ih = 0 captures the idea that housing investment is
irreversible. More generally, the lower bound provides a tractable model of adjustment
costs. To simplify the exposition, we also assume that the initial overbuilding b0 (and
thus h0 = h (1 + b0 )) is such that the economy adjusts to the target level in exactly
T    1 periods.
                     h         h            h T                          h T
Assumption 3.            h =       h0   1         + ih 1            1              for an integer T     1.

With these assumptions, the residential investment path is given by
                               8
                               >
                               < ih < h h
                           h
                                                  if t 2 f0; :::; T      1g
                          it =                                                 .                      (20)
                               >
                               :     h
                                       h                 if t       T


For future reference, note that the parameter ih also provides an (inverse) measure
of the severity of the residential investment shock.
    As before, we characterize the equilibrium backwards. The economy reaches date
T with residential capital hT = h and some kT                   k. The continuation equilibrium
is characterized by the same conditions as before (see Eq. (14)). In particular,
consumption is given by cT = C (kT ), where recall that C ( ) is an increasing function.
    Next consider the equilibrium during the decumulation phase, t 2 f0; ::; T                         1g.
We conjecture that— under appropriate assumptions— there is an equilibrium that
features a liquidity trap at all of these dates, that is, rt+1 = 0 for each t 2 f0; ::; T              1g.
In this equilibrium, the economy reaches date T with the maximum level of capital,
kT = k. Consumption is also equal to its maximum level, that is, ct = ct for each t,


                                              24
where


                    u0 (ct ) = u0 (ct+1 ) for each t 2 f0; 1; ::; T      1g .

We still need to characterize the path of the capital stock fkt gTt=11 during the decu-
mulation phase.
   To this end, consider the investment decision at some date t 1, which determines
                                                                                          k
the capital stock at date t. The gross return from this investment is given by 1+Rt           ,
which is determined by the function s (kt ; Yt ) (cf. Lemma 2). Since rt = 0, the gross
cost of investment is given by 1 + rt = 1. The economy invests at date t         1 up to the
point at which the gross bene…t is equal to the gross cost, which gives a break-even
condition
                        s (kt ; Yt ) = 1 for each t 2 f1; ::; T   1g .                  (21)

Recall that the gross return function s ( ) is decreasing in the capital stock kt and
increasing in net output Yt . Hence, Eq. (21) says that, if the (expected) output at
date t is large, then the economy invests more at date t          1 and ends up with greater
capital stock at date t.
   The level of output is in turn determined by the aggregate demand at date t:


                     Yt = ct + kt+1 + ih for each t 2 f0; :::; T      1g .              (22)

Eqs. (21) and (22) represent a di¤erence equation that can be solved backwards
starting with kT = k. The resulting path corresponds to an equilibrium as long as
S (k0 ) > Y0 , so that there is a liquidity trap in the …rst period as we have conjectured.
The next result establishes that this is the case if the shock is su¢ ciently severe,
as captured by low ih , and characterizes the behavior of nonresidential capital in


                                              25
equilibrium.3 The result requires Assumption 4, which is a regularity condition on
shocks and parameters that ensures an interior liquidity trap equilibrium at date 0
with positive output. This assumption is satis…ed for all of our numerical simulations
and is relegated to the appendix for brevity.

Proposition 3 (Nonresidential Investment Response). Consider the model with the
adjustment length T        1. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 and Assumption 4 in the appendix
hold.
       (i) There exists ih1 such that if ih < ih1 , then there is a unique equilibrium path
fkt ; Yt 1 gTt=1 , which solves Eqs. (21)         (22) along with kT = k. The equilibrium
features a liquidity trap at each date t 2 f0; ::; T         1g with rt+1 = 0 and Yt < S (kt ).
       (ii) There exists ih2 such that, if ih < ih2 , then the nonresidential capital declines
at date 1, and then increases before date T :


                                    k0 > k1 and k1 < kT = k.


       The main result of this section is the second part, which establishes conditions
under which the nonresidential capital (and investment) follow a non-monotone path
during the recession: falling initially, but eventually increasing.
       To understand the drop in investment, note that a negative shock to residential
investment reduces aggregate demand and output. This in turn lowers nonresidential
investment as captured by the break-even condition (21). When the shock is su¢ -
ciently severe, the aggregate demand at date 1 is su¢ ciently low that capital declines.
Intuitively, the economy is optimally responding to the low return to capital depicted
in Figure 4.
   3
    If the condition ih < ih1 is violated, then there is an alternative equilibrium in which there is a
partial liquidity trap at dates t 2 fTb 1; ::; T 1g for some Tb 2. We omit the characterization
of these equilibria for brevity.


                                                  26
       0.1                                      1.3
         0
                                                1.2
     -0.1
     -0.2                                       1.1
     -0.3
                                                  1

      0.4                                       0.9

                                                0.8
      0.2                                       0.7


        0


      1.4
                                                  5
      1.2
                                                4.5
        1

      0.8                                         4

      0.6                                       3.5
      0.4
                                                  3
      0.2

        0                                       2.5




                                                1.4
      3.5
                                                1.2

                                                  1
        3
                                                0.8

      2.5                                       0.6

                                                0.4

        2                                       0.2

                                                  0
             0     1       2       3                  0      1       2        3




Figure 5: The evolution of equilibrium variables over time, given the length of decu-
mulation T = 2.

   In later periods, aggregate demand and output gradually increase in anticipation
of the eventual recovery. As this happens, the low interest rate— or the low cost of
capital— becomes the dominant factor for nonresidential investment. Consequently,
the economy starts reaccumulating capital, and in fact— exits the liquidity trap with
the maximum level of capital k as in the earlier model.
   Figure 5 illustrates the dynamic evolution of the equilibrium variables for the case
T = 2. The parameters are chosen so that the …gure can be compared to Figure 3
after replacing a single period with two periods. The lower panels on the left illus-
trate the non-monotonic response of capital and investment identi…ed in Proposition
3. The …gure illustrates further that the recession can be roughly divided into two
phases. In the …rst phase, captured by date 0, both types of investment fall. This in-


                                          27
duces a particularly severe recession with low output and employment. In the second
phase, captured by date 1 in the …gure (and dates t 2 f1; ::; T              1g more generally),
residential investment remains low whereas the nonresidential investment gradually
recovers and eventually booms. The nonresidential investment response also raises
aggregate demand and creates a partial recovery in output and employment.


4.1     Relationship to the acceleration principle

Our analysis of nonresidential investment is related to the accelerator theory of in-
vestment (see Clark (1917)). To illustrate this, let us linearize Eq. (21) around
(k; Y ) ' k; S k , to obtain the approximation


                    kt '     + Et   1   [Yt ] for each t 2 f1; ::; T    1g ,               (23)


where      =   sY =sk > 0;    = k            S k , and Et    1   [Yt ] = Yt . We introduce the
(redundant) expectations operator to contrast our rational expectations approach
with the previous literature. Taking the …rst di¤erences of Eq. (23), and assuming
                                         k
that the depreciation rate is small,         ' 0, we further obtain


               ikt ' kt+1   kt '    (Yt+1      Yt ) for each t 2 f0; ::; T     2g .


Our model thus implies a version of the acceleration principle, which says that in-
vestment is proportional to changes in output (see Eckaus (1953) for a review). Note,
however, that the relationship in (23) is mechanically assumed in the accelerator liter-
ature, whereas Eq. (21) emerges in our setting from the optimal investment behavior
of …rms.
   Intuitively, the liquidity trap ensures that the interest rate and the cost of capital

                                               28
is constant. Consequently, the return on capital becomes the main determinant of
investment. In our model (and in many settings), the return on capital is increasing in
output, which yields a positive relationship between capital and output. In his review
of the accelerator theory, Caballero (1999) notes: “the absence of prices (the cost of
capital, in particular) from the right-hand side of the ‡exible accelerator equation has
earned it disrespect despite its empirical success.” In our analysis, the liquidity trap
keeps the cost of capital constant, reviving the acceleration principle.
    Our model has several distinct features as compared to the accelerator theory.
First, our acceleration principle applies only temporarily during the liquidity trap.
From time T onwards, investment is driven by neoclassical forces [cf. (14)]. Second,
our acceleration principle captures a nonlinear relationship [cf. Eq. (21)], whereas
the accelerator theory often uses a linear form as in (23). Third, our investing …rms
hold rational expectations, whereas the macroeconomic applications of the accelerator
theory often use Eq. (23) with adaptive expectations, for instance, Et     1   [Yt ] = Yt 1 .
We show that, even with rational expectations, the acceleration principle exacerbates
the earlier phase of the recession similar to Samuelson (1939). However, our model
does not feature the periodic oscillations of output emphasized in Samuelson (1939)
or Metzler (1941), which seem to be driven by adaptive expectations.



5     Consumption response and the Keynesian mul-

      tiplier

This section investigates the consumption response in a version of the model that fea-
tures households with high marginal propensities to consume (MPCs) out of income.
In this context, we illustrate how the overbuilding of residential capital can reduce


                                          29
consumption, and not just nonresidential investment, and how the consumption re-
sponse aggravates the recession through a Keynesian income multiplier.
   The models described so far feature a representative household whose consump-
tion satis…es the Euler equation. However, the Euler equation— and the permanent
income hypothesis that it implies— cannot fully capture the behavior of consumption
in response to income changes in the data. After reviewing the vast empirical litera-
ture on this topic, Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010) note “there is by now considerable
evidence that consumption appears to respond to anticipated income increases, over
and above by what is implied by standard models of consumption smoothing.”
   To make consumption more responsive to income, we introduce households with
high MPCs out of income. Suppose, in addition to the representative household
analyzed earlier, there is an additional mass ltr of households which we refer to as
income-trackers. These agents are excluded from …nancial markets so that they con-
sume all of their income, that is, their MPC is equal to 1 (for simplicity). Each
income-tracker inelastically supplies 1 unit of labor in a competitive market for a
wage level wttr , which provides her only source of income. Consequently, total con-
sumption is now given by ct +wttr ltr , where ct is the consumption of the representative
household and wttr ltr denotes the consumption of income-trackers.
   The aggregate production function can generally be written as F~ (kt ; lt ; ltr ), where
lt is the labor supply by the representative household and ltr is the total labor supply
by income-trackers. To simplify the analysis, we focus on the special case


                           F~ kt ; lt ; ltr = F (kt ; lt ) +    tr tr
                                                                  l ,


                                                           tr
where F is a neoclassical production function and               > 0 is a scalar. We continue to
use the notation Yt = F (kt ; lt ) to refer to the output excluding the supply of income-

                                             30
                                                    tr tr
trackers. Total output is given by Yt +                 l . The rest of the model is the same as in
the previous section.
       In view of these assumptions, the economy is subject to the resource constraint


                        ct + kt+1 + iht + wttr ltr = Yt +         tr tr
                                                                     l            S (kt ) +   tr tr
                                                                                                l .           (24)


In Eq. (24), the equality says that total demand equals total output, whereas the
inequality says that total output is below the maximum total supply. Lemma 3 in
the appendix characterizes the income-trackers’wage level as


                                          wttr =        (kt ; Yt )       tr
                                                                              .                               (25)


Here,      (kt ; Yt ) 2 [0; 1] is a measure of e¢ cient resource utilization (more speci…cally,
  =1            where    is the labor wedge). Absent a liquidity trap,                         = 1 and output is at
its e¢ cient level, in which case the income-trackers also earn their marginal product
 tr
      . In a liquidity trap,        1 and output is below its e¢ cient level due to the demand
shortage. In this case, the income-trackers’wage is also below their marginal product,
wttr       tr
                . Moreover, their wage is increasing in Yt , since greater demand increases
factor returns.
       Combining Eqs. (24) and (25) implies


        Yt = ct + kt+1 + iht + ( (kt ; Yt )        1)     tr tr
                                                             l for each t 2 f0; 1; ::; T              1g .    (26)


This expression illustrates a Keynesian cross in our setting. Total demand depends
on net output Yt through income-trackers’income and consumption. The equilibrium
obtains when the actual and demanded net outputs are equal.



                                                        31
       Next consider a residential investment shock that lasts T periods as in the pre-
vious section.       We conjecture an equilibrium with a liquidity trap for all dates
t 2 f0; 1; ::; T     1g. As before, the optimality of investment implies the break-even
condition (21). Eqs. (26) and (21) can then be solved backwards starting with kT = k.
The next result establishes conditions under which the solution exists and corresponds
to an equilibrium, and characterizes the behavior of consumption in equilibrium.

Proposition 4 (Consumption Response). Consider the model with mass ltr of income
trackers and the adjustment length T          1. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 and Assumption
4tr in the appendix hold.
       (i) There exists ih1 such that if ih < ih1 , then there is an equilibrium path
fkt ; Yt 1 gTt=1 , which solves Eqs. (21) and (26) along with kT = k. Any equilibrium
features a liquidity trap at each date t 2 f0; ::; T        1g with rt+1 = 0 and Yt < S (kt ).
       (ii) There exists l1tr such that if ltr > l1tr , then total consumption at date 0 (in any
equilibrium) is below its steady-state level, that is


                                    c0 + w0tr ltr < c +   tr tr
                                                            l .


       The main result of this section is the second part, which establishes conditions
under which overbuilding also lowers total consumption at date 0 in any equilibrium.4
When the economy is in a liquidity trap, output Yt falls due to the demand shortage.
As illustrated by Eq. (25), the drop in output also lowers income-trackers’ income
and consumption. With su¢ ciently many income trackers, this also reduces total
consumption in contrast to the previous sections.
       Figure 6 illustrates the equilibrium using the same parameters as before (except
   4
    The equilibrium is unique in all of our numerical simulations. However, there could in principle
be multiple equilibria because Eq. (26) represents an intersection of two increasing curves in Yt .


                                                32
                                                1.6
   0.1
     0                                          1.5
  -0.1                                          1.4
  -0.2                                          1.3
  -0.3
                                                1.2
                                                1.1
   0.4
                                                 1
   0.3
                                                0.9
   0.2
                                                0.8
   0.1

     0



   1.8
                                                 5
   1.6
   1.4                                          4.5
   1.2
     1                                           4

   0.8
                                                3.5
   0.6
   0.4                                           3
   0.2
     0                                          2.5




   3.6                                          1.4
   3.4                                          1.2
   3.2
                                                 1
     3
   2.8                                          0.8
   2.6
                                                0.6
   2.4
                                                0.4
   2.2
     2                                          0.2
   1.8
                                                 0
         0       1       2        3                   0       1        2        3




Figure 6: The evolution of equilibrium variables with additional households whose
consumption tracks their income. The light bars illustrate the e¤ect of increasing the
mass of income-trackers.




                                         33
                          tr
for the new parameters         ; ltr > 0). The darker bars illustrate the case with relatively
few income-trackers, and the lighter bars illustrate the e¤ect of having more income-
trackers. In each case the initial consumption declines, illustrating Proposition 4.
   The …gure illustrates further that increasing the mass of income-trackers aggra-
vates the recession. More speci…cally, greater ltr leads to a greater drop in output
and employment. The intuition is provided by the Keynesian cross equation (26),
which implies a Keynesian multiplier. As income-trackers’consumption falls, aggre-
gate demand falls even further. This induces a second round reduction in net output
Yt and income-trackers’income, which further reduces income-trackers’consumption
and aggregate demand, and so on. Hence, income-trackers’ consumption behavior
multiplies the e¤ect of the initial demand shock. Note that greater ltr also leads
to a more severe drop in investment at date 0 followed by a stronger recovery at
date 1. Thus, income-trackers exacerbate the non-monotonic response of investment
identi…ed in Proposition 3.
   Finally, Figure 6 illustrates that our model can explain the asymmetric recovery
from the Great Recession depicted in Figure 1. Similar to the previous section, the
recession can be roughly divided into two phases. In the …rst phase, all components
of aggregate demand— including consumption— simultaneously fall, triggering a deep
recession. In the second phase, nonresidential investment booms, which also increases
output, employment, as well as consumption. Hence, the second phase of the recession
in our model represents a partial and asymmetric recovery in which the residential
sector is left behind, as in Figure 1.




                                               34
6     Conclusion

We have presented a model of investment hangover in the Great Recession that com-
bines both Austrian and Keynesian features. On the Austrian side, the recession is
precipitated by overbuilding in the residential sector, which necessitates a realloca-
tion of resources to other sectors. The reallocation problem is exacerbated by the
durability of residential capital, which prevents depreciation from naturally erasing
the overbuilt capital. On the Keynesian side, a lower bound on interest rates slows
down reallocation and creates an aggregate demand shortage. The demand shortage
can also reduce consumption and investment in sectors that are not overbuilt, leading
to a severe recession. Eventually, consumption and investment recover, but the slump
in the residential sector continues for a long time. The broad trends of the Great Re-
cession on GDP, consumption, residential investment, and other types of investment
are consistent with the predictions of this model.
    Although we have focused on the Great Recession, the model is more widely
applicable. Perhaps the most straightforward extension is to overbuilding in sectors
other than housing. In the 1930s, when both Hayek and Keynes wrote, speculative
overbuilding was seen as a critical impetus to recessions, but the focus was more on
railroads and perhaps industrial plant than on housing. In our model, such extensions
would require only a relabeling of variables.
    Less obvious is the extension to other forms of restrictions on interest rates, such
as currency unions, which also slow down the Austrian reallocation of resources from
the overbuilt sector to others. In the recent European context, such restrictions may
have played a critical role, and generated Keynesian aggregate demand e¤ects along
the lines suggested by our model. We leave an elaboration of these mechanisms to
future work.


                                           35
References

Abraham, Katharine G. and Lawrence F. Katz (1986), “Cyclical unemployment: sec-
toral shifts or aggregate disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), p.367-
388.

Barro, Robert and Herschel Grossman (1971), “A General Disequilibrium Model of
Income and Employment,”American Economic Review 61(1), pp. 82-93.

Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier (2004), “An Exploration into Pigou’s Theory of
Cycles,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 1183–1216.

Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier (2013), “News Driven Business Cycles: Insights
and Challenges,”Toulouse School of Economics working paper.

Beaudry, Paul, Dana Galizia, and Franck Portier (2014), “Reconciling Hayek’s and
Keynes Views of Recessions,”NBER Working Paper, No. 20101.

Blanchard, Olivier and Peter Diamond (1989), “The Beveridge curve,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, p.1-60.

Brunnermeier, Markus (2009), “Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch of 2007–
08,”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 77–100.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Thomas Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov (2013), “Macroeco-
nomics With Financial Frictions: A Survey,” Advances In Economics And Econo-
metrics, Tenth World Congress Of The Econometric Society, New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Caballero, Ricardo J. (1999), “Aggregate Investment,”in Taylor, J. B. and M. Wood-
ford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics (North Holland, Amsterdam)




                                          36
Caballero, Ricardo and Mohamad Hammour (1996), “On the Ills of Adjustment,”
Journal of Development Economics, 51(1), p.161 192.

Campello, Murillo, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey (2010), “The Real E¤ects
of Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 97, 470-487.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt (2014), “Under-
standing the Great Recession,”NBER Working Paper No. 20040.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel (2014), “The Employment E¤ects of Credit Market Disrup-
tions: Firm-level Evidence from the 2008-09 Financial Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 129, 1-59.

Clark, J.M. (1917), “Business Acceleration and the Law of Demand: a Technical
Factor in Economic Cycles,”Journal of Political Economy, 2 5, p.217-235.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger (1990), “Gross job creation and destruction:
microeconolnic evidence and macroeconomic implications,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, 5, p.123-168.

DeLong, Bradford (1990), “‘Liquidation’Cycles: Old-Fashioned Real Business Cycle
Theory and the Great Depression,”NBER Working paper 3546.

Eckaus, R. S. (1953), “The Acceleration Principle Reconsidered,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 67, p.209-230.

Eggertsson, Gauti and Paul Krugman (2012), “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity
Trap,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1469-1513.

Eggertsson, Gauti and Neil Mehrota (2014), “A Model of Secular Stagnation,”Brown
University working paper.


                                        37
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2011), “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Pol-
icy,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, p.17-34.

Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (2011), “Financial Intermediation and Credit
Policy in Business Cycle,”in Handbook of Monetary Economics, North Holland Else-
vier.

Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z. and G.W. Hu¤man (1988), “Investment, Capacity Util-
isation and the Real business Cycle,”American Economic Review, 78, p. 402-417.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni (2011), “Credit Crises, Precautionary Sav-
ings, and the Liquidity Trap,”NBER Working Paper No. 17583.

Hall, Robert E. (2011), “The Long Slump,”American Economic Review 101(2), 431–
469

Hayek, Friedrich (1931), Prices and Production, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2014), “A Macroeconomic Framework for
Quantifying Systemic Risk,”working paper.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo (2009), “Can News about the Future Drive the
Business Cycle?”American Economic Review, 99, 1097-1118.

Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pista¤eri (2010), “The Consumption Response to Income
Changes,”Annual Review of Economics, 2, p.479–506.

Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2012), “Macroeconomic e¤ects of …nancial shocks,”
American Economic Review, 102(1), p.238–71.

Korinek, Anton and Alp Simsek (2014), “Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage,”
NBER Working Paper no. 19970.




                                       38
Krugman, Paul (1998), “The Hangover Theory,” Slate Magazine, available at:
http://www.slate.com/id/9593. (Accessed: Jul 5, 2014).

Malinvaud, Edmond (1977), Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered, Oxford: Black-
well Publishers.

Lilien, David (1980), “The cyclical pattern of temporary layo¤s in United States
manufacturing,”Review of Economics and Statistics, 62, p.24-31.

Metzler, Lloyd (1941), “The Nature and Stability of Inventory Cycles,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 23, p.113-129.

Mian, Atif and Amir Su… (2012), “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggre-
gate Demand Channel,”NBER Working Paper 17830.

Mian, Atif and Amir Su… (2014), The House of Debt, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Mian, Atif, Kamelesh Rao, and Amir Su… (2013), “Household Balance Sheets, Con-
sumption, and the Economic Slump,”forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics

Samuelson, Paul (1939), “Interactions Between the Multiplier Analysis and the Prin-
ciple of Acceleration,”Review of Economic Statistics, 21(2), p.75–78

Summers, Lawrence (2013), “Why Stagnation Might Prove to be the New Normal,”
The Financial Times.




                                           39
A      Appendix: Extensions and omitted proofs
A.1     Omitted proofs
Proof of Lemma 1. First consider the case rt+1 > 0. In this case, the …rst order
conditions for the …rm’s problem (6) implies

                      Fk (kt ; lt ) = Rt and Fl (kt ; lt ) = wt = v 0 (lt ) ,                        (A.1)

where the latter equality also uses the …rst order condition for the household problem
(3). The …rst order condition for problem (8) is also given by Fl (kt ; lt ) = v 0 (lt ). It
follows that Yt = S (kt ) and lt = lt , proving the …rst part.
    Next consider the case rt+1 = 0. In this case, combining the …rst order conditions
for problems (6) and (3) imply Fl (kt ; lt ) v 0 (lt ) [see Eq. (A:2) below]. This in turn
implies that lt 2 [0; lt ]. By feasibility, net output satis…es

                                                                                  k
                  Yt = ct + kt+1 + ih = F (kt ; lt )         v (lt ) + 1              kt .

This expression is strictly increasing in lt over the range [0; lt ]. The minimum and the
                                             k
maximum are respectively given by 1             kt and S (kt ), establishing the constraints
(9). Moreover, given Yt that satis…es these resource constraints, there is a unique
solution to problem (10), which we denote by L (kt ; Yt ), completing the proof.

Proof of Lemma 2. The …rst order conditions for problem (6) can be generally
written as

             (1     t ) Fk   (kt ; lt ) = Rt and (1       t ) Fl   (kt ; lt ) = wt = v 0 (lt ) ,     (A.2)

where t 0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the demand constraint, also known as the
labor wedge. Combining these expressions, the gross return to capital is given by

                         k         v 0 (lt )                         k
             1 + Rt            =               Fk (kt ; lt ) + 1
                                 Fl (kt ; lt )
                                   v 0 (L (kt ; Yt ))                                        k
                               =                         Fk (kt ; L (kt ; Yt )) + 1              ,
                                 Fl (kt ; L (kt ; Yt ))
                               = s (kt ; Yt ) ,                                                      (A.3)


                                                  40
where the last line de…nes the function s ( ). If rt+1 > 0, then the labor wedge is zero
and Fl = v 0 [cf. Eq. (A:1)]. Thus, in this case, we have

                                                                k
                    s (kt ; Yt ) = Fk (kt ; L (kt ; Yt )) + 1       = S 0 (kt ) ,

where the last line uses the envelope theorem. If instead rt+1 = 0, then the labor
wedge is nonnegative and Fl v 0 . In this case, Eq. (A:3) implies s (kt ; Yt ) S 0 (kt ).
It can also be checked that sY > 0 and sk < 0, completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 1. For each r0 0, de…ne the function K1 (r0 ) as the solution
to
                             S 0 (K1 (r0 )) = 1 + r0 .

Note that K1 (r0 ) is decreasing in the interest rate, with K1 (0) = k and
limr0 !1 K1 (r0 ) = 0. Similarly, de…ne the function C0 (r0 ) as the solution to the
Euler equation
                       u0 (C0 (r0 )) = (1 + r0 ) u0 (C (K1 (r0 ))) .

Note that C0 (r0 ) is decreasing in the interest rate, with C0 (0) = c0 and
limr0 !1 C0 (r0 ) = 0. Finally, de…ne the aggregate demand function

                              Y0 (r0 ) = C0 (r0 ) + K1 (r0 ) + ih .

Note that Y0 (r0 ) is also decreasing in the interest rate, with

                                                                        h
                       Y0 (0) = Y 0 and lim Y0 (r0 ) = ih <                 h.
                                             r0 !1


     Next consider the time 0 equilibrium for the case b0 b0 , which implies S (k0 )
Y 0 . Assumption 1 implies S (k0 ) k0 + h h > ih . It follows that there is a unique
equilibrium interest rate r0 2 [0; 1) such that Y0 (r0 ) = S (k0 ). The equilibrium
consumption and investment are determined by c0 = C0 (r0 ) and K1 (r0 ) = k1 , and
the equilibrium output and labor supply satisfy Y0 = S (k0 ) and l0 = l0 .
     Next consider the date 0 equilibrium for the case b0 > b0 . In this case, Y0 (r0 ) <
S (k0 ) for each r0 0. Thus, the unique equilibrium features r0 = 0 and Y0 = Y 0 <
S (k0 ). Consumption and investment are given by c0 = c0 and k1 = k 1 . Labor supply
l0 is determined as the unique solution to (10) over the range l0 2 (0; l0 ). Finally, Eq.


                                                41
(17) implies the equilibrium output, Y0 = Y 0 , is declining in the initial overbuilding
b0 .
     In either case, it can also be checked that the economy reaches time 1 with capital
stock k1      min (k0 ; k ). Under Assumption 1, the system in (14) corresponds to a
standard neoclassical model. Using the standard steps, there is a unique equilibrium
path fct ; kt+1 g1
                 t=1 , which converges to the steady state (c ; k ) characterized by the
equations
                                                              h
                           S 0 (k ) = 1 and c = S (k ) k        h,

completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 2. Note that the recession is triggered if Y 0 < S (k0 ), where
                                          hd          hn
Y 0 is given by Eq. (19). Since 1            > 1         , increasing bd0 (while keeping
b0 = bd0 + bn0 =2 constant) reduces Y 0 , proving the result.

  To prove Proposition 3, we also make the following assumption.
Assumption 4. (i) ih 2 [ cT ; S k    k c0 ) and (ii) s k0 ; c0 cT + k < 1.
Part (i) ensures that ih is not too low to induce zero aggregate demand in any period,
but also not too high so that a liquidity trap at date 0 is possible. Part (ii) ensures
that the worst possible shock ih = cT is su¢ cient to induce a liquidity trap at date
0.

Proof of Proposition 3. We …rst claim that the solution to Eq. (21) can be written
as kt = K (Yt ), where K ( ) is an increasing function over 0; S k . To this end,
consider some Y 2 0; S k . Let k~ < k denote the unique capital level such that
Y = S k~ . Note that

                    ~ Y
                  s k;     = S 0 k~ > 1 and s k; Y < S 0 k = 1;

where the latter inequality follows from Lemma 2 since Y < S k . Since sk < 0,
there exists a unique K (Y ) 2 k;~ k such that s (K (Y ) ; Y ) = 1. Thus, the function
K ( ) is well de…ned. Note also that K ( ) is continuous and strictly increasing. Note
also that limY !0 K (Y ) = 0.
    Given the function K ( ), the path of capital can be written as the solution to the



                                          42
system,
                        kt = Kt (Yt ) , where Yt = ct + kt+1 + ih                    (A.4)

for each t 2 f1; ::; T 1g, starting with kT = k. To solve this system by induction,
consider some kt+1 2 (0; k]. Consider the corresponding aggregate demand Yt . Part
(i) of Assumption 4 implies Yt > 0 (using ct cT ) and Yt < S k (using ct c0 and
kt+1 k). We thus have Yt 2 0; S k . Since K ( ) is a strictly increasing function,
there is a unique solution to (A:4) which also satis…es kt 2 0; k . By induction, we
obtain a unique path for capital fkt gTt=11 . Combining the path of capital with Eq.
(22) also implies a unique path of output fYt 1 gTt=01 . Since kt < k and s (kt ; Yt ) = 1,
we also have Yt < S (kt ) for each t 2 f1; ::; T 1g.
    It remains to show that there is a liquidity trap also at date 0 with Y0 < S (k0 ),
verifying our conjecture. We …rst claim this is the case for the worst allowed shock,
ih = cT . We then establish it also for any shock below a threshold level.
    Consider the worst allowed shock ih = cT . Note that K (Y0 ) 2 0; k is well
de…ned, and describes the capital level at date 0 that would generate a gross return
of 1 given the demand Y0 . The demand at date 0 is in turn given by

                            Y 0 = c0   cT + k1    c0   cT + k.

Combining this with Part (ii) of Assumption 4, we obtain s (k0 ; Y0 ) < 1. This implies
K (Y0 ) < k0 , which further implies

                               Y0 < S (K (Y0 )) < S (k0 ) .

Here, the …rst inequality from the de…nition of K (Y0 ) and the second inequality
follows since K (Y0 ) < k0 . We thus have Y0 < S (k0 ), proving the claim that the
worst allowed shock induces a liquidity trap.
    Next note from Eq. (A:4) that, for any kt+1 , the implied kt is strictly increasing in
i . Consequently, k1 and Y0 are also strictly increasing in ih . Since ih = cT induces
 h

Y0 < S (k0 ), there exists ih1 > cT such that Y0 = S (k0 ). It follows that there is a
liquidity trap at date 0 with Y0 < S (k0 ) whenever ih < ih1 , proving the …rst part.
    Similarly, we claim that the worst allowed shock ih = cT induces k1 < k0 . To




                                            43
see this, consider the aggregate demand at date 1 given by

                           Y 1 = c1       cT + k2       c0         cT + k.

Combining this with Part (ii) of Assumption 4, we obtain s (k0 ; Y1 ) < 1. This in turn
implies k1 = K (Y1 ) < k0 , proving the claim. Since k1 is strictly increasing in ih ,
there exists ih2 > cT such that k1 = k0 . It follows that k1 < k0 whenever ih < ih2 ,
completing the proof.


Lemma 3. The income-trackers’ wage level is given by Eq. (25) for some function
 (kt ; Yt ), which has the following properties:
                                v 0 (lt )
  (i) (kt ; Yt ) = 1      t = Fl (kt ;lt ) ,

  (ii) (kt ; Yt ) = 1 if rt+1 > 0 and (kt ; Yt ) 2 [0; 1] if rt+1 = 0,
  (iii) (kt ; Yt ) is strictly decrasing in kt , and strictly increasing in Yt .

Proof. As in the proof of Lemma 2, let L (k; Y ) denote the labor supply correspond-
                                                     k
ing to capital level k   k and output Y 2 1            k; S (k) . Next consider the
analogue of Problem (6) that also includes …rms’demand for hand-to-mouth labor.
The …rm’s optimization in this case implies

                                 wtr (kt ; Yt ) = (1          t)
                                                                    tr
                                                                         ,

where t    0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the demand constraint. As before, the
same problem also implies that t is equal to the labor wedge, that is:

                                      v 0 (L (kt ; Yt ))
                       1     t   =                                   (kt ; Yt ) .
                                     Fl (kt ; L (kt ; Yt ))

Here, the last line de…nes the function (kt ; Yt ). Combining these expressions proves
the …rst part. Recall that the labor wedge satis…es t = 0 if rt+1 = 0, and t 2 [0; 1]
if rt+1 > 0, proving the second part. It can also be checked that k < 0 and Y > 0,
completing the proof.

  To prove Proposition 4, we strengthen Assumption 4 as follows.
Assumption 4tr . (i) ih 2 [ (cT   tr tr
                                    l ) ; S k k c0 ), (ii) s k0 ; c0                cT + k < 1.



                                                 44
Proof of Proposition 4. Let K (Y ) denote the function de…ned in the proof of
Proposition 3 that describes the break-even capital level kt = K (Yt ) given aggregate
demand Yt . Eqs. (21) and (26) can then be written as

               Yt = f (Yt )      ct + kt+1 + ih + ( (K (Yt ) ; Yt )   1)   tr tr
                                                                             l ,       (A.5)

for each t   1. The output at date 0 is separately characterized as the solution to
Eq. (26) with the initial k0 (as opposed to K (Y0 )).
    We next claim that, given kt+1 2 (0; k], there exists a solution to (A:5) over the
range Yt 2 0; S k . To see this, note that

                              lim f (Yt ) > cT + ih      tr tr
                                                           l     0,
                              Yt !0


where the …rst inequality uses ct cT ; kt+1 > 0 and              0, and the second inequality
uses Part (i) of Assumption 4tr . Next note that

                              f S k         c0 + k + i h < S k ,

where the …rst inequality uses ct c0 ; kt+1 k and          1, and the second inequality
reuses Part (i) of Assumption 4tr . Combining the last two inequalities implies the
existence of a solution Yt 2 0; S k . This also implies a capital stock kt = K (Yt ) 2
 0; k . Applying the same argument recursively, we obtain the path fkt ; Yt gTt=11 . By
the same argument, there exists Y0 that solves Eq. (26) with the initial k0 . Note
that the solution satis…es Yt < S (kt ) for each t 2 f1; ::; T 1g as in the proof of
Proposition 3.
     Note that there could be multiple solutions to Eq. (A:5) [and Eq. (26) for date
0], which could generate multiple equilibria. We establish the desired results for the
“best”equilibrium that has the highest capital and net output, which also implies the
results for any other equilibrium. To this end, let Ytb denote the supremum over all
                                                            b
Yt ’s that solve Eq. (A:5) [and Eq. (26) for date 0] given kt+1 . Then let ktb = K Ytb .
By induction, we obtain a particular solution to Eq. (A:5) [and Eq. (26) for date
0]. It is easy to show that this is the “best” solution in the sense that ktb      kt and
Ytb Yt for each t for any other solution.
     We next claim that, given the worst allowed shock ih = (cT           tr tr
                                                                            l ), the best
solution results in a liquidity trap at date 0 with Y0b < S (k0 ). To see this, note that

                                               45
the aggregate demand at date 0 satis…es

                   Y0b = c0    cT + k1b + (        1)   tr tr
                                                          l       c0     cT + k.

Combining this with Part (ii) of Assumption 4tr , we obtain s k0 ; Y0b < 1. As in the
proof of Proposition 3, this implies K Y0b < k0 , which in turn implies Y0b < S (k0 ).
Using Y0 Y0b , this further implies that any solution features a liquidity trap at date
0 with Y0 < S (k0 ), proving the …rst part.
   To prove the second part, …rst note that Ytb < S ktb also implies t ktb ; Ytb <
1 for each t 2 f0; ::; T 1g. Eqs. (A:5) and (26) then imply that Ytb is strictly
decreasing in ltr for each t 2 f0; ::; T 1g. Next note that the required inequality can
be rewritten as

                                                                 tr tr
                              c0   c < (1          (k0 ; Y0 ))     l .                (A.6)

Since Y0b is strictly decreasing in ltr , so is the expression        k0 ; Y0b . Thus, there
                                                                            T 1
exists l1tr such that (A:6) holds for the “best”equilibrium ktb ; Ytb 1 t=0 if and only if
ltr > l1tr . Note also that any other equilibrium features Y0 Y0b , and thus (k0 ; Y0 )
    k0 ; Y0b . It follows that, if ltr > l1tr , then the inequality in (A:6) holds for any
equilibrium, completing the proof.




                                              46
