                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         CONSTRAINED DISCRETION AND CENTRAL BANK TRANSPARENCY

                                          Francesco Bianchi
                                          Leonardo Melosi

                                         Working Paper 20566
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20566


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




We wish to thank Martin Eichenbaum, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Jordi Gali, Pablo Guerron-Quintana,
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Narayana Kocherlakota, Frederick Mishkin, Matthias Paustian, Jon Steinsson,
Mirko Wiederholt, Michael Woodford, and Tony Yates for very helpful comments and discussions.
We also thank seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Columbia University, UC Berkeley,
Duke University, the SED conference in Cyprus, the Bank of England, the ECB Conference "Information,
Beliefs and Economic Policy," the Midwest Macro Meetings 2014, and the Philadelphia Fed. Part
of this paper was written while Leonardo Melosi was visiting the Bank of England, whose hospitality
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, any other person associated with
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Francesco Bianchi gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-1227397.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Constrained Discretion and Central Bank Transparency
Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi
NBER Working Paper No. 20566
October 2014
JEL No. C11,D83,E52

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop and estimate a general equilibrium model in which monetary policy can deviate from
active inflation stabilization and agents face uncertainty about the nature of these deviations. When
observing a deviation, agents conduct Bayesian learning to infer its likely duration. Under constrained
discretion, only short deviations occur: Agents are confident about a prompt return to the active regime,
macroeconomic uncertainty is low, welfare is high. However, if a deviation persists, agents' beliefs
start drifting, uncertainty accelerates, and welfare declines. If the duration of the deviations is announced,
uncertainty follows a reverse path. When estimated to match past U.S. experience, our model suggests
that transparency lowers uncertainty and increases welfare.


Francesco Bianchi
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu

Leonardo Melosi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle street
Chicago, IL 60604
lmelosi@frbchi.org
1       Introduction
The last two decades have witnessed two major breakthroughs in the practice of central
banking worldwide. First, most central banks have adopted a monetary policy framework
that Bernanke and Mishkin (1997) have termed constrained discretion. Bernanke (2003)
explains that under constrained discretion, the central bank retains some flexibility in de-
emphasizing inflation stabilization so as to pursue alternative short-run objectives such as
unemployment stabilization. However, such flexibility is constrained to the extent that
the central bank should maintain a strong reputation for keeping inflation and inflation
expectations firmly under control. Second, many countries have taken remarkable steps to
make their central bank more transparent (Bernanke et al., 1999 and Mishkin 2001).1
    As a result of these changes, some key questions lie at the heart of modern monetary policy
making. First, for how long can a central bank de-emphasize inflation stabilization before
the private sector starts fearing a return to a period of high and volatile inflation as in ’70s?
Second, does transparency play an essential role for eﬀective monetary policy making? In
other words, should a central bank be explicit about the future course of monetary policy?
The recent financial crisis has triggered a prolonged period of accommodative monetary
policy that some members of the Federal Open Market Committee fear could lead to a
disanchoring of inflation expectations.2 As a result, the research questions outlined above
are at the center of the policy debate.
    In order to address them, we develop and estimate a model in which the anti-inflationary
stance of the central bank can change over time and agents face uncertainty about the nature
of deviations from active inflation stabilization. When monetary policy alternates between
prolonged periods of active inflation stabilization, active regime, and short periods during
which the emphasis on inflation stabilization is reduced, short-lasting passive regime, the
model captures the monetary approach described as constrained discretion. However, the
central bank can also engage in a prolonged deviation from the active regime and move to
a long-lasting passive regime. Agents in the model are fully rational and able to infer if
monetary policy is active or not. However, when the passive rule prevails, they are uncertain
about the nature of the observed deviation. In other words, agents are not sure if the central
bank is engaging in a short or long-lasting deviation from the active regime. The central bank
    1
      Since May 1999, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has included explicit language about
the likely future policy stance in its oﬃcial statements, as documented in Rudebusch and Williams (2008).
Industrialized countries such Canada, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom have publicly announced
a target range for inflation and also introduced a wide variety of instruments for communicating with the
public. These include regular release of macroeconomic forecasts, discussions of the policy responses to keep
inflation on target, and prompt releases of minutes.
    2
      As an example see Plosser (2012).



                                                     1
can then follow two possible communication strategies: Transparency and no transparency.
Under no transparency, the nature of the deviation is not revealed. Under transparency, the
duration of every deviation is announced.
    Under no transparency, when passive monetary policy prevails, agents conduct Bayesian
learning in order to infer the likely duration of the deviation from active monetary policy.
Given that the behavior of the monetary authority is unchanged across the two passive
regimes, the only way for rational agents to learn about the nature of the deviation consists
of keeping track of the number of consecutive deviations. As agents observe more and more
realizations of the passive rule, they become increasingly convinced that the long-lasting
passive regime is occurring. As a result, the more the central bank deviates from active
inflation stabilization, the more agents become discouraged about a quick return to the
active regime. We then solve the model keeping track of the joint evolution of policy makers’
behavior and agents’ beliefs using the methods developed in Bianchi and Melosi (2014b).
The latter methods are based on the idea of expanding the number of regimes to take into
account the learning mechanism. Once a regime is defined in terms of both policy makers’
behavior and agents’ beliefs, the model can be solved using any of the methods developed
for perfect information Markov-switching models. The resulting solution implies that the
model dynamics evolve over time in response to the evolution of policy makers’ behavior and
agents’ beliefs.
    The ability of generating smooth changes in agents’ beliefs in response to central bank
actions makes the model an ideal laboratory to study the macroeconomic and welfare im-
plications of constrained discretion. In the model, social welfare is shown to be a function
of agents uncertainty about future inflation and future output gaps. Both of these measures
of uncertainty keep increasing as agents observe more and more deviations from the active
policy and update their beliefs about the duration of the passive policy. In standard mod-
els, monetary policy aﬀects agents’ welfare by influencing the unconditional variances of the
endogenous variables. In our nonlinear setting, policy actions exert dynamic eﬀects on un-
certainty. Therefore, welfare evolves over time in response to the short-run fluctuations of
uncertainty. To our knowledge, this feature is new in the literature and allows us to study
changes in the macroeconomic risk due to policy actions and communication strategies and
the associated welfare implications.
    We measure uncertainty taking into account agents’ beliefs about the evolution of mone-
tary policy. As long as the number of deviations from the active regime is low, the increase
in uncertainty is very modest and in line with the levels implied by the active regime. This
is because agents regard the early deviations as temporary. However, as the number of de-
viations increases and fairly optimistic agents become fairly pessimistic, uncertainty starts


                                             2
increasing and eventually converges to the values implied by the long-lasting passive regime.
As a result, for each horizon, our measure of uncertainty is now higher than its long run value.
This is because agents take into account that while in the short run a prolonged period of
passive monetary policy will prevail, in the long run the economy will surely visit the active
regime again. Therefore, an important result arises: Deviations from the active regime that
last only a few periods have no disruptive consequences on welfare because they do not have
a large impact on agents’ uncertainty regarding future monetary policy. Instead, if a central
bank deviates for a prolonged period of time, the disanchoring of agents’ uncertainty occurs,
causing sizeable welfare losses.
    The model under the assumption of no transparency is fitted to U.S. data. In line with
previous contributions, we identify prolonged deviations from active monetary policy in the
’60s and the ’70s. However, we also find that the Federal Reserve has recurrently engaged
in short-lasting passive policies since the early ’80s, supporting the view that constrained
discretion has been the predominant approach to U.S. monetary policy in the last three
decades. In the analysis, we abstract from the reasons why the Federal Reserve has engaged
in such deviations. In fact, we consider such recurrent deviations as a given of our analysis.
The objective of this paper is to use the estimated model to evaluate how quickly agents’
beliefs respond to policy makers’ behavior and announcements, what this implies for the
evolution of uncertainty and welfare, and what the potential gains are from reducing the
uncertainty about the conduct of monetary policy.
    The paper introduces a practical definition of reputation: a central bank has strong
reputation if it is less likely to engage in long-lasting deviations from active policies. It
is worth pointing out that the proposed definition of central bank reputation is not only
reflected in the in sample frequency of regime changes, but it also manifests itself aﬀecting
agents’ beliefs and, consequently, the general equilibrium properties of the macroeconomy.
Therefore, the proposed definition of central bank reputation has the advantage of being
measurable in the data, while at the same time being in line with the seminal contributions
of Kydland and Prescott (1977), Barro and Gordon (1983), and Gali and Gertler (2007).
    The Federal Reserve is found to benefit from strong reputation. Based on the estimates,
pessimism and hence agents’ uncertainty about future inflation change very sluggishly in
response to deviations from active monetary policy. In fact, uncertainty is found to stay an-
chored and move only very gradually as the Federal Reserve deviates from active monetary
policy. This finding has the important implication that the Federal Reserve can conduct
passive policies for up fairly large number of years before the disanchoring of inflation ex-
pectations and an overall increase in macroeconomic uncertainty occur.
    While this result implies that the Federal Reserve can successfully implement constrained


                                               3
discretion even without transparency, our findings suggest that increasing transparency
would improve welfare. The estimated model suggests that the welfare gains from trans-
parency range between 0.67% to 6.63%. A transparent central bank systematically announces
the duration of any deviation from the active regime beforehand. The implications of such a
communication strategy vary based on the nature of the deviation. When the central bank
engages in a short lasting deviation, announcing its duration immediately removes the fear
of the ’70s: When agents are not informed about the exact nature of an observed devia-
tion, whenever a short deviation occurs, ex-ante agents cannot rule out the possibility of
a long-lasting deviation of the kind that characterized the early part of the sample. As a
result, ex-post, agents turn out to have overstated the persistence of the observed deviation.
How large this eﬀect is depends on the central bank reputation, captured by the conditional
probability of engaging in a long lasting deviation.
    When instead a deviation is in fact long lasting, the model allows us to highlight an
important trade-oﬀ associated with transparency. First, in the short run being transparent
reduces welfare because agents are told that passive monetary policy will prevail for a while
and thereby future shocks are expected to have more dramatic inflationary/deflationary
consequences. It follows that, if the duration of the announced deviation is long enough,
over the early periods uncertainty is higher than when no announcement is made. This
short-run eﬀect on welfare arises because the central bank publicly commits to a policy that
de-emphasizes inflation stabilization for the announced number of future periods. Agents
understand that such a commitment to follow the announced policy course limits the central
bank’s ability of countering the inflationary consequences of future shocks that might occur
during the implementation of the announced policy. Therefore, the announcement leads to
a higher macroeconomic risk and associated detrimental eﬀects on welfare. Second, as time
goes by, agents know that the prolonged period of passive monetary policy is coming to an
end. This leads to a reduction in the level of uncertainty at every horizon with an associated
improvement in welfare. Notice, that this is exactly the opposite of what occurs when no
announcement is made: Agents, in this case, become more and more discouraged about the
possibility of moving to the active regime and uncertainty increases. To our knowledge, this
is the first paper that studies this critical trade-oﬀ and its welfare implications through the
lens of an estimated DSGE model.
    This paper makes three main methodological contributions to the existing literature.
First, we estimate a microfounded general equilibrium model with changes in policy makers’
behavior and Bayesian learning. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper that
estimates a DSGE model with Markov-switching parameters and Bayesian learning.3 Second,
  3
      The learning mechanism implies that agents’ beliefs are not invariant to the duration of a certain policy.


                                                        4
we show how to model systematic and recurrent policy makers’ announcements in a general
equilibrium framework. In light of the recent development of forward guidance, we believe
that this contribution should be of independent interest. Finally, we show how to characterize
and compute social welfare in a Markov switching DSGE model with Bayesian learning and
announcements. In doing so, we combine the methods developed by Bianchi (2013a) to
measure uncertainty in MS-DSGE models with the solution methods for MS-DSGE models
with learning developed by Bianchi and Melosi (2014b) and the solution methods for MS-
DSGE models with announcements developed in this paper.
    Our modeling framework goes beyond the assumption of anticipated utility that is often
used in the learning literature.4 Such an assumption implies that agents forecast future
events assuming that their beliefs will never change in the future. Instead, agents in our
models know that they do not know. Therefore, when forming expectations, they take into
account that their beliefs will evolve according to what they will observe in the future. In our
context, it is possible to go beyond the anticipated utility assumption because we can keep
track of the joint evolution of policymakers’ behavior and agents’ beliefs. Using anticipated
utility would break the link between the observed policy path and the future policy course.
This link is key for the dynamics of uncertainty. To understand why, consider a prolonged
sequence of deviations from the active regime. This would have two eﬀects. First, monetary
policy is less active in stabilizing inflation. Second, agents become more pessimistic about a
return to the active regime. Both eﬀects are reflected in the model solution with important
consequences for the expected impact of future shocks and, consequently, the evolution of
uncertainty and welfare.
    This paper is part of a broader research agenda that aims to model the evolution of
agents’ beliefs in general equilibrium models. In Bianchi and Melosi (2014a), we study a
model in which the current policy makers’ behavior influences agents’ beliefs about the
way debt will be stabilized. In Bianchi and Melosi (2013), we develop methods to study
the evolution of agents’ beliefs in general equilibrium models. Unlike those two papers, in
this paper we conduct a full estimation of a DSGE model with parameter instability and
information frictions. We use the results to assess how anchored inflation expectations and
uncertainty are in the U.S. economy and to investigate the welfare implications of forward-
looking communication by the Federal Reserve.
    Eusepi and Preston (2010) study monetary policy communication in a model where
Therefore, the model captures a very intuitive idea: Agents in the late ’70s were arguably more pessimistic
about a return to the active regime with respect to the early ’70s. This feature was not present in previous
contributions such as Bianchi (2013b) and Davig and Doh (2008).
   4
     For some prominent examples see Marcet and Sargent (1989b,a) Cho, Williams, and Sargent (2002), and
Evans and Honkapohja (2001, 2003).



                                                     5
agents face uncertainty about the value of model parameters. Unlike Eusepi and Preston
(2010), agents in our model are not bounded rational, they only have incomplete information.
Cogley, Matthes, and Sbordone (2011) address the problem of a newly-appointed central
bank governor who inherits a high average inflation rate from the past and wants to disinflate.
In their model, agents conduct Bayesian learning over the coeﬃcients that characterize the
conduct of monetary policy, but they are bounded rational to the extent that use anticipated
utility to form expectations. In our model, regime changes are recurrent, agents learn about
the regime in place as opposed to the Taylor rule parameters, and expectations reflect the
possibility of changes in beliefs and policy makers’ behavior. Finally, the tractability of our
approach allows us to conduct a full estimation.
    Schorfheide (2005) considers an economy in which agents use Bayesian learning to infer
changes in a Markov-switching inflation target. In that paper agents solve a filtering problem
to disentangle a persistent component from a transitory component. The learning mechanism
is treated as external to the model, implying that the model needs to be solved in every
period in order to reflect the change in agents’ beliefs regarding the persistent and transitory
components. Consequently, when agents form expectations they do not take into account
how their beliefs will respond to future observations. On the contrary, in this paper agents
form expectations by knowing that they do not know. Furthermore, the method developed
in Schorfheide (2005) cannot be immediately extended to models in which agents learn about
changes in the stochastic properties of the model parameters.
    The paper is then related to a growing literature that models parameter instability to
capture changes in the evolution of the macroeconomy. This consists of three branches: Davig
and Leeper (2007), Farmer, Waggoner, and Zha (2009), and Foerster, Rubio-Ramirez, Wag-
goner, and Zha (2011) develop solution methods for Markov-switching rational expectations
models, Justiniano and Primiceri (2008), Benati and Surico (2009), Bianchi (2013b), Bianchi
and Ilut (2013), Davig and Doh (2008), and Fernandez-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramirez (2008)
introduce parameter instability in estimated dynamic equilibrium models, while Sims and
Zha (2006), Primiceri (2005), Cogley and Sargent (2005), and Boivin and Giannoni (2006)
work with structural VARs. Finally, our work is also linked to papers that study the impact
of monetary policy decisions on inflation expectations, such as Nimark (2008), Mankiw, Reis,
and Wolfers (2004), Del Negro and Eusepi (2010), and Melosi (2014a and 2014b).
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the baseline model. In Section
3, we show how to solve the model under no transparency and transparency. In Section
4, the model under the assumption of no transparency is fitted to U.S. data. In Section 5
we use the estimated model to assess the welfare implications of introducing transparency.
In Section 6 we study some extensions and assess the robustness of our results. Section 7


                                               6
concludes.


2    The Model
The model is a prototypical three-equation New-Keynesian model (Clarida, Gali, and Gertler,
2000 and Woodford, 2003), which has been used for empirical studies (Lubik and Schorfheide,
2004). We make two main departures from this standard framework. First, we assume that
households and firms have incomplete information, in a sense to be made clear shortly.
Second, we assume parameter instability in the monetary policy rule.
   Households: The representative household maximizes
                      hP           ³                                ´     i
                        ∞                 −1 1−          −1   1+
                       =0      (1 − )     − (1 + )         |F0   

where  is composite consumption and  are hours worked in period . The parameter
 ∈ (0 1) is the discount factor, the parameter  ≥ 0 is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply.  [·|F0 ] is the expectation operator conditioned on information of private
agents available at time 0. The information set F contains the history of all model variables
and volatility regimes   but not the history of policy regimes   that, as we shall show,
determine the parameter value of the central bank’s reaction function.  is an exogenous
process aﬀecting the discount factor of households and is assumed to follow a stationary
first-order autoregressive process:
                       ¡      ¢
                ln  = 1 −  ln  +  ln −1 +        ∼  (0 1)          (1)

 where  is an i.i.d. Gaussian shock and  is determined by the exogenous variable   ,
which is assumed to follow a discrete Markov-switching process. As it is common in the
literature we assume  = 1 implying that the discount factor in steady state is given by .
We refer to  as preference shock.
    Composite consumption in period  is given by the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator
                                          ³R            ´  −1
                                                             
                                             1 1−1      
                                    =      
                                            0 
                                                                

where  is consumption of a diﬀerentiated good  in period  and   1 determines
the elasticity of substitution between consumption goods. The elasticity of substitution is
determined by the following exogenous process:

               ln  = (1 −  ) ln  +  ln −1 +      ∼  (0 1)           (2)

                                                 7
where  = ( − 1)−1 and   is referred to as price markup shock. Analogously to the
preference shocks, the standard deviation of the markup shock   is determined by the
discrete Markov-switching process   
    The flow budget constraint of the representative household in period  reads

                             +  = −1 −1 +   +  −  

where  is the price level in period , −1 is the stock of one-period nominal government
bonds held by the household between period  − 1 and period , −1 is the gross nominal
interest rate on those bonds,  is the nominal wage rate,  are nominal aggregate profits,
and  are nominal lump-sum taxes in period . The price level is given by
                                           ³R          ´1(1− )
                                              1 1−
                                     =      
                                             0 
                                                                                        (3)

    In every period , the representative household chooses a consumption vector, labor
supply, and bond holdings subject to the sequence of the flow budget constraints and a no-
Ponzi-scheme condition. The representative household takes as given the nominal interest
rate, the nominal wage rate, nominal aggregate profits, nominal lump-sum taxes, and the
prices of all consumption goods.
    Firms: There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms of mass one. Firms
are indexed by . Firm  supplies a diﬀerentiated good . Firms face Calvo-type nominal
rigidities and the probability of re-optimizing prices in any given period is given by 1 − 
independent across firms. Those firms that are not allowed to re-optimize index their prices
to the steady-state inflation rate Π∗ . Those firms that are allowed to re-optimize their price
choose their price ∗ () so as to maximize:
                  P∞       
                                £       ¡  ∗                              ¢ ¤
                     =0      +  Π∗  () + () − + + () |F

where + is the stochastic discount factor measuring the time  utility of one unit of
consumption good available at time  + ,  () is amount of labor hired, and  () is the
amount of diﬀerentiated good produced by firm . Firms are endowed with an identical
technology of production:
                                     () =   ()1− 

The variable  captures exogenous shifts of the marginal costs of production and is assumed
to follow a stationary first-order autoregressive process:

                 ln  = (1 −  ) ln  +  ln −1 +       ∼  (0 1)      (4)

                                                  8
We refer to the innovations   as technology shocks. Again, the Markov-switching process
  determines the volatility regime for the technology shock. Re-optimizing firms face a
sequence of demand constraints:
                                              ¡                  ¢−
                                    + () = Π∗ ∗ () +      +

   Policy Makers: There is a monetary authority and a fiscal authority. The flow budget
constraint of the fiscal authority in period  reads

                                             +  = −1 −1 

The fiscal authority has to finance maturing government bonds. The fiscal authority can
collect lump-sum taxes or issue new government bonds. We assume that the fiscal authority
follows a Ricardian fiscal policy. The monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate 
according to the Taylor rule
                          "µ        ¶ µ         ¶ #1−
                          Π                                      ¡          ¢
            = −1                                                   exp     ∼  (0 1)   (5)
                               Π∗              ∗

where Π = ( −1 ) is inflation and  is aggregate output in period , and ∗ is the
potential output. The variable  captures non-systematic exogenous deviations of the
nominal interest rate  from the rule. The standard deviation of the monetary shock is
assumed to depend on the volatility regime   that follows a discrete Markov process. The
variable   is the policy regime that determines the policy coeﬃcients of the rule reflecting
the emphasis of the central bank on inflation stabilization relative to output gap stabilization
in any period .


2.1    Volatility and Policy Regimes
The standard deviations of the preference shocks, the markup shocks, the technology shocks,
and the monetary shocks are determined by the volatility of regime   . The volatility regime
follows a discrete Markov process and can assume two values: High and Low. The low
volatility regime is characterized by standard deviations that are strictly smaller than those
associated with the high volatility regime. Transition matrix that governs the evolution of
the two volatility regimes   is the following:
                                                 "                           #
                                                            1 − 
                                         P =
                                                       1 −    

                                                              9
where  ( ) captures the probability of staying in the high (low) volatility regime. Unlike
the policy regimes   , the realizations of the volatilities regimes   are perfectly observed by
the agents (i.e.,   ∈ F , any ).
   We model changes in the central bank’s emphasis on inflation and output gap stabilization
by introducing a Markov-switching process   with three regimes that evolve according to
the matrix:                                ⎡                     ⎤
                                               11    12 13
                                           ⎢                     ⎥
                                      P = ⎣ 1 − 22 22 0 ⎦                                      (6)
                                             1 − 33    0    33
The realized regime determines the monetary policy parameters of the central bank’s reaction
function. In symbols, for  ∈ {1 2 3}:
                                                              ⎡ ¡   ¢                   ⎤
                                                                      , if  = 1
             ¡                                             ¢ ⎢ ¡               ¢           ⎥
               (  = )   (  = )   (  = ) = ⎣      , if  = 2 ⎦     (7)
                                                                ¡   ¢
                                                                      , if  = 3

    Under Regime 1, the active regime, the central bank’s main goal is to stabilize inflation
and the Taylor principle is satisfied  (  = 1) =    ≥ 1. Under Regime 2, the short-
lasting passive regime, the central bank de-emphasizes inflation stabilization by deviating
from the Taylor principle   1, but only for short periods of time (on average). The
same parameter combination also characterizes Regime 3, the long-lasting passive regime.
However, under Regime 3 deviations are generally more prolonged. In other words, Regime
2 is less persistent than Regime 3: 22  33 . Summarizing, the two passive regimes do not
diﬀer in terms of the response to inflation  and the output gap  , but only in terms of
their relative persistence.
    The three policy regimes are meant to capture the recurrent changes in the Federal
Reserve’s attitude toward inflation and output stabilization in the postwar period. A number
of empirical works (Clarida, Gali, and Gertler, 2000, Lubik and Schorfheide, 2004, Bianchi,
2013) have documented that the Federal Reserve de-emphasized inflation stabilization for
prolonged periods of time in the 1970s. Furthermore, as argued by Bernanke (2003), while
the Federal Reserve has been mostly focused on actively stabilizing inflation and inflation
expectations starting from the early 1980, it has also occasionally engaged in short-lasting
policies whose objective was not stabilizing inflation in the short run. This monetary policy
approach has been dubbed constrained discretion. We introduce this three-regime structure
so as to give the model enough flexibility to explain both the long-lasting passive monetary
policy of the 1970s as well as the recurrent and short-lasting passive policies of post-1970s.
    The probabilities 11 , 12 , 22 govern the evolution of monetary policy when the central

                                                   10
bank follows constrained discretion. The larger 12 is vis-a-vis to 11 , the more frequent the
short-lasting deviations are. The larger 22 is, the more persistent the short-lasting deviations
are. The probability 13 controls how likely it is that constrained discretion is abandoned
in favor of a prolonged deviation from the active regime. The ratio 12  (1 − 11 ) captures
the relative probability of a short-lasting deviation conditional on having deviated to passive
regimes and can be interpreted as a measure of central bank’s reputation. This is because this
composite parameter controls how likely it is that the central bank will abandon constrained
discretion the moment it starts deviating from the active regime. When 12  (1 − 11 ) is close
to unity, agents expect that the central bank will refrain from engaging in 1970s-style long-
lasting passive policies that - as we shall show - are invariably associated with heightened
inflation instability. As it will become clear later on, central bank reputation has deep
implications for the general equilibrium properties of the macroeconomy. Therefore, the
parameters of the transition matrix do not only aﬀect the frequency with which the diﬀerent
regimes are observed, but also the law of motion of the economy across the diﬀerent regimes.
This is because agents are fully rational and form expectations taking into account the
possibility of regime changes, implying that their beliefs matter for the way shocks propagate
through the economy. Therefore, the proposed definition of central bank reputation has the
important advantage of being measurable, even over a relatively short period of time.


2.2       Communication Strategies
In the model, regime changes do not aﬀect the steady state, but only the way the economy
propagates around it. We then log-linearize the model around the steady-state equilibrium.
We then obtain:5

                  = E (+1 |F ) −  −1 [ − E ( +1 |F )] +                            (8)
                   = E ( +1 |F ) +  ( −  ) +                                       (9)
                                    ³           ´h                           i
                  =  −1 + 1 −     +  ( −  ) +       (10)
                  =  −1 +                                                        (11)
                  =  −1 +                                                        (12)
                 =  −1 +                                                        (13)

where lowercase variables denote log-deviations of uppercase variables from their steady
                                     (1−)++
state equilibrium and  ≡ (1−)(1−)   1−+
                                                 is the slope of the Phillips curve. The model
can then be solved under diﬀerent assumptions on what the central bank communicates to
  5
      Following Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) we rescale the preference process  .


                                                      11
agents about the future monetary policy course. Central bank communication aﬀects agents’
information set F . We consider two cases: no transparency and transparency.
     If the central bank is not transparent, it never announces the duration of passive policies.
We call this approach no transparency. We make a minimal departure from the assumption
of perfect information assuming that agents can observe the history of all the endogenous
variables, the history of the structural shocks as well as the history of the volatility regimes
  but not the policy regimes   . It should be noted that agents are always able to infer if
monetary policy is currently active or passive. However, when monetary policy is passive,
agents cannot immediately figure out whether the short-lasting Regime 2 or the long-lasting
Regime 3 is in place. To see why, recall that the two passive regimes are observationally
equivalent to agents, given that  and  are the same across the two regimes. Therefore,
agents conduct Bayesian learning in order to infer which one of the two regimes is in place.
In the next section we will discuss how agents’ beliefs evolve as agents observe more and
more deviations from the active regime.6
     Under transparency all the information held by the central bank is communicated to
agents. We assume that the central bank knows for how long it will be deviating from active
monetary policy. Therefore, a transparent central bank announces the duration of passive
policies, revealing to agents exactly when monetary policy will switch back to the active
regime. It is important to emphasize that agents form their beliefs by taking into account
that the central bank will systematically announce the duration of passive policy. We assume
that central bank’s announcements are truthful and are believed as such by rational agents.
In Section 7, we will consider the case in which the central bank has much less information
about the duration of its policy course and can only announce the likely duration of the
passive policies; that is, the type of passive regime (i.e.,   ∈ {2 3}) that the central bank
will carry out. This case corresponds to a form of transparency in which the central bank
communicates only the likely duration rather than the actual duration of the passive policy.


3       Beliefs Dynamics and Model Solution
Diﬀerent communication strategies imply diﬀerent dynamics of beliefs and hence diﬀerent
solution methods. Let us first discuss how to solve the model in which the central bank is
    6
    It might be argued that the central bank could try to signal the kind of deviation perturbing the Taylor
rule parameters across the two rules. For example,  ( = 3) =  ( = 2) +  for  6= 0 and small.
However, the point of the paper is exactly to capture agents’ uncertainty about the duration of passive
policies. Therefore, the model would be extended to allow for a total of four passive regimes: a long-lasting
Regime 4 in which  =  ( = 2) and 44  22 and a short-lasting Regime 5 in which  =  ( = 3)
and 55  33 .



                                                     12
not transparent. Since agents know the history of endogenous variables and shocks, they can
exactly infer the policy mix that is in place at each point in time. However, while the active
regime is fully revealing, when the passive regime is prevailing, agents do not know whether
the central bank is engaging in a short-lasting deviation or a long-lasting one. Agents have to
learn the nature of the deviation in order to form expectations over the endogenous variables
of the economy.
    To solve the model under no transparency we use the methods developed in Bianchi
and Melosi (2014b). We briefly report the main features of this solution method so as to
make this paper self-contained. Denote the number of consecutive deviations from the active
regime at time  as   ∈ {0 1 }, where   = 0 means that monetary policy is active at time
. Conditional on having observed   ≥ 1 consecutive deviations from the active regime at
time , agents believe that the central bank will keep deviating in the next period  + 1 with
the following probability:7

                                                  22 (12 13 ) (22 33 )  −1 + 33
                     { +1   6= 0|  =
                                           6 0} =                                                      (14)
                                                     (12 13 ) (22 33 )  −1 + 1

    Equation (14) makes it clear that  { +1 6= 0|  6= 0} =  { +1 6= 0|F } as   is a
suﬃcient statistic for the probability of being in the passive regime next period. Furthermore,
this equation captures the dynamics of agents’ beliefs about observing yet another period of
passive policy in the next period, which is the key state variable we use to solve the model
under no transparency. It should be observed that this equation has a number of properties
that are quite insightful to the key mechanism of the model at hand. It is useful to observe
that the probability of observing yet another period of passive policy in the next period is
a weighted average of the probabilities 22 and 33 with weights that vary with the number
of consecutive periods of passive policy   . When agents observe the central bank deviating
from the active regime for the first time (  = 1), the weights for the probabilities 22 and
33 are 12  (1 − 11 ) and 13  (1 − 11 ), respectively. These weights can be interpreted as
agents’ priors about which passive regime is in place when the first deviation is observed.
As more and more periods of passive policy are observed (  ↑), the weight assigned to
the short-lasting passive Regime 2 monotonically decreases due to the fact that 33  22 .
Consequently, as the first period of passive policy is observed, agents’ beliefs about observing
a passive policy in the next period are at their lower bound. Furthermore, as the central
bank keeps on deviating, agents get increasingly convinced that the economy has entered a
long-lasting deviation, given that under this policy regime long deviations are more likely.
   7
     This result can be derived by applying the Bayes’ theorem and then combining the resulting probabilities
with the transition matrix . The proof is straightforward and is shown in Bianchi and Melosi (2014b).


                                                      13
    Importantly, how low is the lower bound for the probability of observing yet another
period of passive policy will depend on the level of the central bank’s reputation. High
reputation makes the weight 12  (1 − 11 ) close to one, implying that the probability of
observing a second consecutive period of passive policy will be very close to 22 , the value
associated with a short lasting deviation. When reputation is high, it is very unlikely that the
central bank engages in a long-lasting passive policy. Therefore, as the first period of passive
policy is observed, agents are quite confident to have entered the short-lasting passive regime
(Regime 2). If the central bank keeps deviating from the active regime, agents will eventually
become convinced of being in the long-lasting passive regime (Regime 3) regardless of the
level of the central bank’s reputation, 12  (1 − 11 ).8 After a suﬃciently long-lasting passive
policy, the probability of observing an additional deviation in the next period degenerates to
the persistence of the long-lasting Regime 3. Formally: lim  { +1 6= 0|  6= 0} = 33 .
                                                                 →∞
Hence, 33 is the upper bound for the probability that agents attach to staying in the passive
regime next period. It follows that rational agents cannot get more convinced to observe yet
another passive policy in the next period than when they are sure to be in the long-lasting
Regime 3. More formally, for each   0, there exists an integer  ∗ such that:

                                   33 −  { +1 6= 0|  =  ∗ }                                   (15)

with the important result that for any     ∗ , agents’ beliefs can be eﬀectively approximated
using the properties of the long-lasting passive regime (Regime 3).
    Endowed with these results, we can solve the model under no transparency by expanding
the number of regimes in order to take into account the evolution of agents’ beliefs. Now each
regime is characterized by central bank’s behavior and the number of observed consecutive
deviations from the active policy at any time    ∈ {0 1   ∗ }  The mapping to the
parameter values of the policy rule is as follows:
                                                             "      ¡   ¢                    #
            ¡                                          ¢                  , if  = 0
              (  = )   (  = )   (  = ) =        ¡   ¢                                  (16)
                                                                       , if 1 ≤    ∗

The transition matrix for this new set of regimes   ∈ {0 1   ∗ } can be derived by equation
(14) as shown in Appendix A.
   Endowed with these results regarding the dynamics of agents’ beliefs, one can recast the
   8
    We abstract from the extreme case in which the central bank’s reputation is such that 12  (1 − 11 ) = 1.
In this case, agents’ beliefs will not evolve at all as the central bank deviates Another limit case is when
the central bank’s reputation is at its lowest; that is, 12  (1 − 11 ) = 0. In this case, agents know that any
passive policy is surely of the long-lasting type and do not update their beliefs during the implementation
of the passive policy. We do not consider these two extreme cases in this paper.


                                                       14
Markov-switching DSGE model under no transparency and learning as a Markov-switching
Rational Expectations model. Now regimes are defined in terms of the observed consecutive
duration of the passive regimes,   , which, unlike the primitive set of policy regime   ∈
{1 2 3}, belongs to the agents’ information set F . This result allows us to solve this model
by applying any of the methods developed to solve Markov-switching rational expectations
models, such as Davig and Leeper (2007), Farmer, Waggoner, and Zha (2009), and Foerster,
Rubio-Ramirez, Waggoner, and Zha (2011). We use Farmer, Waggoner, and Zha (2009) to
solve the model with learning once the policy regimes are redefined as described above.
    It is worth emphasizing that this way of recasting the learning process allows us to
tractably model the behavior of agents that know that they do not know. In other words,
agents are aware of the fact that their beliefs will change in the future according to what they
observe in the economy. This represents a substantial diﬀerence with the anticipated utility
approach, in which agents form expectations without taking into account that their beliefs
about the economy will change over time. Furthermore, our approach diﬀers from the one
traditionally used in the learning literature in which agents form expectations according to a
reduced form law of motion that is updated recursively (for example, using discounted least
squares regressions). The advantage of adaptive learning is the extreme flexibility given that,
at least in principle, no restrictions need to be imposed on the type of parameter instability
characterizing the model. However, such flexibility does not come without a cost, given that
agents are not really aware of the model they live in, but only of the implied law of motion.
Instead, in this paper, agents fully understand the model and they are aware of the trade-oﬀs
that characterize it. However, they are uncertain about the central bank’ future behavior,
and this uncertainty has important consequences for the law of motion of the economy.
    When the central bank is transparent, the exact duration of every deviation from active
policy is truthfully announced. In this model the number of announced deviations from
the active policy yet to be carried out   is a suﬃcient statistic that captures the dynamics
of beliefs. Hence, we redefine the set of policy regimes in terms of this variable with the
following mapping to the parameter values of the policy rule:
                                                              "      ¡   ¢                     #
           ¡                                             ¢                 , if  = 0
             (  = )   (  = )   (  = ) =       ¡   ¢                                (17)
                                                                        , if 1 ≤    ∗

where  ∗ is a large number at which we truncate the redefined set of regimes.9 The regimes
                                                                                  e = [e
  ∈ {0 1   ∗ } governed by the ( ∗ + 1)×( ∗ + 1) transition matrix P     10  e20
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                            ] , where
e1 is a 1×( ∗ + 1) vector whose − element e () is 11 if  = 1 and 12 −2               −2
                                                                                     22 21 +13 33 31
   9
    Since 33  1, it can be easily show that the higher the truncation regime  ∗ , the lower the probability
that the realized duration is larger than  ∗ , the lower the approximation error.


                                                      15
(the probability that the realized passive policy will last exactly  − 1 consecutive periods)
                                                                            £             ¤
for any 2 ≤  ≤  ∗ + 1. The  ∗ × ( ∗ + 1) matrix e2 is defined as I ∗  0 ∗ ×1 , where I ∗ is
a  ∗ ×  ∗ identity matrix and 0 ∗ ×1 is  ∗ × 1 column vector of zeros. Note that regimes are
ordered from the smallest number of deviations (zero, the active policy) to the largest one
( ∗ ).
      Similarly to the case of no transparency, we have recasted the Markov-switching DSGE
model under transparency as a Markov-switching Rational Expectations model, in which
the regimes are redefined in terms of the number of announced deviations from the active
regimes yet to be carried out,   , which, unlike the policy regime   , belongs to the agents’
information set F . This result allows us to solve the model under transparency by applying
any of the methods developed to solve Markov-switching rational expectations models.


4        Empirical Analysis
In order to put discipline on the parameter values, the model under the assumption of no
transparency is fitted to US data. We believe that the model with a non-transparent central
bank is the better suited to capture the Federal Reserve communication strategy in our
sample that ranges from mid-1950s to prior the great recession. We then use the results to
quantify the Federal Reserve reputation and the potential gains from making the Federal
Reserve more transparent.
    This section is organized as follows. Section 4.1 briefly deals with the Bayesian estimation
of the model. In Section 4.2 we show the evolution of agents’ beliefs about future monetary
policy, which is key to understand the welfare implications of transparency.


4.1        Data and Estimation
For observables, we use three series of U.S. quarterly data: the (HP filtered) real GDP
per capita, the annualized quarterly inflation (GDP deflator), and the Federal Funds Rate
(FFR). The sample spans from 1954:III to 2008:I. Table 1 reports the prior and the posterior
distribution of model parameters.10 To keep the dimensionality of the state space tractable,
we measure the output gap using the HP-filtered GDP. For a detailed discussion of the
estimation strategy see Bianchi (2013b). We shut down the process for the technology  as
its parameters cannot be identified. The parameter ∗ denotes the steady-state equilibrium
real interest rate. The parameter   is the standard deviation of the measurement error
associated with inflation.
  10
       The convergence statistics of the Gibbs sampler are reported in Appendix B.



                                                     16
                                              Posterior                       Prior
                    Name           Mode     Mean     5%        95%     Type   Mean      Std.
                       
                                  16033   16332   12896   20583           18      03
                       
                                  02450   02763   00934   06042          025     015
                       
                                  06253   06899   05384   08916           07     015
                       
                                  07456   07587   04926   10537           08      03
                       
                                  03706   04194   02056   06867          025     015
                       
                                  08725   08549   07269   09107           07     015
                       11         07887   07825   06254   09251          085      01
                    22 33       09132   08326   06529   09438          075      01
                       33         09538   09401   08862   09779           09     005
                12  (1 − 11 )   09186   08773   07738   09595           09     005
                      −1          45927   46988   30468   67451            3        1
                                  00185   00173   00079   00290           03      02
                                 08335   08312   07862   08755           08      01
                                 09462   09288   08909   09617           07     015
                   100 · ∗       04230   04359   03404   05330           06      03
                      100         05151   05142   04693   05582           05    0025
                    100         03029   03228   02613   03973         031      04
                    100         02942   03128   02364   03971         038      04
                    100         13700   22249   11936   37360           1       08
                    100         00714   00771   00654   00908         031      04
                    100         01349   01420   01127   01757         038      04
                    100         04798   07567   04383   12573           1       08
                                 09086   08856   07951   09515       08333   01034
                                 09646   09545   09198   09796       08333   01034
                     100         02772   02741   02369   03131         015      03

Table 1: Posterior modes, means, and 90% error bands of the model parameters. Type N, G,
B, IG stand for Normal, Gamma, Beta, Inversed Gamma density, respectively. Dir stands
for the Dirichelet distribution


    At the posterior mode, the passive policy implies a higher output-gap coeﬃcient  than
that implied by the active policy. The probability of being in the short-lasting passive regime
conditional on having switched to passive policies, 12  (1 − 11 ), plays a critical rule in the
model. As noticed in Section 2, this parameter value relates to the strength of the Federal
Reserve reputation to refrain from long-lasting deviations. This parameter is found to be
fairly close to one, confirming that the Federal Reserve has strong reputation. This number
means that as agents observe a deviation from the active regime, they expect that the Federal
Reserve is conducting a short-lasting passive policy with probability 092.
    Figure 1 shows the estimated probabilities of the active policy regime (upper panel)11 and
the estimated probabilities of the high volatility regimes (lower panel). In line with previous
studies, it emerges that the 1970s and the early 1980s were periods of high volatility. While
  11
    As discussed in Section 3, we estimate the model after we have redefined the set of regimes as the
number of consecutive deviations from the active policy   . Therefore, we cannot tease out the evolution of
the probability of the short-lasting passive regime and the long-lasting passive regime.


                                                       17
                                     Probability Active Monetary Policy


  0.8

  0.6

  0.4

  0.2

    0
    1955     1960   1965     1970    1975       1980      1985       1990   1995   2000   2005

                                     Probability High Volatility Regime
      1

  0.8

  0.6

  0.4

  0.2

    0
    1955     1960   1965     1970    1975       1980      1985       1990   1995   2000   2005


Figure 1: Estimated probability of the active monetary policy regime and the high volatility
regime.


the 1970s were characterized by a fairly long-lasting passive policy, the Federal Reserve has
alternated periods of active policy to periods of rather short-lasting passive policy in the
post-1970s. The most recent approach to monetary policy closely resembles the idea of
constrained discretion discussed by Bernanke (2003); that is, a monetary policy approach
whose main objective is to stabilize inflation through active policies but the central bank
may sometimes de-emphasize inflation stabilization for rather short periods of time.


4.2       Beliefs Dynamics
Monetary policy decisions on stabilizing inflation and communication strategies critically
aﬀect the social welfare and the macroeconomic equilibrium by influencing agents’ pessimism
about future monetary policy. In this paper, we will use the word pessimism to precisely
mean agents’ expectations about the duration of an observed passive policy. A high level
of pessimism means that agents expect an observed passive policy to last for relatively
long; that is, close to the expected duration of the long-lasting passive Regime (1 − 33 )−1 .
While expecting a longer lasting deviation from the active regime is not necessarily welfare
decreasing, we will show that expecting a prolonged period of passive policy impairs social
welfare in the estimated model.
   We measure pessimism by computing the expected number of consecutive periods of


                                                18
                                   No Transparency                                   Transparency
                        22                                         100

                                                                    90
                        20
                                                                    80
                        18
                                                                    70
                        16
                                                                    60
            Pessimism




                        14                                          50


                        12                                          40

                                                                    30
                        10
                                                                    20
                        8
                                                                    10

                        6
                         0     20      40     60     80      100             20      40     60      80     100
                          Consecutive Periods of Passive Policy          Consecutive Period of Passive Policy



Figure 2: Pessimism on the vertical axis is measured as the number of expected consecutive
deviations ahead. On the left plot the two horizontal lines denote the smallest lower bound
(1 − 22 )−1 and upper bound of pessimism (1 − 33 )−1 . These statistics are computed at the
posterior mode.


passive monetary policy. Let us assume that the central bank decides to engage in passive
policies lasting one hundred consecutive periods. While a policy of such a long duration is
clearly quite implausible for the U.S., this example is illustrative of how transparency aﬀects
pessimism relative to no transparency. Figure 2 reports the evolution of pessimism under no
transparency (left graph) and under transparency (right graph) at the posterior mode.12 The
two horizontal lines mark the smallest lower bound and upper bound for pessimism. The
former is given by the expected duration of the short-lasting passive Regime (1 − 22 )−1 . The
smallest lower bound is attained at the first period of passive policy only if the conditional
probability of a long lasting deviation is zero: 12  (1 − 11 ) = 1. The left graph shows that
the intercept of the solid line is quite close to the bottom dashed line, implying that agents’s
  12
    Under no transparency, the pessimism after having observed   consecutive deviations from the active
policy is computed as follows:
                                                         1                                   1
                                   {  = 2|  }       + [1 −  {  = 2|  }]
                                                     1 − 22                              1 − 33
                                           ¡                           ¢
where  {  = 2|  } = 12 22 −1  12 22 −1 + 13 33 −1 is the probability of being in Regime 2 conditional
on having observed   consecutive periods of passive regime.


                                                              19
mostly expect that the Federal Reserve is engaging in a short-lasting deviation as the first
period of passive policy is observed. This result is due to the fact that the Federal Reserve’s
reputation is estimated to be fairly high (12  (1 − 11 ) = 092).
    The upper bound for pessimism is given by the expected duration of the long-lasting
passive policy (1 − 33 )−1 and is attained only after a very large number of consecutive
deviations from the active regime. Such a gradual increase in pessimism suggests that the
Federal Reserve can enjoy a great deal of leeway in deviating from active monetary policy in
order to stabilize alternative short-lasting objectives. This result is again due to the strong
reputation of the Federal Reserve. If the reputation coeﬃcient 12  (1 − 11 ) were close to
zero, then the expected number of consecutive deviations would experience a larger jump
and, hence, the convergence to the upper bound would be much faster than what shown in
Figure 2.
    As shown in the right graph, pessimism follows an inverse path under transparency.
Unlike the case of no transparency, agents’ pessimism is very high at the initial stage of the
deviation from the passive policy but it decreases as the time goes by. This result comes
from assuming that agents are fully rational and the announcement is truthful. As the
one hundred periods of passive monetary policy are announced ( = 0), an immediate rise in
pessimism occurs. As the number of periods of passive policy yet to be carried out decreases,
agents’ pessimism declines accordingly. At the end of the policy ( = 100), pessimism reaches
its lowest level, with agents expecting to return to the active regime with probability one
in the following period. It should be noted that at the end of the announced deviation
transparency allows the central bank to lower agents’ pessimism below the smallest lower
bound attainable under no transparency: This result emerges because the central bank is
able to inform agents about the exact period in which the passive policy will be terminated.
This assumption will be relaxed in Section 6.2.
    To sum up, Figure 2 allows us to isolate two important eﬀects of transparency on agents’
pessimism about future monetary policy: (i) transparency raises pessimism at the beginning
of the policy; (ii) transparency anchors down pessimism at the end of the policy. As we shall
show, these two eﬀects play a critical role for the welfare implications of transparency.


5    Welfare Implications of Transparency
In this section, we use the model to assess the welfare implications of introducing trans-
parency. Before proceeding, it is worth emphasizing that the regime changes considered in
this paper do not aﬀect the steady state, but only the way the economy fluctuates around the
steady state. The period welfare function can then be obtained by taking a log-quadratic

                                              20
approximation of the representative household’s utility function around the deterministic
steady state:13
                                ∙                                ∙          ¸                           ¸
                         P∞                                           +
W ( ()    ; )                                    
                 = − =1  ()  ( + | ()    ) +  +                                   
                                                                               (+ | ()    ) 
                                                                      1−
                                                                                                 (18)
                           £         ¤
                                 + −1
where  ∈ {  },  ≡   + 1−        ,  (·) stands for the stochastic variance associated
with agents’ forecasts of inflation, and the output gap at horizon , and ,  is the vector of
model parameter. The subscript  refers to the communication strategy:  =  stands for
the case of no transparency, while  =  denotes transparency. Finally,  () denotes the
policy regime:  ( = ) =   and  ( =  ) =   . Recall from Section 3, the policy regime
 is the observed duration of passive policy for the case of no transparency and the number
of periods of announced passive policy yet to be carried out in the case of transparency. The
steady-state demand elasticity  = (1 + ) , the Frisch labor supply elasticity parameter
, and the capital labor share  are not identifiable. We set this parameter equal to 6, which
Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) argue to deliver plausible markups for the U.S. economy.
Following Rios-Rull, Schorfheide, Fuentes-Albero, Kryshko, and Santaeulalia-Llopis (2012)
we calibrate the (inverse) Frisch labor supply elasticity parameter  to 05. The capital
income share  is set equal to 03.
    The output gap enters the welfare function because it reflects the diﬀerence between
the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor, which is a measure
of the economy’s aggregate ineﬃciency (Woodford, 2003, Steinsson (2003), and Gali, 2008).
Inflation deviations from its steady-state level reduce welfare by raising price dispersion. The
elasticity of substitution between two diﬀerentiated goods  raises the weight of inflation
fluctuations relative to the output gap because it amplifies the welfare losses associated with
any given price dispersion. Nominal rigidities, whose size is inversely related to the slope of
the New Keynesian Phillips curve , raise the degree of price dispersion resulting from any
given deviation from the steady-state inflation rate.
    Equation (18) makes it explicit that social welfare depends on agents’ uncertainty about
future inflation and the future output gap. It should be noted that agents’ uncertainty
in any given period captures the macroeconomic risk associated with the observed policy
regime and communication strategy,  (). Unlike standard New Keynesian models with
fixed parameters where welfare is merely a function of the unconditional variance of inflation
and the output gap, our model allows to study the dynamic eﬀects of policy actions and
  13
    The derivation closely follows Woodford (2003), Gali (2008), Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Wieland
(2012). Furthermore, we assume that the ineﬃciency generated by the market power are removed by the
suitable choice of subsidies so that the steady-state equilibrium is eﬃcient. A detailed derivation of the
welfare function is in Appendix C.


                                                   21
forward-looking communication on welfare. Furthermore, the learning mechanism plays an
important role in our welfare analysis by linking the concept of reputation, which can be
directly measured in the data, to the central bank’s ability of controlling the dynamics of
the macroeconomic risk associated with policy actions. This last point will be the focus of
the next session.
    To assess the desirability of transparency, we compute the model predicted welfare
gains/losses from transparency as follows:

               ∆W () =∗ (     )0 · W (     ; ) − ∗ (     )0 · W (     ; )   (19)

where ∗ (     ) stands for the vector of the ergodic joint probabilities of a passive pol-
icy of announced duration   and volatility regime   . ∗ (     ) stands for the vector of
ergodic joint probabilities of a passive policy of observed duration   and volatility regime
  are realized. It is important to emphasize that welfare gains from transparency are not
conditioned on a particular shock or policy path. Instead, the welfare gain is measured by
the unconditional long-run change in welfare that arises if the central bank systematically
announces the duration of any deviation from active monetary policy.
     Uncertainty about the future output gap plays only a minor role for social welfare since
the estimated value of the slope of the Phillips curve  is very small (see Table 1) and
standard calibrations for the elasticity of substitution  range from 6 to 10. Such a flat
Phillips curve is a standard finding when DSGE models are estimated using U.S. data.
Therefore, welfare turns out to be tightly related to agents’ uncertainty about future inflation,
which, as we shall show, depends on the time-varying level of pessimism about observing
a future switch to active monetary policy. If the central bank has lower reputation, agents
take into account that long-lasting deviations from the active regime are more frequent
and potentially more persistent. Consequently, agents expect more drastic inflationary or
deflationary consequences from future shocks and thereby they become more uncertain about
future inflation as the central bank engages in passive policies. As a result, social welfare
deteriorates faster than in the case of strong reputation. As shown in Section 4.2, the
level of pessimism responds to central bank behavior, namely the frequency and duration of
deviations from active policy and the communication strategy.
     Section 5.1 outlines how uncertainty evolves as the central bank conducts passive policies
of diﬀerent duration and under diﬀerent communication strategies. In Section 5.2, we use
the model to assess the welfare implications of increasing central bank transparency.




                                                            22
5.1     Evolution of Uncertainty
We have shown that agents’ uncertainty about future inflation crucially aﬀects social welfare
in the estimated model. In this section, we will show how uncertainty is tightly linked to
agents’ pessimism about observing active monetary policy in the future. As shown in Section
4.2, transparency has two eﬀects on pessimism: (i) pessimism rises at the beginning of the
policy (henceforth, the short-run eﬀect of transparency on pessimism); (ii) pessimism is
anchored down at the end of the policy (henceforth, the anchoring eﬀect of transparency on
pessimism). As we shall show, these two eﬀects play a critical role for the welfare implications
of enhancing the transparency of the central bank.
    To illustrate how uncertainty responds to pessimism, we consider the case in which the
Federal Reserve conducts a forty-quarter-long deviation from active monetary policy.14 Fig-
ure 3 illustrates the evolution of uncertainty about inflation at diﬀerent horizons under no
transparency, left panel, and under transparency, right panel. At each point in time, the
evolution of agents’ uncertainty is measured by the -period ahead standard deviation of
inflation at diﬀerent horizons re-scaled by the standard deviation conditional on monetary
policy being currently active and given the communication strategy:
                                          hp                              p                               i
           (+ |     ) = 100      ( + | ()    ) −  ( + | () = 0   )

where  ∈ {  } and   ∈ { }.15 We analytically compute the conditional standard
deviations taking into account regime uncertainty using the methods described in Bianchi
(2013a).
    It should be noted that the normalizing factor  ( + | () = 0   ) is not the same
across communication strategies  ∈ {  }, implying that the left and right panels are not
directly comparable. This is because transparency determines an overall reduction in un-
certainty that manifests itself also under the active regime, even if under the active regime
no announcement is made. A transparent central bank enjoys lower uncertainty even when
monetary policy is active because agents understand that should a passive policy of any
durations be implemented in the future, the central bank will announce its duration before-
  14
     The analysis is conducted for an economy at the steady-state and hence without conditioning on a
particular shock. The exercise is only conditioned on the policy path and intends to facilitate the exposition
of the welfare implications of transparency in the next section.
  15
     The graphs plot the results for  from 1 to 60: At horizon  = 0, uncertainty is zero as agents observe
current inflation. We rescale the uncertainty using the volatility conditional on being in the active regime
at horizon  = 0 so as to purge the eﬀect of heteroskedasticity on agents’ uncertainty from the graph. In
the interest of space, we report only the dynamics of uncertainty conditional on being in the low volatility
regime while the passive policy is carried out. The dynamics of uncertainty conditional on being in the high
volatility regime follows a very similar pattern and is available upon request.



                                                           23
                                                    No Transparency                                 Transparency




                                   0.06                                            0.06
     Uncertainty about Inflation




                                   0.04                                            0.04


                                   0.02                                            0.02


                                     0                                               0



                                    60                                              60
                                                                              40                                             40
                                          40                                              40
                                                                         30                                             30
                                               20                  20                          20                  20
                                                              10                                            10
                                     Horizon                          Time           Horizon                       Time


Figure 3: Evolution of uncertainty about inflation at diﬀerent horizons () over forty periods
of passive policy (time) under low volatility (i.e.,   = ). The vertical axis reports the
standard deviations (rescaled for the standard deviation associated with currently being in
the active regime) in percentage points at the posterior mode.


hand. As it will soon become clear, such a communication strategy is eﬀective in reducing
uncertainty by removing the fear of a long lasting deviation for the frequent short lasting
deviations and creating an anchoring eﬀect for the sporadic long lasting deviations. However,
Figure 3 is illustrative of the dynamics of uncertainty about future inflation as a prolonged
passive policy is carried out. When we will compute the welfare implications of transparency,
we will not normalize our measure of uncertainty.
    As shown in the left graph, when the central bank does not announce its policy course
beforehand, uncertainty about future inflation is relatively low at the beginning of the policy
because agents interpret the first deviations from active policy as short lasting. This result
is driven by the high reputation of the Federal Reserve, implying that agents attach 92%
probability of being in the short-lasting passive regime as the first period deviation from
active policy is observed. As more and more periods of passive policy are observed, agents
get progressively more persuaded that the observed deviation may have a long-lasting na-
ture and uncertainty about future inflation gradually takes oﬀ. Uncertainty rises because
expecting a longer spell of passive policies raises concerns about the central bank’s ability of

                                                                              24
controlling the inflationary consequences of future unanticipated shocks. Note that the in-
crease in uncertainty occurs at every horizon because agents expect passive monetary policy
to prevail for many periods ahead and thereby anticipate that the inflationary/deflationary
consequences of future shocks will be more severe. It is worth emphasizing that the pat-
tern of agents’ uncertainty over time mimics the evolution of pessimism depicted in Figure
2. Summarizing, under no transparency, following a prolonged deviation from the active
regime uncertainty starts low and then gradually accelerates. Since higher uncertainty maps
into higher welfare loss, the progressive disanchoring of uncertainty about future inflation is
a reason of concern for a non-transparent central bank.
    The right graph illustrates the dynamics of uncertainty about future inflation in the case
of transparency. Upon announcement agents become suddenly more uncertain about future
inflation because of the short-run eﬀect of transparency on pessimism. This is captured
by the pronounced hump-shaped dynamics of short- and medium-horizon uncertainty. The
announcement commits the central bank to follow a passive policy for the next forty periods,
causing agents to expect more dramatic inflationary/deflationary consequences from all those
disturbances that will materialize during the implementation of the announced policy path.
The rise in uncertainty upon the announcement is clearly welfare decreasing and captures the
main reason why the central bank may be reluctant to explicitly communicate their future
policy course.
    Compared to the case of no transparency, short-horizon uncertainty is larger at the
beginning of the policy. However, at this early stage of the passive policy, uncertainty about
forty-quarter-ahead inflation appears to be smaller in the case of transparency. This result
is due to the anchoring eﬀect of transparency on pessimism. While agents know monetary
policy will be passive for forty quarters, they also know there will be a switch to the active
regime thereafter. Announcing the timing of the return to active monetary policy determines
a fall in uncertainty in correspondence of the horizons that coincide with announced date
(40 quarters in this numerical example). In the graph, such a decline in uncertainty shows
up as a valley in the surface representing the level of uncertainty. As we shall show, this
feature of transparency has the eﬀect of raising social welfare by systematically anchoring
agents’ uncertainty at the end of prolonged deviations from the active regime.
    While under no transparency uncertainty increases across all horizons as the policy is
implemented, under transparency uncertainty decreases across all horizons because agents
are aware that the end of the prolonged period of passive monetary policy is approaching.
This depends on the anchoring eﬀect of transparency on pessimism. Furthermore, announc-
ing the duration of passive policies triggers a fall in uncertainty at every horizon because it
eliminates policy uncertainty for the duration of the announced policy. Even though this


                                              25
eﬀect is not easy to observe in Figure 3, this is certainly an additional welfare-increasing
eﬀect. Finally, under the active regime uncertainty about future inflation is found to be
lower at every horizon under transparency. This result tends to raise the social welfare asso-
ciated with transparency. Note that this finding does not hold for all parameter values and
hence is due to the estimated parameters for the U.S. In the next section, we will show that
this last fact plays a critical role for the welfare comparison between transparency and no
transparency.
    For the sake of brevity, we do not discuss the evolution of uncertainty about the output
gap. As mentioned before, since the estimated value of the slope of the Phillips curve 
is very small when compared to the elasticity of substitution between goods , uncertainty
about future output plays a negligible role in our welfare analysis.
    It is also important to point out that the variance about future inflation conditional on
monetary policy to be current active is lower under transparency than that under no trans-
parency at all horizons. In symbols,  (+ |  = 0   )   (+ |  = 0   ) This
point is important and will be deserve more attention in the next sections.


5.2     Welfare Gains from Transparency
This section derives the welfare gains from enhancing central bank transparency in our model
estimated to the U.S. economy. In Section 5.2.1, we conduct a numerical exercise to illustrate
the dynamics of the welfare gains/losses from transparency during the implementation of a
passive policy. In Section 5.2.2, we compute and discuss the model predicted welfare gains
from transparency.

5.2.1    A Numerical Example

For the sake of illustrating the dynamics of welfare, let us consider a passive policy of duration
40 quarters.16 Figure 4 shows the dynamics of welfare W ( ()    ; ), defined in equation
(18), over time as this policy is implemented under the two communication schemes: no
transparency  =  and transparency  =  . We make this computation conditional on
being in the high volatility regime (left graph) and in the low volatility regime (right graph)
at time . It should be observed that under the high volatility regime the welfare under
transparency (red solid line) is lower than the welfare under no transparency (blue dashed
line) at an early stage of the passive policy. Under the low volatility regime the welfare
associated with transparency is always higher than that associated with no transparency
  16
     This is a numerical example and is made for the sake of illustrating the evolution of welfare. We pick a
fairly prolonged deviation from the active regime so as to make these dynamics more visible in the graphs.
Such a long-lasting passive policy has a low probability of occuring based on our estimates.

                                                     26
                               High Volatility                                   Low Volatility

                          No Transparency                            −441
                   −474
                          Transparency
                                                                     −442
                   −476                                              −443

                                                                     −444
                   −478
                                                                     −445
         Welfare




                                                           Welfare
                   −480                                              −446

                                                                     −447
                   −482
                                                                     −448

                   −484                                              −449

                                                                     −450
                   −486
                                                                     −451
                          10        20           30   40                    10        20          30   40
                                   Time                                              Time


Figure 4: Evolution of welfare W ( ()    ; ) defined in equation (18) as a passive policy
of duration 40 quarters is implemented under no transparency ( = ), the blue dashed
line, and under transparency ( =  ), the red solid line. Parameter values are set at their
posterior mode.


at any time. However, larger gains from transparency, measured by the vertical distance
between the two lines, are reaped at the end of the passive policy. As discussed earlier,
when the announcement is made, agents become suddenly more pessimistic and hence being
transparent lowers welfare compared to no transparency at the beginning of the policy.
    However, transparency lowers pessimism as the passive policy is implemented because
agents expect less and less periods of passive policy ahead. Therefore, welfare generally
increases as the passive policy is implemented. In contrast welfare is downward sloping
under no transparency. When the central bank does not communicate the duration of passive
policies, agents’ pessimism gradually unfold, progressively lowering welfare.

5.2.2   Model Predicted Welfare Gains from Transparency

To assess the welfare gains from transparency we use formula (19), which combines the
welfare associated with the augmented policy regimes (  for the case of no transparency and
  for the case of transparency) and their ergodic probabilities. To facilitate the comparison,
we redefine the regimes under transparency   in terms of observed periods of passive policy


                                                      27
                                                  High Volatility                                                       Low Volatility




       perc of ss consumption




                                                                             perc of ss consumption
                                  10                                                                    10


         from transparency




                                                                               from transparency
            Welfare gains




                                                                                  Welfare gains
                                   9                                                                     9

                                   8                                                                     8

                                   7                                                                     7

                                    0      20       40        60                                          0      20       40        60
                                     Observed Periods of Passive Policy                                    Observed Periods of Passive Policy

                                                                                                       0.25
                                 0.08                                                                   0.2
                 Ergodic Prob.




                                                                                       Ergodic Prob.
                                 0.06                                                                  0.15
                                 0.04                                                                   0.1

                                 0.02                                                                  0.05

                                   0                                                                     0
                                              20       40       60                                                  20       40       60
                                        Observed Periods of Passive Policy                                    Observed Periods of Passive Policy



Figure 5: The upper graphs report the dynamics of the welfare gains from transparency as a
function of the observed periods of passive policy (  ). The lower graph reports the ergodic
probability of observing the periods of passive policy on the x-axis (  ). Parameter values
are set at their posterior mode.


  and recompute welfare under transparency associated with these new set of regimes as
shown in Appendix D.
    The upper panels of Figure 5 shows the welfare gains from being transparent associated
with having observed passive policy for   periods. Once again, we consider the case in which
the economy is initially under the high and low volatility regimes. The lower panels report
the ergodic probabilities associated with these events. It should be observed that the welfare
gains from transparency grow fast for passive policies of short duration and then slow down as
their duration increases. This negative second-order derivative is explained by the fact that
announcing deviations of longer and longer durations progressively strengthens the short-run
eﬀect of transparency on pessimism which raises the risk of macroeconomic instability, as
shown in Figure 3. In fact, for extremely long-lasting passive policy welfare gains from trans-
parency start declining. However, the lower graphs show that such long-lasting deviations
have virtually zero probability to occur in the US economy and hence do not significantly
influence the computation of the model predicted welfare gains from transparency based on
equation (19). It should be observed that welfare gains from transparency are positive for
all the durations of passive policies reported on the x-axis under both low volatility and

                                                                         28
high volatility. This result implies that the anchoring eﬀects due to transparency dominate
its short-run eﬀects. In other words, transparency is welfare improving because it allows
the central bank to eﬀectively sweep away the fear of a return to the 1970s-type of passive
policies.
    Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that the upper plots capture the welfare gains from
systematically announcing the duration of passive policies. This explains why when the
central bank conducts an active policy (  = 0), the welfare gains from transparency are not
zero. They are, in fact, positive capturing the welfare gains from expecting that the central
bank will systematically and truthfully announce the duration of any future passive policy.
This result is the mirror image of what discussed in the previous section: Transparency
implies that under the active regime uncertainty is lower at every horizon because agents
anticipate the future conduct of monetary policy.
    The overall welfare gain is obtained combining the welfare gains conditional on having
observed a specific number of deviations, with their corresponding ergodic probabilities.
The plausible durations of passive policies in the U.S. are shown in the lower graphs, which
report the ergodic probabilities of observing a policy regime of a given duration conditional
on currently being in the high volatility regime and in the low volatility regime. Quite
interestingly, in the case of low volatility the ergodic probability appears to be less skewed
to the right than when the macroeconomic volatility is high. In both cases, the distribution
attributes large probability mass to active policies and fairly small probability mass of passive
policies of duration longer than twenty quarters.
    To sum up, Figure 5 shows that welfare gains from transparency are positive for passive
policies of plausible durations for the U.S. under both volatility regimes, implying that the
model predicted welfare gains from transparency computed in equation (19) are positive based
on our estimates. More precisely, the model’s predicted welfare gains from transparency
amount to roughly 6.63% of steady-state consumption for the U.S. economy.


6     Robustness and Extensions
In this section we conduct a robustness exercise and consider an extension of the bench-
mark communication strategy. In Section 6.1 we investigate whether transparency is welfare
increasing for passive policies of every plausible duration. In Section 6.2, we relax the as-
sumption that the central bank knows exactly the realized duration of the ongoing passive
policy and investigate whether transparency would still deliver welfare improvements. Specif-
ically, we study the eﬀects of a central bank that announces the likely duration of passive
policies revealing which type of passive regime is in place as opposed to announcing the exact

                                               29
                                  7.5




      perc of ss consumption
                                             High Volatility


        from transparency
                                             Low Volatility
           Welfare gains           7


                                  6.5



                                    0          5            10            15         20         25                    30         35         40
                                                                     Realized Duration of Passive Policy
                                                   High Volatility                                                  Low Volatility
                                                                                                    0.25
                                 0.08                                                                0.2
                 Ergodic Prob.




                                                                                    Ergodic Prob.
                                 0.06                                                               0.15
                                 0.04                                                                0.1

                                 0.02                                                               0.05

                                   0                                                                  0
                                            10        20       30        40                                    10        20       30        40
                                        Duration of the Passive Policies                                   Duration of the Passive Policies


Figure 6: Upper graph: Average per-period welfare gains from transparency associated with
policy of a given duration. Lower graphs: the ergodic distribution of the duration of passive
policies. A passive policy with duration of zero period on the -axis corresponds to an active
policy. Parameter values are set at their posterior mode.


duration of the deviation.


6.1      Short-Run Benefits from Transparency
In the previous section we showed that embracing transparency would raise the social welfare
compared to no transparency. The computation of expected welfare gains from transparency
is obtained using the ergodic distribution of the policy regimes and hence captures the
long-run gains. Furthermore, it should be noted that these long-run welfare gains have
been computed under the assumption that agents understand that the central bank will
systematically announce the duration of every passive policy. The fact that welfare gains
from transparency are positive in the active regime (when no announcement is actually
made) suggests that this systematic feature of the central bank’s communication policy
contributes to raise the welfare gains from transparency. A transparent central bank enjoys
higher welfare when monetary policy is active because agents understand that should a
passive policy of any durations be implemented in the future, the central bank will announce
its duration beforehand. However, it remains to be seen if the central bank is better oﬀ


                                                                             30
following transparency for any possible duration of the deviation. In other words, are there
deviations for which the central bank would rather be not transparent?
    We find that the gains from transparency occur for every plausible duration of the passive
policy. To see this, the upper plot of Figure 6 shows the dynamics of the average per-period
welfare gains from transparency associated with passive policy of various durations, while
the lower plots in Figure 6 report the corresponding ergodic probabilities. The important
result is that welfare gains are positive for all plausible durations of the passive policies. This
finding suggests that the central bank is better oﬀ by announcing passive policies of every
plausible duration. Quite interestingly, the upper graph suggests that the central bank is
better oﬀ even if it has to announce passive of policy of fairly long duration. This is an
important result that implies that the overall reduction of uncertainty that occurs thanks to
transparency overcomes any short run loss associated with announcing a prolonged deviation
fro active inflation stabilization.
    It should be noted the diﬀerence between the welfare gains from transparency in Figure 5
and those of Figure 6. Figure 5 reports the welfare gains from having announced the duration
of the ongoing passive policy when   deviations out of the announced   ≥   have been
observed. Figure 6 shows the average per-period welfare gains, should the Federal Reserve
decide to announce a passive policy of a certain duration. The latter measure evaluates the
average of welfare gains from transparency across periods of policy implementation whereas
the former measure coupled with the ergodic probability distribution of the observed du-
rations of policies (  ) captures the expected benefit from being transparent over the long
run.


6.2    Limited Information
We have modeled transparency as a communication strategy in which the central bank shares
all the information about the policy regime to households and firms. Since we assume that
the central bank knows the exact duration of its passive policies, transparency implies that
such information is shared with the public. In this section, we relax the assumption that
the central bank knows the exact duration of passive policies. Rather, we assume that the
central bank knows only the expected duration of the deviations from the active regime;
that is, the bank perfectly knows only if the passive policy is short-lasting, Regime 2, or
long-lasting, Regime 3. Now, under transparency the central bank truthfully announces the
expected duration of passive regimes to households and firms. It should be noted that since
the central bank truthfully tells the type of passive regime that is realized to agents, the
model boils down to a MS DSGE model with perfect information given that now the history


                                                31
                                       High Volatility                                                        Low Volatility




                                                                  perc of ss consumption
                        2.5                                                                   2.5




                                                                    from transparency
                                                                       Welfare gains
                         2                                                                     2

                        1.5                                                                   1.5

                         1                                                                     1

                          0      20       40       60                                           0      20       40       60
                           Observed Period of Passive Policy                                     Observed Period of Passive Policy

                                                                                             0.25
                       0.08                                                                   0.2
       Ergodic Prob.




                                                                             Ergodic Prob.
                       0.06                                                                  0.15
                       0.04                                                                   0.1

                       0.02                                                                  0.05

                         0                                                                     0
                                    20      40       60                                                   20      40       60
                              Observed Period of Passive Policy                                     Observed Period of Passive Policy


Figure 7: The upper graphs report the dynamics of the welfare gains from transparency as a
function of the observed periods of passive policy (  ). The lower graph reports the ergodic
probability of observing the periods of passive policy on the x-axis (  ). Parameter values
are set at their posterior mode.


of policy regimes   ∈ {1 2 3} belongs to the agents’ information set, F .
    The upper graphs of Figure 7 show the welfare gains from transparency associated with
observing diﬀerent durations of passive policies under the two volatility regimes. The lower
graphs report the ergodic probability of observing passive policies of diﬀerent durations where
the one with zero duration corresponds to active policy.17 The important result that emerges
from this graph is that welfare gains from transparency are always positive for policies of
any plausible duration and any volatility regime.
    Quite interestingly, the pattern of the welfare gains from transparency is qualitatively
similar to the one depicted in Figure 5 reporting the welfare gains from transparency when
the central bank has full information. The main diﬀerence is the duration of passive policy
above which the welfare gains from transparency starts declining. The turning point occurs
at shorter durations in the case of limited information of the central bank. The welfare gains
  17
    Computing the upper graphs requires to transform the primitive regimes,   ∈ {1 2 3}  into the set of
regimes used for the case of no transparency that are defined in terms of the observed durations of passive
policies   . The details of this transformation are provided in Appendix D.



                                                                     32
from transparency are reduced because while the central bank is still able to remove the fear
of a long lasting deviation from the active regime whenever a short lasting deviation occurs,
the anchoring eﬀect deriving from exactly announcing when the active regime will be again
in place is lost.
    Welfare gains from transparency are smaller than in the case of full information by the
central bank. In fact, the model predicted welfare gains from transparency amounts to
0.67% of steady-state consumption. Thus, our analysis suggests that the welfare gains from
transparency are positive and are quantified to range from 0.67% to 6.63% depending on the
degree of information of the central bank.


7    Concluding Remarks
In the model, the central bank alternates active policies aimed to stabilize inflation and
passive policies that de-emphasize inflation stabilization. Agents observe when monetary
policy becomes passive but they face uncertainty regarding its nature. Importantly, when
passive policies are observed, they cannot rule out the possibility that a persistent sequence
of deviations is in fact a return to the kind of monetary policy that characterized the 1970s.
Instead, they have to keep track of the number of deviations to learn if monetary policy
entered a short-lasting or a long-lasting period of passive monetary policy. The longer
the deviation from the active policy is, the more pessimistic about the evolution of future
monetary policy agents become. This implies that as the central bank keeps deviating,
uncertainty increases and welfare deteriorates.
    We develop a general equilibrium model in which the central bank can deviate from active
inflation stabilization. Agents observe when monetary policy becomes passive but they face
uncertainty regarding its nature. Importantly, when passive policies are observed, they
cannot rule out the possibility that a persistent sequence of deviations is in fact a return to
the kind of monetary policy that characterized the 1970s. Instead, they have to keep track of
the number of deviations to learn if monetary policy entered a short-lasting or a long-lasting
period of passive monetary policy. The longer the deviation from the active policy is, the
more pessimistic about the evolution of future monetary policy agents become. This implies
that as the central bank keeps deviating, uncertainty increases and welfare deteriorates.
    When the model is fitted to U.S. data, we find that the Federal Reserve benefits from
strong reputation. As a result, the Federal Reserve can deviate for a fairly prolonged period
of time from active monetary policy before losing control over agents’ uncertainty about
future inflation. Nevertheless, increasing the transparency of the Federal Reserve would
improve welfare by anchoring agents’ pessimism when facing exceptionally prolonged periods

                                              33
of passive monetary policy and removing the fear of the ’70s for the frequent short lasting
deviations.
    In the model, agents learn only the persistence of passive policies, while the active regime
is fully revealing. This implies that agents’ expectations are completely revised as soon as
the central bank returns to the active regime. In Bianchi and Melosi (2014b) we develop a
more general methodology that could be used to study a model in which agents have to learn
about the likely duration of both passive and active policies. This extension implies that
central bank reputation varies over time. While this feature is very interesting, it would make
the task of solving the model computationally challenging, preventing us from estimating the
model. We regard estimation as an important ingredient of the paper because the proposed
framework is new in the literature, with the result that the parameters controlling central
bank reputation cannot be borrowed from previous contributions. Furthermore, we believe
that this extension is unlikely to aﬀect the main conclusions of the paper. This is because
announcing the return to a long lasting period of active monetary policy would still have the
eﬀect of anchoring agents’ pessimism and uncertainty.
    A nice feature of the paper is to introduce a convenient way to model gradual changes
in beliefs about future policy decisions and macroeconomic outcomes. In the parsimonious
setting studied in this paper, we have shown that waves of agents’ pessimism or optimism
about future policy actions play a central role in shaping the response of macroeconomic
variables and households’ welfare to macroeconomic shocks in forward-looking rational ex-
pectations models. Expanding the analysis to state-of-the-art monetary DSGE models such
as Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005 and Smets and Wouters, 2007 would be of great
interest, but quite challenging from a computational point of view.




                                              34
References
Barro, R. J., and D. B. Gordon (1983): “Rules, discretion and reputation in a model
 of monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), 101—121.

Benati, L., and P. Surico (2009): “VAR Analysis and the Great Moderation,” American
 Economic Review, 99(4), 1636—52.

Bernanke, B. S. (2003): “Constrained Discretion" and Monetary Policy,” Discussion pa-
 per, Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke.

Bernanke, B. S., T. Laubach, F. S. Mishkin, and A. S. Posen (1999): Inflation
 Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton University Press.

Bernanke, B. S., and F. S. Mishkin (1997): “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework
 for Monetary Policy?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2), 97—116.

Bianchi, F. (2013a): “Methods for Markov-Switching Models,” Manuscript.

        (2013b): “Regime Switches, Agents’ Beliefs, and Post-World War II U.S. Macro-
  economic Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, 80(2), 463—490.

Bianchi, F., and C. Ilut (2013): “Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix and Agents’ Beliefs,”
  CEPR Discussion Papers 9645, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Bianchi, F., and L. Melosi (2013): “Escaping the Great Recession,” Duke University
  mimeo.

         (2014a): “Dormant Shocks and Fiscal Virtue,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  2013, ed. by J. Parker, and M. Woodford, vol. 28 of NBER Chapters, pp. 1—46. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

         (2014b): “Modeling the Evolution of Expectations and Uncertainty in General
  Equilibriumy,” Duke University mimeo.

Boivin, J., and M. P. Giannoni (2006): “Has Monetary Policy Become More Eﬀective?,”
 The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 445—462.

Cho, I.-K., N. Williams, and T. J. Sargent (2002): “Escaping Nash Inflation,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 69(1), 1—40.




                                          35
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
 1—45.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules And Macro-
 economic Stability: Evidence And Some Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 115(1), 147—180.

Cogley, T., C. Matthes, and A. M. Sbordone (2011): “Optimal disinflation under
 learning,” Staﬀ Reports 524, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent (2005): “Drift and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and
 Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8(2), 262—302.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and J. Wieland (2012): “The Optimal Inflation
 Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their Inflation Targets in
 Light of the Zero Lower Bound?,” Review of Economic Studies, 79(4), 1371—1406.

Davig, T., and T. Doh (2008): “Monetary policy regime shifts and inflation persistence,”
 Research Working Paper RWP 08-16, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Davig, T., and E. M. Leeper (2007): “Generalizing the Taylor Principle,” American
 Economic Review, 97(3), 607—635.

Del Negro, M., and S. Eusepi (2010): “Fitting observed inflation expectations,” Staﬀ
 Reports 476, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2010): “Central Bank Communication and Expectations
 Stabilization,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3), 235—71.

Evans, G., and S. Honkapohja (2001): Learning and Expectations In Macroeconomics.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Evans, G. W., and S. Honkapohja (2003): “Expectations and the Stability Problem for
  Optimal Monetary Policies,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(4), 807—824.

Farmer, R. E., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2009): “Understanding Markov-switching
  rational expectations models,” Journal of Economic Theory, 144(5), 1849—1867.

Fernandez-Villaverde, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2008): “How Structural Are
  Structural Parameters?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, Volume 22, NBER
  Chapters, pp. 83—137. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                           36
Foerster, A. T., J. Rubio-Ramirez, D. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2011): “Perturba-
 tion Methods for Markov-Switching Models,” Mimeo Duke University.

Gali, J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
 the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press.

Gali, J., and M. Gertler (2007): “Macroeconomic Modeling for Monetary Policy Eval-
 uation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(4), 25—46.

Justiniano, A., and G. E. Primiceri (2008): “The Time-Varying Volatility of Macro-
  economic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 98(3), 604—41.

Kydland, F. E., and E. C. Prescott (1977): “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
 Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), 473—91.

Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application
  to U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 190—217.

Mankiw, N. G., R. Reis, and J. Wolfers (2004): “Disagreement about Inflation Ex-
 pectations,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Volume 18, NBER Chapters, pp.
 209—270. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Marcet, A., and T. J. Sargent (1989a): “Convergence of Least-Squares Learning in
 Environments with Hidden State Variables and Private Information,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 97(6), 1306—22.

Marcet, A., and T. J. Sargent (1989b): “Convergence of least squares learning mech-
 anisms in self-referential linear stochastic models,” Journal of Economic Theory, 48(2),
 337—368.

Melosi, L. (2014a): “Estimating Models with Dispersed Information,” American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(1), 1—31.

        (2014b): “Signaling Eﬀects of Monetary Policy,” Mimeo Federal Reserve Bank of
  Chicago.

Mishkin, F. S. (2002): “Inflation Targeting,” in An encyclopedia of macroeconomics, ed.
 by B. Snowdon, and H. Vane, Elgar Original Reference Series. Edward Elgar.

Nimark, K. (2008): “Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 55(8), 365—382.


                                           37
Plosser, C. I. (2012): “Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” Policy Speech at the
  CFA Society of Philadelphia/The Bond Club of Philadelphia, September 25.

Primiceri, G. E. (2005): “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary
 Policy,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(3), 821—852.

Rios-Rull, J.-V., F. Schorfheide, C. Fuentes-Albero, M. Kryshko, and
  R. Santaeulalia-Llopis (2012): “Methods versus substance: Measuring the eﬀects
  of technology shocks,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(8), 826—846.

Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1999): “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and
 Costs,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1 of
 Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 16, pp. 1051—1135. Elsevier.

Rudebusch, G. D., and J. C. Williams (2008): “Revealing the Secrets of the Temple:
 The Value of Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate Projections,” in Asset Prices and
 Monetary Policy, NBER Chapters, pp. 247—289. National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

Schorfheide, F. (2005): “Learning and Monetary Policy Shifts,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 8(2), 392—419.

Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2006): “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?,”
  American Economic Review, 96(1), 54—81.

Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
  Bayeasian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586—606.

Steinsson, J. (2003): “Optimal monetary policy in an economy with inflation persistence,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(7), 1425—1456.

Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press, Princeton.




                                           38
A     Solving the Model with No Transparency
It is very important to emphasize that the evolution of agents’ beliefs about the future con-
duct of monetary policies plays a critical role in the Markov-switching model with learning.
In fact, three policy regimes   are not a suﬃcient statistic for the dynamics of the endoge-
nous variables in the model with learning. Instead, agents expect diﬀerent dynamics for next
period’s endogenous variables depending on their beliefs about a return to the active regime.
    To account for agents learning we expand the number of regimes and redefine them as a
combination between central bank’ behaviors and agents’ beliefs. Bianchi and Melosi (2014b)
show that the Markov-switching model with learning described previously can be recast in
terms of an expanded set of ( ∗ + 1)  3 new regimes, where  ∗  0 is defined by the
condition (15). These new set of regimes constitute a suﬃcient statistics for the endogenous
variables in the model as they capture the evolution of agents’ beliefs about observing a
switch to the active regime in the next period. The  ∗ + 1 regimes are given by

          [(  = 1   = 0)  (  6= 1   = 1)  (  6= 1   = 2)   (  6= 1   =  ∗ )] 

and the transition matrix e is defined using equation (14); that is,
     ⎡                                                                                                                                  ⎤
                          11                        12 + 13           0            0                       0
     ⎢                 12 22 +13 33                           12 22 +13 33                                                      ⎥
     ⎢          1−         12 +13
                                                         0            12 +13
                                                                                      0                       0                      ⎥
     ⎢                 12 222 +13 233
                                                                                                                                        ⎥
     ⎢          1−                                      0                0            0                       0                      ⎥
     ⎢                 12 22 +13 33                                                                                                 ⎥
e
 = ⎢                      ..                          ..               ..          . . . ..                    ..                     ⎥
     ⎢                       .                           .                .                 .                     .                     ⎥
     ⎢                                                                                                                                  ⎥
     ⎢                                  ∗
             22 (12 13 )(22 33 ) −2 +33
                                                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                22 (12 13 )(22 33 ) −2 +33     ⎥
     ⎢ 1−                               ∗               0                0            0    0                               ∗            ⎥
     ⎣          (12 13 )(22 33 ) −2 +1                                                      (12 13 )(22 33 ) −2 +1        ⎦
                                        ∗ −1                                                                              ∗ −1
             22 (12 13 )(22 33 )       +33                                              22 (12 13 )(22 33 )       +33
       1−                               ∗
                (12 13 )(22 33 ) −1 +1
                                                        0                0            0    0                               ∗
                                                                                                   (12 13 )(22 33 ) −1 +1



B     Convergence
Table 2 reports results based on the Brooks-Gelman-Rubin potential reduction scale factor
using within and between variances based on the four multiple chains used in the paper.
The five chains consist of 540 000 draws each, the first 40 000 draws are dropped, and of
the remaining draws 1 every 1 000 draws is saved. The numbers are very close to 1 and
therefore well below the 12 benchmark value used as an upper bound for convergence.




                                                             39
                       Potential Scale Reduction Factor
 Parameter PSRF    Parameter       PSRF Parameter PSRF Parameter PSRF
                        
          100       11          101               101   100
                                                          
          100   22 33         100               100    100
                         
    
           100        33         100              100  
                                                                 100
                                                          
          100 12  (1 − 11 ) 100                102    100
                                                             
          105       11          100               100    100
                                                             
          100       22          100               100    101
                                                                100

Table 2: The table reports the Gelman-Rubin Potential Scale Reduction Factor (PSRF) for
four chains of 540,000 draws each (1 every 1000 is stored). Values below 1.2 are regarded as
indicative of convergence.


C     Welfare Function
It is worth emphasizing that the regime changes considered in this paper do not aﬀect the
steady state, but only the way the economy fluctuates around the steady state. There-
fore, we are going to follow the literature and we derive a second order approximation of
the representative household’s utility function around the steady state. The representative
household’s utility function are described by the following function:

                                                 1−   1+
                                   (   ) =       −
                                                 1− 1+

           b = ln  as the log-deviation of the generic variable  from its own steady-state
Define the 
value. The utility function above can be equivalently written as

                                            1− (1−)̂  1+ (1+)̂
                           (   ) =                  −
                                               1−             1+

The second order Taylor expansion around the steady-state equilibrium yields

                                                1                      1
           (   ) '  1− ̂ −  1+ ̂ +  1− (1 − ) ̂2 −  1+ (1 + ) ̂2
                                µ               2 ¶           µ        2            ¶
                           1−          1          2      1+            1        2
                       '          ̂ + (1 − ) ̂ −           ̂ + (1 + ) ̂        (20)
                                        2                                2

where in the second line we use the market clearing condition ̂ = ̂ .
   Using the production function we can write

                                                        ()
                                        ()1− =
                                                        

                                                  40
                                                                                                           ³            ´−
                                                                                                                ()
Using the fact that the demand for the variety produced by firm  is  () =                                   
                                                                                                                                we
obtain                                µ ¶ 1− 1 µ       ¶− 
                                                 () 1−
                              () =
                                                 
    Integrating both sides of the above equation across firms , we obtain
                                              µ           1 Z µ
                                                       ¶ 1−                 ¶− 1−
                                                                                 
                                                                   ()
                                        =                                           
                                                                   
                                                                          R
where we use the fact that the labor market clearing requires that  =  () . The
above equation can be log-linearized around a symmetric steady state to get the following:

                                           (1 − ) ̂ = (̂ −  ) +                                                        (21)

                                          R ³  () ´− 1−
                                                         

where we define  ≡ (1 − ) ln                   
                                                              .

Lemma 1 In a neighborhood of a symmetric hsteady state,  i−1 and up to a second-order ap-
                                               1+(−1)
proximation,  ' 2Θ  ln  ()  where Θ ≡  (1−)
                                                            is the strategic complementarity
parameter.

Proof. Let ̂ () ≡ ln  () − ln  . Note that ̂ () is a stationary variable because of the
assumption of perfect indexation of price to steady-state inflation. Notice that
                                   µ             ¶− 1−
                                                             ∙             ¸
                                         ()                     
                                                          = exp −     ̂ ()
                                                                1−

Taking the second-order approximation of this object around the symmetric steady state:18
                         µ             ¶− 1−
                                           
                               ()                                        2      2
                                                 '1−          ̂ () +          2 ̂ ()
                                                        1−           2 (1 − )

Integrating both sides of this equation across firms leads to
               Z µ            ¶− 1−
                                                            Z                                 Z
                      ()                                                         2
                                         ' 1 −                   ̂ ()  +                     ̂2 ()                  (22)
                                               1−                            2 (1 − )2
                                                                                           R
Note that from the definition of the price level we obtain 1 =                                 ̂ ()(1− ) . Taking the
  18
     Note that since b () is equal to zero in steady state, taking the Taylor expansion with respect to the
elasticity of substitution ̂ ≡ ln ( ) would be immaterial. To keep the derivation notationally tractable,
we do not take the Taylor expansion with respect to ̂ .


                                                              41
second-order approximation of this expression yields
                                                 Z                            Z
                                                                   (1 − )2
                              0 ' (1 − )             ̂ ()  +                 ̂ ()2 
                                                                      2

and after rearranging                   Z                           Z
                                                             −1
                                                ̂ ()  =            ̂ ()2                           (23)
                                                              2
Substituting equation (23) in equation (22) allows us to write
          Z µ            ¶− 1−
                                             ∙     Z           ¸             Z
                 ()                          −1          2          2
                                   = 1 −             ̂ ()  +          2   ̂ ()2 
                                         1−    2                 2 (1 − )

After same straightforward manipulation, we obtain
                             Z µ             ¶− 1−
                                                                             Z
                                     ()                     1  1
                                                       = 1 +                        ̂ ()2            (24)
                                                             21−Θ
                                                                  R             R
    Recalling the definition of ̂ () we can write  ̂ ()2 ≡ ̂ ()2  = [ln  () − ln  ]2 .
Note also that up to a first-order approximation, the price index equation implies that ln  =
                                                  R
 ln  ().19 Hence, we can write  ̂ ()2 ' (ln  () −  ln  ())2  =  (ln  ()  ) 
    Then we can use this result to write
                            Z µ             ¶− 1−
                                                
                                    ()                         1  1
                                                      = 1 +            (ln  ())                     (25)
                                                                21−Θ

Finally, combining the definition of  with the equation above leads to the following:
                                                              Z µ            ¶− 1−
                                                                                 
                                                                     ()
                                      ≡ (1 − ) ln                                   
                                                                     
                                                  
                                            '        (ln  ())
                                                 2Θ

where in the last line we use the fact that ln (1 + ) '  for  suﬃciently small. QED.
   Using equation (21) we can rewrite the second-order approximation of the utility function
  19
                                       R
      Write the price index as 1 = ̂ ()(1−)  Taking the loglinearization yields 0 =  ̂ (). Recall that
̂ () ≡ ln  () − ln  , implying ln  =  ln  ().




                                                             42
(20) as follows:
                                  µ                     ¶
                               1−          1         2
               (   ) '       ̂ + (1 − ) ̂                                              (26)
                                            2
                                 1+
                                       µ                                               ¶
                                                                   11+            2
                             −           ̂ +     {ln  ()} +      (̂ −  )
                               1−             2Θ                    21−
                             + + 

where  collects all terms independent of policies (e.g.,  ) and  stands for higher-
order term. We can write
                         µ                   ¶
         (   )            1          2
                     '     ̂ + (1 − ) ̂                                                 (27)
           1−                 2
                                          µ                                                ¶
                              1                                    11+              2
                         −                 ̂ +     {ln  ()} +        (̂ −  )
                              − 1 −          2Θ                    21−
                         + + 

       Eﬃciency of the steady state implies that20

                                           
                                       −        =  
                                            −
                                                              
                                                = (1 − )
                                                              

Substituting the last equation into equation (27) and re-arranging yield:

                                  ∙            ¸
                (   )    1        + 2                               1+
                   1−
                            ' − +               ̂ −     {ln  ()} +     ̂             (28)
                              2        1−            2Θ                    1−
                              + + 

Note that the log-deviation of the eﬃcient level of output from its steady-state level is given
              1+
by ̂ = (1−)++  . Hence, we can substitute this expression for  and write
                                                           ∙        ¸
                 (   )                            1      + ¡ 2             
                                                                                      ¢
                             ' −      {ln   ()} −     +       ̂ − 2̂ ̂               (29)
                   1−          2Θ                      2      1−
                               + + 
  20
    As standard, we assume that the ineﬃciency generated by the market power are removed by the suitable
choice of subsidies so that the steady-state equilibrium can be regarded eﬃcient.




                                                  43
We can complete the square and write
                                                      ∙       ¸
                 (   )                       1     +
                             ' −  {ln  ()} −    +       (̂ − ̂ )2                       (30)
                   1−         2Θ                  2     1−
                               + + 

Accordingly, a second-order approximation to the consumer’s welfare function can be ex-
pressed as a fraction of steady-state consumption (and up to additive terms independent of
policy) as follows21
                               ∙                     ∙        ¸              ¸
                     1 X  
                          ∞
                                                          +             2
                W = − 0           {ln  ()} +  +       (̂ − ̂ )                        (31)
                     2   =0
                                 Θ                        1−

where 0 is the expectation operator conditional on the information set that agents has at
time 0, F0 .

Lemma 2 Under Calvo pricing with non-zero inflation steady state and perfect indexation
                         P                                     P∞  2
to steady state inflation ∞                            
                          =0   {ln  ()} = (1−)(1−)  =0  ̂  .


Proof. In each period the distribution of prices is given by  times the price distribution in
the previous period times the gross steady-state inflation rate plus an atom of height (1 − )
at the optimal reset price. Let us denote

                                           ̄ ≡  ln  ()                                       (32)

Observe that Calvo pricing implies
                        £                          ¤
̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ =  ln  () − ̄−1 − ln Π∗
                          £                                     ¤          £                      ¤
                    =  (ln −1 () + ln Π∗ ) − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ + (1 − ) ln ∗ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗
                          £                   ¤           £                    ¤
                    =  ln −1 () − ̄−1 + (1 − ) ln ∗ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗                 (33)

where ln ∗ is the optimal resetting price for those firms that are allowed to re-optimize their
price and Π∗ is the steady-state gross inflation rate. Notice that  ln −1 () ≡ ̄−1 and
         £                  ¤
hence  ln −1 () − ̄−1 = 0. Therefore,
                                                     £                      ¤
                        ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ = (1 − ) ln ∗ − ̄−1 − ln Π̄                         (34)
  21
    Since we analyze welfare for an economy that is currently at the steady state, we set the value of the
exogenous process  =  = 1




                                                   44
Analogously, denote the cross-sectional variance of prices  {ln  ()} as ∆  This can be
equivalently expressed as
                    £                          ¤
           ∆ =  ln  () − ̄−1 − ln Π∗
                  h¡                         ¢2 i ¡                             ¢2
              =  ln  () − ̄−1 − ln Π∗     −  ln  () − ̄−1 − ln Π∗            (35)

Observe that the property of the cross-sectional distribution of prices under Calvo pricing
allows us to write
  h¡                           ¢2 i      h¡                  ¢2 i     £                       ¤2
   ln  () − ̄−1 − ln Π∗      =  ln −1 () − ̄−1 +(1 − ) ln ∗ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗
                                                                                           (36)
Notice that since  ln −1 () − ̄−1 = 0, then
                       h¡                   ¢2 i
                      ln −1 () − ̄−1      =  [ln −1 ()] ≡ ∆−1               (37)

Also taking the square of both sided of equation (34) implies that

                       £                      ¤2     1 ¡                    ¢2
                (1 − ) ln ∗ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ =        ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗                (38)
                                                    1−

Using the results in equations (37) and (38) in combination with equation (36) yields
              h¡                         ¢2 i              1 ¡                    ¢2
             ln  () − ̄−1 − ln Π∗      = ∆−1 +       ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗          (39)
                                                          1−

Plugging equation (39) into equation (35) and also observing that the definition (32) implies
                                                  ¡                  ¢2
that the second term of equation (35) is equal to ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ allow us to leads to

                            1 ¡                    ¢2 ¡                   ¢2
             ∆ = ∆−1 +       ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ − ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗
                           1−
                             ¡                    ¢2
                 = ∆−1 +      ̄ − ̄−1 − ln Π∗ 
                           1−

Now note that up to a first-order approximation, the price index equation implies that
ln  = ̄ and hence the last term of the recursive equation for price dispersion is the
log-deviation of inflation from its steady state value Π∗ , which we denote with ̂  . Finally,

                                                     
                                    ∆ = ∆−1 +        ̂ 2 
                                                    1−




                                               45
Integrating forward for any given (small) initial degree of price dispersion ∆0 we obtain:

                                                   X
                                                                   µ         ¶
                                      +1                     −        
                             ∆ =          ∆0 +                                 ̂ 2 
                                                   =0
                                                                        1−

Since the initial price dispersion ∆0 is independent of any policy implemented in periods
 ≥ 0, one obtains
                             X∞
                                                          X∞
                                   ∆ =                        ̂ 2
                             =0
                                          (1 − ) (1 − ) =0

QED.
  Hence the welfare function can be rewritten as follows
                                    ∙      ∙        ¸              ¸
                          1 X   2
                               ∞
                                                +             2
                     W = − 0         ̂ +  +       (̂ − ̂ )                                   (40)
                          2   =0
                                              1−

where we use the definition  ≡   (1−)(1−)
                                       
                                              Θ     and b̃
                                                          ≡ (̂ − ̂ ) is the welfare-relevant output
gap.


D     Transformation of Regimes under Transparency
In Figure 5 we express welfare under transparency in terms of number of observed devia-
tions from the active regime. This corresponds to the definition of policy regime under no
transparency. This is done in order to facilitate the analysis of how the welfare gains from
transparency varies with passive policies of duration  
    Let us compute the probability that  consecutive periods of passive policy has been
announced conditional on having observed  period of passive policy:

                            12 −1 21 + 13 −1
                                                33 31
              () = P ∗ + −1 £22 −1             −1    ¤ for any  ≤  ≤  +  ∗
                      =         12 22 21 + 13 33 31

Note that the numerator captures the probability that a deviation of duration  is realized and
hence announced (recall all announcements are truthful). The denominator is the probability
of (announcing) a passive policy lasting  periods or longer (up to the truncation  ∗ ).
    The welfare associated with a policy that has been deviating for  consecutive periods
under transparency is given by
                                             ∗
                                            
                                            X
                       f
                       W (    ; ) =          ( +  ) W (  =    ; )                   (41)
                                            =0



                                                     46
Note the diﬀerence from W (     ; ) in equation (18), which is the welfare function defined
in terms of policy regimes for the case of transparency (i.e.,   the number of announced
deviations yet to be carried out). W (  ·) is the welfare under transparency associated with
a announcing   periods of passive policy. f    W (    ; ) is the welfare under transparency
associated with having observed  consecutive periods of passive policy. We can show that
this recasting of policy regimes leads to a negligible approximation error as

                        ∗ (    )0 · f
                                           W ( ) ≈ ∗ (     )0 · W (     ; )

    When we compute the welfare gains from transparence under limited information by the
central bank in Section 6.1, we compute W (    ; ) = W ( = 2) + (1 − ) W ( = 3)
where W denotes the welfare under perfect information and  ∈ {1 2 3} the primitive set
of policy regimes and the weight  is defined as follows:

                                                      12 22−1 21
                                   ( ) =                                   
                                             12 22−1 21 + 13 33−1 31

which capture the probability of being in the short-lasting passive regime conditional on
having observed  consecutive deviations from the active policy.




                                                        47
