NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCT AND LABOR MARKET REGULATIONS, PRODUCTION PRICES, WAGES
AND PRODUCTIVITY
Gilbert Cette
Jimmy Lopez
Jacques Mairesse
Working Paper 20563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20563
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the other institutions the authors belong to.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Product and Labor Market Regulations, Production Prices, Wages and Productivity
Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 20563
October 2014, Revised June 2015
JEL No. C23,L16,L50,O43,O47
ABSTRACT
This study is an attempt to evaluate the effects of product and labour market regulations on industry
productivity through their various impacts on changes in production prices and wages. In a first stage,
the estimation of a regression equation on an industry*country panel, with controls for country*industry
and country*year fixed effects, show that multi-factor productivity is negatively and significantly influenced
by both indicators of industrial prices from same industry and weighted average of industrial prices
from other industries, and by indicators of country wages weighted by industry labour shares for low
and high skilled workers. In a second stage, an economic policy simulation of the implications these
results on the basis of their calibration by the OECD product and labour market anti-competitive regulation
indicators suggests that nearly all countries could expect sizeable gains in multifactor productivity
from deregulation reforms.
Gilbert Cette
Banque de France
1, rue de la Vrillière
75001 Paris, France
and Aix-Marseille School of Economics,
CNRS & EHESS
gilbert.cette@banque-france.fr
Jimmy Lopez
Université de Bourgogne
UFR Economie et Gestion
4, Boulevard Gabriel
21000 Dijon, FRANCE
Jimmy.Lopez@u-bourgogne.fr

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20563

Jacques Mairesse
CREST (ParisTech-ENSAE)
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
and also NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr

I.

Introduction

A large body of literature investigates the productivity impacts of product and labour market
imperfections, and of the anti-competitive regulations establishing and supporting them (see
Aghion and Howitt 2009 for a survey). This paper greatly extends the scope of two previous
studies by the authors (Bourlès et al., 2013, and Cette, Lopez and Mairesse, 2013) that focus
only on the indirect productivity impact of non-manufacturing regulations. By considering the
effects of product and labour market regulations on industry productivity through their
various impacts on production prices and wages, it allows to assess and compare the relative
size of the different channels of direct and indirect impacts of product and labour market
imperfections. The paper relies on country*industry panel that is basically the same as in the
other two previous studies. It also takes advantage of the rich information provided by the
OECD regulation indicators, but it does so only indirectly for economic policy calibration and
simulation purposes.
The originality of our new approach is twofold. First, to our knowledge, it is the first attempt
to assess the consequences on productivity of anti-competitive regulations in product and
labour markets through their impacts on production prices and wages.1 Second, it does so by
considering in conjunction the six channels through which regulations can impact MFP: direct
and indirect influence of product market regulations on rent building in manufacturing and
non-manufacturing industries, and direct influence of labour market regulations on the rent
sharing process between firms on the one hand and skilled and unskilled workers on the other.
Our approach is theoretically grounded in the model developed by Blanchard and Giavazzi
(2003). In their own words, “their model is built on two basic assumptions: monopolistic
competition in the goods market, which determines the size of rents; and bargaining in the
labour market, which determines the distribution of rents between workers and firm.”(pp.
879-880). In other words, firms can take advantage of the market power permitted by product
market anti-competitive regulations to charge higher production prices and generate rents that
they can be kept in the form of increased profits. Workers can also capture in the form of
higher wages a share of these rents, which varies with their bargaining power, itself largely
influenced by labour market regulations. Our empirical framework is an attempt to assess the
productivity impact of regulations as mediated by their effects on the changes on production

1

The study by Askenazy, Cette and Maarek (2013) also rely on similar assumptions.
2

prices and wages. It can be simply explained by the diagram of Figure 1, which we shall now
comment.

INCLUDE FIGURE 1 about HERE

The right side of the diagram outlines the regression equation central to our investigation. It
shows the channels by which the six price and wage indicators, key in the analysis, relate to
Multifactor Productivity (MFP). The left side of the diagram shows the calibration
relationships, which validate our use of six price and wage indicators as proxies of the product
and labour market imperfections impacts, and allow us to perform simulations of the (MFP)
gains resulting from structural reforms of product and labour markets, as gauged by the
OECD indicators for Non-Manufacturing Regulations (NMR), Harmonized tariffs (HT) and
Employment Protection Legislation (EPL).
The regression equation assumes that product market imperfections in an industry generate
higher production prices and rents, which have a “direct” impact on MFP in the same industry
and an “indirect” impact on MFP in other industries. The two price indicators of direct
impacts measure the extent to which what we label “Manufacturing” industries and NonManufacturing” industries are able to charge relatively high prices. They thus benefit from
large rents and have fewer incentives to improve their efficiency and to innovate but also
more financial resources to do so. We can thus expect an impact on MFP which could be
either negative or positive. A negative sign may a priori seem more likely for nonmanufacturing industries generally sheltered from foreign competition and often protected
from national competition by product market regulations. But this may also be true for
manufacturing industries when they are protected from foreign competition by high tariff
barriers. The two price indicators of indirect impacts are similarly indicative of weaker
incentives to improve efficiency and to innovate by “downstream” industries when the rents
they can generate are appropriated by “upstream” industries that have market power and can
charge them relatively high prices for the intermediate inputs they must use. In this case,
however, the expected impact on MFP is unambiguously negative. Again and for the same
reasons this should be more likely when the upstream industries are non-manufacturing
industries than manufacturing industries.
3

Our regression equation also assumes that, in conjunction with product market imperfections
in an industry, labour market imperfections may result in higher wages and lower profits,
entailing a negative impact on the industry MFP. Employment protection legislation,
professional agreements and standards, shortage of qualified workers, etc., contribute to
higher wages, implying that rents, which could have been fully appropriated by firms’ owners
and shareholders, are shared with workers. In turn, firms have fewer incentives and financial
resources to improve their efficiency and to innovate. We can thus expect that the low- and
high-skilled wage indicators have a negative impact on MFP. Since high-skilled workers have
a stronger bargaining power than low-skilled workers, it is also likely that the negative impact
would be larger for the former than the latter.
In Section 2, we describe our country*industry panel data sample, define in detail the six
production price and wage impact indicators, and discuss in depth the econometric
specification of our regression model. Our main estimation results are presented and discussed
in Section 3. They show that the estimated coefficients of our six impact indicators are all
negative and are both statistically and economically significant. In Section 4 we consider an
illustrative policy simulation based on these results and on their calibration by the OECD
product and labour market anti-competitive regulation indicators, which suggests that nearly
all countries could expect sizeable gains in multifactor productivity over the years from an
economic policy of deregulation reforms. Section 5 offers a short conclusion, stressing the
plausibility of our results but also their fragility and limitations, largely inherent in the
aggregate nature of our framework and supporting data.

II.

Sample, variables and regression model

Our analysis is based on an unbalanced country*industry*year panel data sample covering
fourteen OECD countries and eighteen industries: thirteen mainly in “Manufacturing” and
five mainly in “Non-Manufacturing”. Due to the lack of data for several countries and/or
sectors in the earlier years, it is relatively unbalanced ranging for each country*industry time
series from 1987 to 2007 at maximum, 6 years at minimum and about 12 years on average.
The fourteen countries are: Austria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United
States. For the sake of convenience, “Manufacturing” refers here to: food products, textiles,
4

wood products, paper, chemicals products, non-metallic mineral products, metal products,
machinery not elsewhere classified (n.e.c.), electrical equipment, transport equipment,
manufacturing n.e.c., as well as construction and hotels & restaurants; while “nonmanufacturing” refers to: energy, transport & communication, retail distribution, banking
services and professional services. Overall, our panel data sample contains 2,820
observations, when we exclude the United States that we have taken in our analysis as the
country of reference to control for unobserved technical changes at the industry level.
Production prices, intermediate consumption and data used to calculate Multifactor
Productivity (MFP) come mainly from OECD databases, while wages by skill level and
physical investments by assets (used to calculate MFP) come from the EUKLEMS database.
The regulation indicators that we use to assess the economic significance of our results and to
calibrate simulations of the potential impacts of structural reforms are constructed on the basis
of the OECD indicators for Non-Manufacturing Regulations (NMR), Harmonized Tariffs (HT)
and Employment Protection Legislation (EPL). Appendices A and B provide detailed
information on the panel composition, the construction of variables and the OECD indicators.
They also show some simple descriptive statistics.
As shown in the Diagram, in our regression model, MFP expressed in logarithm and noted as
for country c, industry i and year t, is related to four impact indicators based on
production price data, two “direct” impact indicators

_

and

_

for

manufacturing industries and non-manufacturing industries respectively, and two “indirect”
impact indicators

_

_

and

for impacts on “downstream” industries originating

from “upstream” manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries respectively. They also
consist of two impact indicators based on low-skilled (L) and high-skilled (H) wage data
noted

_

and

_

.

The direct impact country*industry price indicators are simply defined as:
_
where

with ∈

_

with ∈

is the logarithm of the production price index relative to the GDP price index, for

country c, industry i and year t, normalised to be equal to 1 in year 2000 (with ∈
manufacturing industries and ∈

for the

for the non-manufacturing industries). Because of the

aggregate nature of our panel sample, the price direct impact coefficients we can expect to

5

estimate with good precision are two average country*industry elasticities (not separate
elasticities by country or industry, or country*industry).
The country*industry price indirect impact indicators are composite indicators of the same
production prices but for the upstream industries, and are defined as:
_

∗
∈

where

_

&

∗
∈

&

is the intensity-of-use of intermediate inputs, defined as the ratio of the

intermediate consumption from industry j to industry i over the production of industry i and
measured on the basis of the 2000 input-output table for the USA, taken as country of
reference in our analysis. Here also, the coefficients that can be precisely estimated are two
average country*industry elasticities with respect to the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries. For that purpose, interacting the log upstream industry price with
the intermediate input intensity-of-use ratio is an appropriate way to take into account the
intrinsic heterogeneity of their potential impact on downstream multifactor productivity,
assuming that the higher this ratio, the higher the impact of a given change in upstream
industry price. Note also that we prefer to use the USA 2000 input-output table as a weighting
fixed reference in the computation of the intensity-of-use ratios to avoid endogeneity biases
that might arise from potential correlations between the country*industry changes in such
ratios and productivity. For a similar reason we also exclude the intra-industry intermediate
consumption in the computation.
The low- and high-skilled country*industry wage impact indicators are defined as:
_
where

and

∗

_

∗

are the country’s real wage index, in logarithms, for the low- and high-

skilled workers of country c, and

and

are the corresponding shares of

labour costs in the production value of industry i for the USA in 2000. As in the case of the
price direct and indirect impact indicators, the coefficients we can hope to estimate accurately
enough are two average country*industry elasticities. Similarly to what we do to construct the
price indirect impact indicators, we deem appropriate to interact the log country’s low- and
high-skilled wages with the corresponding labour costs shares in production at the industry
level for the USA in 2000, assuming that the higher these changes, the higher the impact of a
6

given change of a given change in low and high skill industry wage. To also avoid potential
endogeneity biases we rely on the USA 2000 industry shares as fixed reference. Note finally
that since we found that the estimated elasticities of the indicators based on separate low- and
medium-skilled wages were not statistically different, we pool them for the sake of greater
precision as one indicator, to which we simply refer here as the low-skilled wage indicator.
Finally, our regression preferred specification is the following:
_

_
_

_

_

_
1

In addition to the six price and wage impact indicators defined above, we included the log
USA multifactor productivity for industry i and year (t-1)

in order to control

mainly for exogenous technical changes at the industry level. We chose the USA, which is at
the world productivity frontier in most industries, as an appropriate reference country for our
analysis.

, , , , and

are our elasticity parameters of interest.

random error of the regression.

,

and

is the idiosyncratic

denote the one-way country, industry and year

fixed effects that are usually included in regression models estimated on panel data samples
such as ours in order to control for distinctive country, industry or period characteristics,
which could affect the estimates of the parameters of interest.

and

stand for two-way

country-industry and country-year fixed effects. They are an important component in our
regression specification for reasons we shall make clear in explaining our estimation method.

III.

Estimation and main results

Before presenting our main results, we must explain how they have been estimated to take
care of various sources of potential biases, and in particular why we entered two-way countryindustry and country-year fixed effects in our regression model.
The purpose of including

and

is to correct for the biases which could be due to the

omission of relevant explanatory variables and also to attenuate biases potentially arising
from other sources of endogeneity. It does so at the cost of reducing the variability of the data
on which our estimates are actually based and at the risk of exacerbating downward biases
7

from measurement errors in variables.2 Actually, entering

in regression (1) is a necessity

in the present context since our price and wage indicators do not measure absolute levels of
price or wage but are computed from price and wage indices normalized to be equal to 1 in a
given reference year (in our case 2000). The evidence on which we rely for estimation is thus
only based on the within country*industry changes over time of the variables in the
regression, implying an important cut back in their standard-deviation conditional on
shown in Table A1 of Appendix A). Including also the country*year fixed effects

(as
entails

an additional reduction of variability, especially large for the price indirect impact and wage
impact indicators. It is, however, a useful precaution protecting from a variety of sources of
potential estimation biases, such as differences in country multifactor productivity not related
to product or labor market imperfections (and not captured by the presence of

), and

simultaneity biases due to changes in prices and wages in response to country productivity
shocks.
It is also possible to go one more step further and substitute industry*year fixed effects

to

to control more fully for industry technical changes and other variation in industry
multifactor productivity unrelated to product or labor market imperfections. As discussed in
Cette, Lopez and Mairesse (2013), we can view the regression results obtained when
including only the country*year fixed effects
fixed effects (

and

or both the country*year and industry*year

as providing respectively upper and lower bound estimates. We

also explain that we can put some more confidence on the upper estimates, and we will
mainly consider them here. However, we present the two types of estimates in Table C1 of
Appendix C. We find that, in spite of the inherent uncertainties of our analysis, our estimates
of the six prices and wages impact indicators elasticities obtained in the two cases appear
fairly robust overall: all six are negative as expected and three out of the six are in fact not
statistically different from one another at the 5% or 10% confidence level.3
Besides controlling for interacted fixed effects in our regression, we prefer not to rely on the
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimator but to implement the Dynamic OLS (DOLS)
estimator proposed by Stock & Watson (1993). This estimator has the advantage to make sure
that the estimated elasticities are not biased by short-term correlations between the variables
2

3

See Griliches and Mairesse (1998) who document and strongly stress such risk in the context of the
identification of production function on panel data.
Precisely, as documented in Table C1, the estimated elasticities, when we control for both
and
, are significantly smaller for
_ ,
_ and _ than when we only control for
., and
they remain significantly negative for the first elasticity but not for the two others.
8

and the idiosyncratic error

, and that we can consider them as long-term parameters. When

the variables used are non-stationary, the DOLS estimator eliminates these short-term
correlations by including in the regressions leads and lags of the first differences of the
potentially endogenous explanatory variables.4,

5

Finally, note that we have lagged in

regression (1) all explanatory variables by one year as another safeguard to avoid spurious
contemporaneous correlations with productivity changes.
Our estimation results are shown in Table 1, in the last column 6, for the full specification of
regression (1) and in the columns 1 to 5 for simpler, but less informative, specifications in
which we introduce sequentially less detailed impact indicators that do not differentiate
between direct and indirect price impacts in or from manufacturing and in and from nonmanufacturing industries, nor between wage impacts for low and high-skilled workers.

INCLUDE TABLE 1 about HERE

We can see that the estimated elasticities for all six impact indicators in the full specification
are negative and statistically very significant, with standard errors roughly proportional to
their size (i.e. with comparable Student t-statistics and relative precision). We find very large
and significant differences between the manufacturing and non-manufacturing direct and
indirect price impact estimated elasticities and the low and high-skill wage impact estimated
elasticities: they are twice for
_ than for

for
_

_ than for

_ (about 0.8 versus 0.4), ten times higher

_ (about 5.0 versus 0.5), and almost twice also for

_

than for

(3.0 versus 1.7). The results for the simpler specifications show that the three less

detailed impact elasticities are only slightly affected by the presence of the other indicators.
The similar results presented for our more informative full specification in Table C1 of

4
5

We have found that it is enough to keep only one lead and one lag of these first differences.
To support our long-term interpretation of our estimation results and our reliance on the DOLS
estimators, we performed Levin, Lin and Chu (2002) and Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003) panel data
unit-root tests on our dependent and explanatory variables and Pedroni (1999, 2004) panel data
cointegration tests. All the unit-root tests confirm that our variables are I(1), whereas the
cointegration tests are somewhat less clear-cut, with four out of seven rejecting the nocointegration null hypothesis. However, because of the short time dimension of our panel data
sample, the power of these tests is relatively weak.
9

Appendix C show that the six impact elasticities also appear quite robust, although sizeably
affected by the presence of the other type of indicators.

IV.

Simulation of the potential impact of structural reforms

The estimation results for regression (1) appear quite satisfactory, i.e. with productivity
elasticities of all our price and wage indicators of the expected sign, statistically significant
and reasonably robust. However, they cannot unambiguously be interpreted in terms of
productivity impacts of anti-competitive regulations in the product and labour markets, and
thus cannot directly be used to assess the potential effects of structural reforms in these
markets. Moreover, despite the great care we have taken to avoid specification error biases in
estimating our regression model, it is indeed important to confirm that our production price
and wage indicators indirectly capture the impacts of regulations. We address these two issues
by calibrating them in relation to the OECD Non-Manufacturing Regulations (NMR) and
Harmonized tariffs (HT) indicators on the one hand and to the OECD Employment Protection
Legislation (EPL) indicators on the other hand. As documented in some details in Appendix
B, the OECD indicators are constructed on the basis of very detailed information on laws,
rules and market, country and industry settings, and they have thus the advantage of being
directly related to underlying policies and they can be considered, at least to a major extent, to
be exogenous to productivity developments.
The calibration we have performed simply amounts to four distinct OLS projections on the
OECD indicators: two on the NMR and HT indicators respectively for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing production prices, and two on the EPL indicators for low- and high-skilled
wages separately. The projection coefficients estimates we find corroborate our hypotheses
that changes in production prices and wages are positively and significantly related to changes
in the OECD regulation indicators. These estimates are shown in Appendix D.
By means of this calibration we can interpret and assess the estimates of regression (1) in
terms of two illustrative simulations of the potential long-term MFP gains by country. The
first is an ex-post evaluation of the long term effects of the observed regulatory changes on
the product and labour markets during the 2008-2013 period. This simulation, also detailed in
Appendix D, shows that the MFP gains attributable in the long term to these changes are

10

about 0.6% on average and are mainly due to reforms on product markets, with the higher
gains (of about 2%) for Austria and Italy.
The second simulation that we present now is an ex-ante evaluation of the potential long term
effects of extreme, hypothetical, regulatory reforms if they had been implemented all at once
in 2013. We suppose for the purpose of this simulation that the “lightest practice” regulations
observed as of 2013 could be immediately enforced in all industries, where “lightest
practices” are defined as the averages of the three lowest levels of regulations in the fourteen
countries of our sample.6 Such pervasive and simultaneous switch to lightest practices is thus
an overly extreme, simplified, illustration of structural reforms in product and labour markets,
ignoring of course the many and great institutional and political difficulties of
implementation. The results of this simulation are presented in the Bar chart of Figure 2,
where the height of bars indicates the long-term overall MFP impacts of adopting lightest
practices for each country, and the breath of their components corresponds to the
contributions of adopting the lightest practices related to the NMR, HT and EPL regulations
respectively.

INCLUDE Figure 2 about HERE

We see that the average MFP long term gains are of about 4.4%, but that they vary broadly
across countries, depending on the initial regulation levels, from 1.1% in the UK to 7.0% in
the Czech Republic. The regulatory components of these gains differ widely across countries
from one another in absolute size but are close enough in relative terms. The average MFP
gains from product market reforms amount to 2.5%, and they arise for 60% and 26% from
respectively the indirect and direct impacts of the NMR and HT reforms in non-manufacturing
industries, and for only about 6% and 8% from respectively the indirect and direct impacts of
these reforms in manufacturing industries. The average gains from the EPL reforms are of
about 2.0%, resulting for 75% and 25% from respectively the low-skilled and high-skilled
labour market reforms. It is also interesting to point out the positive correlations between the

6

Although the USA is taken as the reference country and excluded from our estimation sample, we
can include it in the simulation and the definition of lightest practices, thus extending to this
country the average estimates obtained for the thirteen countries used in the sample.
11

size of the simulated MFP gains from the HT and EPL reforms and from the NMR and EPL
reforms: respectively 0.26 and 0.21 as computed over fourteen countries. This is significant
evidence of the complementary linkage between the productivity impacts of regulations on
the product and labour markets which is stressed in Blanchard and Giavazzi (2013).
The average and country simulated MFP impacts from a sudden shift to the lightest regulatory
practices shown in Figure 2 are long term gains. As also detailed in Appendix D, on the basis
of a complementary approximate analysis of the respective adjustments of the changes in
MFP, production prices and wages and OECD indicators, we can have an idea of the overall
speed of evolution to the long term equilibrium. The results are illustrated by the graphs in
Figure 3 for the five following large European countries: France, Germany, Italy, Spain and
the UK. They suggest that on average about 30% of the long-term MFP gains could be
achieved after six years on average.

INCLUDE Figure 3 about HERE

V.

To conclude

This study is an attempt to assess the productivity consequences of anti-competitive
regulations in product and labour markets by investigating them through the lens of an
analysis of the relationships between changes in production prices and wages and changes in
multifactor productivity. In our analysis, production prices and wages are indicative of rent
building and sharing processes, which impede productivity in different ways and to different
extents, and which stem from market imperfections as gauged by the OECD product and
labour market regulations indicators. The results are encouraging notwithstanding the great
difficulties of the approach and limitations of relying on a macroeconomic country*industry
panel. Two simulations, respectively ex-post and ex-ante, based on these results suggest that
nearly all countries, particularly European countries, can expect significant gains in
multifactor productivity over the years from economic policies reforming anticompetitive
regulations on the product and labour markets.
Our estimates and simulations suffer clearly from various weaknesses, due in particular to the
data limitation, with implications of course on the econometric methods implemented. They
12

should be taken with particular caution and the policy indications that they suggest considered
as tentative. In particular, the ex-ante simulation of an extreme, hypothetical of a programme
of product and labour market reforms consisting in the immediate adoption of country lightest
regulation practices must only be viewed as illustrative. We also do not consider in our
analysis the great institutional, political and social difficulties that the implementation of such
ambitious structural reform programmes usually encounters.
We can stress, however, that the evidence concerning the indirect impact of product market
regulatory changes in non-manufacturing, which is strongest in our present results analysis, is
very much consistent with our previous two evaluations based on an approach largely
different in important respects from the one followed here (see Bourlès et al., 2013, and Cette,
Lopez and Mairesse, 2013). We can also mention that a number of historical country
experiences seem to confirm that ambitious structural reform programmes implemented over
the last decades have had very large multifactor productivity impacts. This is the case of the
reform programmes implemented in the Netherlands in the early 1980 or in Australia, Canada
and Sweden in the early 1990 that have been followed in the subsequent decade by a much
faster growth in multifactor productivity (see Bergeaud, Cette and Lecat, 2014).

13

Figure 1: Diagram of the overall framework

14

Figure 2: Simulated long-term impacts on MFP
from the adoption of the lightest practices by country

EPL – High-Skilled and EPL – Low-Skilled: Long-run impacts through high and low-skilled
wages, respectively.
NMR – Indirect and NMR – Direct: Long-run indirect and direct impacts through production
prices in non-manufacturing industries, respectively.
HT – Indirect and HT – Direct: Long-run indirect and direct impacts through production
prices in manufacturing industries, respectively.

15

Figure 3: Simulated evolution of impacts on MFP
from the adoption of the lightest practices
for France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom

16

Table 1: Main estimation results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.688***

0.821***

0.704***

0.808***

0.720***

0.756***

[0.014]

[0.013]

[0.014]

[0.012]

[0.014]

[0.015]

Dependent variable:

US MFP (

)

-0.513***

-0.523***

-0.441***

[0.034]

[0.033]

[0.033]

Direct prices in

All industries

Manufacturing
industries (
_ )

-0.379***

Non-Manuf.
industries (
_ )

-0.827***

[0.037]

[0.090]
-0.486***

-0.546***

-0.479***

[0.074]

[0.070]

[0.068]

Country wages * industry
labour share

Indirect prices from

All industries

Manufacturing
industries ( _ )

-0.446***

Non-Manuf.
_ )
industries (

-5.060***

[0.069]

[0.898]
-2.338***

-2.091***

[0.165]

[0.170]

All Skills

-3.043***
High-Skilled (

_w)
[0.329]
-1.743***

Low-Skilled ( _ )

[0.215]

Observations

2820

2820

2820

2820

2820

2820

R-squared

0.779

0.760

0.785

0.774

0.798

0.804

*** Significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *significant at 10%. Standard errors between brackets.
Country*industry and country*year fixed effects included. All the explanatory variables are one year lagged.
Estimator: DOLS estimates performed with one lag and one lead (corresponding coefficients not presented).

17

REFERENCES
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (2009): “The Economics of Growth”, MIT Press.
Allegra, Elisabetta, Mario Forni, Michele Grillo, and Lara Magnani (2004): “Antitrust
Policy and National Growth: Some Evidence from Italy”, Giornale degli Economisti e Annali
di Economia, 63(1), 69-86.
Arnold, Jens, Beata Javorcik, and Aaditya Mattoo (2011): “Does Services Liberalization
Benefit Manufacturing Firms?”, Journal of International Economics, 85(1), 136-146.
Askénazy, Philippe, Gilbert Cette and Paul Maarek (2013): “Rent Building, Rent Sharing:
A Panel Country-Industry Empirical Analysis”, Banque de France Working Paper Series,
369.
Barone, Guglielmo, and Federico Cingano (2011): “Service regulation and growth:
evidence from OECD countries”, The Economic Journal, 121(555), 931-957.
Bergeaud, Antonin, Gilbert Cette and Remy Lecat (2014): “Productivity trends from 1890
to 2012 in advanced countries”, Banque de France, Working paper, n° 475.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Francesco Giavazzi (2003): “Macroeconomic Effects of
Regulation and Deregulation in Goods and Labor markets”, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118, 879-907.
Bourlès, Renaud, Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, Jacques Mairesse and Giuseppe Nicoletti
(2013): “Do Product Market Regulations in Upstream Sectors Curb Productivity Growth?
Panel Data Evidence for OECD Countries”, The Review of Economics and Statistics,
December, 95(5), 1750–1768.
Cette, Gilbert, Jimmy Lopez and Jacques Mairesse (2013): “Upstream product market
regulations, ICT, R&D and productivity”, NBER Working Paper Series, N° 19488.
Forthcoming in the Review of Income and Wealth.
Forlani, Emanuele (2010): “Competition in the Service Sector and the Performances of
Manufacturing Firms: Does Liberalization Matter?”, CESifo Working Paper series, 2942.
Griliches, Zvi and Jacques Mairesse (1998): “Production Functions: The Search for
Identification”, in Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frish
Centennial Symposium, S. Ström ed., Cambridge University Press, 169-203.
18

Mairesse, Jacques (1990): “Time-series and Cross-sectional Estimates on Panel Data : Why
Are They Different and Why Should They Be Equal ?" in Panel Data and Labor Market
Studies, J. Hartog, G. Ridder and J. Theeuwes, eds. Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1990, p. 8195.
Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2013): “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in
Higher Order Integrated Systems”, Econometrica, 61(4).

19

20

APPENDIX A: STUDY SAMPLE AND MAIN VARIABLES

STUDY SAMPLE
Our study sample is an unbalanced country-industry panel dataset of 2,812 observations from
1987 to 2007, which have been assembled from several sources of data, primarily the STAN
OECD data base and which we have already used in our two previous studies (Bourlès et al.,
2013, and Cette, Lopez and Mairesse, 2013). For the purpose of this analysis we had to
complete it as mainly concerns the production prices and wages information. It covers
fourteen countries (Austria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States) and
eighteen industries, which we pooled in two groups of industries delineated mainly for
reasons of congruence with the OECD regulation indicators HT and NMR (see Appendix B).
The first group, referred as Manufacturing, consists of thirteen industries, eleven of which are
properly in manufacturing: food products, textiles, wood products, paper, chemicals products,
non-metallic mineral products, metal products, machinery non elsewhere classified (n.e.c.),
electrical equipment, transport equipment, manufacturing non elsewhere classified (n.e.c.),
and two other industries construction and hotels & restaurants, which we thought were more
appropriately included in this group. The second group comprise five network and service
industries: energy, transport & communication, retail distribution, banking services and
professional services, which for simplicity we call Non-Manufacturing industries.

MULTI FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY (MFP)
Our regression model, referred as (1) in the text, is expressed in terms of MFP levels. These
levels are calculated for a base year (2000) and then extended over the sample period using
data on MFP growth calculated as follows (using small letters for logarithms):
Δ

Δ

.Δ

.Δ
21

.Δ

Δ

.Δ

where

is the Value Added at constant price of country c, industry i at time t,

total employment in number of workers,

,

and

is the

the physical capital stocks of,

respectively, Information and communication technology (I), Non-ICT equipment (NI) and
non-residential Structure (S),

the Knowledge capital stock and

,

,

and

the output

elasticity of these factors in industry i, approximated by the factor cost shares over total cost
in the USA, averaged on the 1987-2007 period for each industry. Remember that regression
(1) including country*industry fixed effects, our estimates of the impact parameters of interest
are in fact independent of the MFP levels and relate only to MFP growth rates.
Capital stocks

,

and

and

are calculated from investment data using the so called

permanent inventory method, assuming constant geometric rates of depreciation: 5% for nonresidential structures, 10% for non-ICT equipment, 20% for ICT equipment and 25% for
R&D. In order to compute investments at constant prices, we have used investment deflators
at the national level. Because of the lack of specific price information for R&D, we have used
as a proxy the manufacturing production deflator. To improve comparability, we have
assumed that in all countries for the ICT investments in hardware, software and
telecommunications equipment the ratio of investment prices to the GDP price is the same as
for the USA. This correction appears indeed as important since the USA is the country that
uses most systematically hedonic methods to measure these prices and that the quality
improvements have been considerable for these products during the study period.
Data on value added and employment come from the OECD STAN database, data on R&D
expenses from the ANBERD OECD database and on physical investments for non-residential
structures, non-ICT and ICT equipment from the EU KLEMS database. Since R&D is not yet
treated as investment in the national accounts collected by OECD, we had to correct both the
industry value added by adding (“expensing out”) the intermediate consumption of their R&D
activities, and the industry number of employees by subtracting the number of R&D
personnel (“avoiding double counting”). Note also that we had to modify the price index of
value added, and hence its value at constant prices, for the “Electrical and optical equipment”
industry, which includes ICT equipment. We assumed as for ICT investment that in this
industry the ratio of value added prices to the GDP price is the same in all countries as for the
USA.
The country Box Plots of Figure A1 shows that MFP growth rates cannot only be widely
varying from year to year and across industries, but that they also differ significantly in
22

average by country, the median MFP growth i ranging from 0.35% in Spain and 1.01% in
Canada to 2.97% and 4.28% in the Czech Republic.

PRODUCTION PRICE AND WAGE INDEXES
In regression model (1), as explained in section II of the text, we have computed the price
indicators of direct and indirect impacts with respect to manufacturing and nonmanufacturing:

_

_

,

_

,

and

_

on the basis of the

country*industry production prices indexes to the country GDP price index, which are
available in the OECD STAN database. We have computed similarly the low and high-skilled
wage indicators of impact:

_

and

_

using the country wage indexes relative to the

country GDP price index, which come from the EUKLEMS database. As noted in the text,
what we refer as low-skilled indicator

_

is in fact combined with the medium- skilled

indicator, with some gain of precision in estimation.
The Bar chart of Figure A2 shows the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sample average
annual growth rates of country production prices relative to GDP price. Except for Japan, all
these growth rates relative to GDP price growth rate are negative, and quite limited in average
per year. We see nonetheless significant differences across countries and a wider relative
average decrease for manufacturing than for non-manufacturing industries. Similarly, the Bar
chart of Figure A3 shows the sample average annual growth rate of real wages for highskilled and low-skilled workers. These growth rates are all positive and larger than for the
production prices, but also differ markedly across countries in average per year. We also
observe they are quite close for the low and high-skilled wages.

VARIANCE ANALYSIS OF MAIN VARIABLES WITH RESPECT TO THE FIXED
EFFECTS
We have explained in Section III of the text why, in addition to the necessary inclusion of
country*industry fixed effects, we have included country*year fixed effects in estimating
regression model (1), and why we did not also include industry*year fixed effects. We also
refer to Cette, Lopez and Mairesse (2013) to clarify why these two specifications tend to
respectively provide upper and lower range estimates, which can be indeed verified in Table
23

C1 in Appendix C. One important reason we put forward was the trade-off between
exacerbating attenuation biases from errors in variables and correcting for omitted variables
and stricto sensu endogeneity. Such trade-off mainly depends on the reduction of variability
in the dependent and independent regression variables, which is resulting from introducing
fixed effects and which can often be massive.
Tables A1 and A2 show in detail how such reduction is increasing with the progressive
introduction of fixed effects. The analysis of variance in Table 1 starts from the regression
specification in levels with country*industry fixed effects that we privileged. The analysis of
variance in Table A2 starts from a specification in first-differences that also control for
country*industry fixed effects by first-differencing country*year observations, but is more
vulnerable to errors in variables than the fixed effect country*industry or “within
country*industry” that we favour.
In both tables, each column gives the residual standard-deviation of the regression on a
sequence of fixed effects for each of variables in our analysis. Thus in Table A1, column (1)
shows the dispersion if we were including only the country, industry and year fixed effects
,

,

while column (2) shows by how much this dispersion is reduced by also including

the country*industry fixed effects

(which we have to do since all our variables are

computed from country*industry indexes equal to 1 by construction in a given reference
year). Columns (3) and (4) document the further reductions in dispersion by including
respectively the country*year fixed effects

alone, which is our preferred specification, or

both the country*year and industry*year fixed effects

and

. We can observe that the

residual standard deviations in column (3) are particularly small and that they are even
_

smaller in column (4) for
manufacturing, and for

_

and

, the indirect price impact indicator with respect to non_

, the low and high-skilled impact indicators. This

accounts for the relatively large standard errors of the corresponding estimated elasticities of
our preferred estimates in column (6) of Table 1 in the text. It also accounts for the significant
drop in these elasticities in column of Table C1 of Appendix C, which is probably related to
the exacerbation of measurement errors biases.
Estimation in country*industry log first differences may be easier to interpret than estimation
in within country*industry log levels, which is what we do in another way by including in the
specification of regression (1) the country*industry fixed effects

. The columns (1), (2)

and (3) of Table A2 thus correspond respectively to the columns (2), (3) and (4) of Table A1.
24

We can indeed verify that the comparable evidence. Actually when we estimate regression (1)
in country*industry log first differences, we obtain estimated elasticities that are not
qualitatively different but that tend to smaller and have higher standard errors. In fact within
level estimators have the advantage of being less affected by potential measurement errors in
variables than estimators in first differences, which why we prefer the former in the present
analysis (see Mairesse, 1990).

25

Au
st
r
C ia
a
n
C
ze ad
ch a
R
D e p.
en
m
a
Fi rk
nl
an
Fr d
a
G nce
er
m
an
y
Ita
ly
N Jap
et
he an
rla
nd
s
Sp
a
U
n i S w in
te
d ede
K
n
U ing
ni
d
om
te
d
St
at
es

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

Figure A1: Country Box Plot of log MFP growth

MFP growth rates= log (MFPt) –log (MFPt-1) in percent

26

Figure A2: Sample average annual growth of relative production prices

Figure A3: Sample average annual growth of real wages, by skill level

27

Table A1 : Analysis of variance of the regression variables in log levels
controlling sequentially for fixed effects

Fixed effects

Country, industry, year
Country*industry
Country*year
Industry*year
MFP (

USA MFP (

)
)

Manuf. industries (
Direct prices

Indirect
prices

_ )

Non-manuf. industries
(
_ )
Manuf. industries (

_ )

Non-manuf. industries
(
_ )

(1)
Y
N
N
N

(2)
Y
Y
N
N

(3)
Y
Y
Y
N

(4)
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.235

0.162

0.163

0.079

0.168

0.160

0.164

---*

0.038

0.033

0.067

0.051

0.007

0.007

0.030

0.028

0.080

0.067

0.03

0.019

0.042

0.031

0.003

0.002

Country
0.071
0.009
0.007
0.004
High-Skilled ( _ )
wages *
industry
0.106
0.015
0.010
0.006
Low-Skilled ( _ )
labour share
2766
2571
2433
2173
Degree of freedom
2820
2820
2820
2820
Observations
*The variability in (
) is necessarily null when controlling for industry*year fixed
effects. Columns (1), (2), (3) and (4) give the standard deviations of the variables after
controlling for fixed effects.

28

Table A2: Analysis of variance of the regression variables
in country*industry log differences
controlling sequentially for fixed effects

Fixed effects

Country*year
Industry*year
MFP (

USA MFP (

)
)
_ )

Manuf. industries (
Direct prices

Non-manuf. industries
(
_ )
Manuf. industries (

Indirect prices

_ )

Non-manuf. industries
_ )
(

(1)
N
N

(2)
Y
N

(3)
Y
Y

0.066

0.064

0.052

0.058

0.057

---*

0.030

0.028

0.021

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.016

0.011

0.008

0.004

0.002

0.002

Country wages
0.004
0.003
0.002
High-Skilled ( _ )
* industry
0.007
0.003
0.003
Low-Skilled ( _ )
labour shares
Degree of freedom
2590
2432
2172
Observations
2591
2591
2591
*The variability in (
) is necessarily null when controlling for industry*year
fixed effects. Column (1) gives the standard deviations of the first difference of the
variables, while columns (2) and (3) gives them after controlling respectively for
country*year fixed effects and both country*year and industry*year fixed effects.

29

30

APPENDIX B: OECD REGULATION INDICATORS

In this Appendix, we present shortly the OECD regulation indicators on which we rely to
calibrate our manufacturing and non-manufacturing production prices indicators and our low
and high-skill wages indicators. They are precisely 1) the Non-Manufacturing Regulation
(NMR) indicators (available for five non-manufacturing industries), 2) the Harmonized Tariffs
(HT) indicators, available for manufacturing industries, and the Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) restrictiveness indicators for the construction and hotels & restaurants, 3) and the
Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) indicators.

NMR INDICATORS
The OECD NMR indicators measure the extent to which competition and firm choices are
restricted where there are no a priori reasons for government interference, or where
regulatory goals could plausibly be achieved by less coercive means. They are based on
detailed information on laws, rules, market and industry settings and cover energy (gas and
electricity), transport (rail, road and air) and communication (post, fixed and cellular
telecommunications), retail distribution and professional services (see Conway and Nicoletti,
2007, for a more detailed presentation).7
The Bar chart in Figure B1 documents the values of the NMR indicators and the
corresponding lightest regulation practices for 2013.8 The year 2013 is the one chosen to
construct the lightest regulatory practices taken as target of the ex-ante policy simulation

7

Note that that we cannot include banking and financial services in our analysis, since the indicator

of regulatory restrictions for this industry has been constructed by Serres et al. (2006) only
for the year 2003.
8

Note that the 2013 OECD NMR indicators take into account new questions. Using the updates
provided by OECD results in insignificant changes in our estimation results.
31

presented in the text.9 We observe differences that can be very important both between
country and within country across the four non-manufacturing industry regulations.

HT AND FDI INDICATORS
The OECD Harmonized Tariff (HT) indicators are computed on the basis of the ad valorem
tariff rates applied to the most favoured nation at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System
Product Classification. They are aggregated into indicators using import-based weights at the
2-digit (ISIC Rev. 3) industry level. These indicators are coded between 0 and 6 with 0 for the
smallest tariffs (see Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2003, for a more detailed presentation).
Since no HT indicators do not exist for the ‘Construction’ and ‘Hotels and restaurants’
industries, we use for them the OECD Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) restrictiveness
indicators. These indicators measure different forms of discrimination against foreign firms,
such as i) restrictions on foreign ownership, i.e. limitations of the share of companies’ equity
capital in a particular sector that are not applied to domestic firms; ii) obligatory screening
and approval procedures for foreign affiliates; iii) operational constraints or controls for
affiliates of foreign companies, including constraints to the mobility of foreign professionals
working in these affiliates. They are primarily based on information from the GATS
Commitments and country submissions to the OECD Code of Liberalization of Capital
Movements (see Koyama and Golub, 2006, for a more detailed presentation).
The Bar chart in Figure B2 records the HT and FDI indicator values in 2007 (the last year for
which the HT indicator information is available), as well as the corresponding values of the
lightest regulation practices. As in the case of the NMR indicator values, we observe major
differences between country and within country across industry. We see in particular that
harmonized tariffs are very high in the food products (ISIC code 15-16) and in the textiles
(17-19), with significant differences between countries.

9

However, note that, since the HT indicators are not available after 2007, we have simply assumed
they remain constant afterwards for the purpose of our calibration and ex-ante simulation.
32

EPL INDICATORS
The OECD provides various labour market regulation indicators: unemployment replacement
rates, expenditures on labour market programmes, statutory minimum wages, union members
and Employment Protection Legislations (EPL). Bassanini and Venn (2008) provide an
empirical analysis of the impact of these various indicators on productivity. Our analysis
focus on the EPL indicators, which are the most frequently used in the empirical literature on
the impact of labour market regulations on productivity and growth. Like the NMR indicators,
the EPL indicators are based on detailed information on laws, rules and market settings. They
measure the procedures and cost involved in dismissing individual workers with regular
contracts (data on collective dismissal is available only since 1998) and regulations on
temporary contracts, including regulations on fixed-term and temporary work agency
contracts (see OECD Employment Outlook 2013 for more information).
The Bar chart in Figure B3 shows the values of EPL on regular and on temporary contracts in
2013 as well as the lightest practice. We observe that are higher in continental European
countries relatively to the other countries, and particularly as concerns regular contracts.

33

Figure B1: OECD Non-Manufacturing Regulation (NMR) indicators in 2013
Scale 0-6 for each indicator, 0 for the most pro-competitive

34

Figure B2: OECD Harmonized Tariff (HT) and Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
indicators in 2007, by country-industry
Scale 0-6 for each industry, 0 for the smallest tariffs

The 2-digit (ISIC Rev. 3) industries (with their codes in parentheses) codes are the following:
food products (15-16), textiles (17-19), wood products (20), paper (21-22), chemicals
products (23-25), non-metallic mineral products (26), metal products (27-28), machinery
n.e.c. (29), electrical equipment (30-33), transport equipment (34-35), manufacturing n.e.c.
(36-37), construction (45) and hotels & restaurants (55).

35

Figure B3: OECD Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) indicators in 2013
Scale 0-6, 0 for the most flexible country labour market

36

APPPENDIX REFERENCES
Bassanini, Andrea, and Danielle Venn (2008): "The Impact of Labour Market Policies on
Productivity in OECD Countries", International Productivity Monitor, 17, 3-15.
Conway, Paul, and Giuseppe Nicoletti (2007): “Product Market Regulation and
Productivity Convergence: OECD Evidence and Implications for Canada", International
Productivity Monitor, 15, 3-24.
De Serres, Alain, Shuji Kobayakawa, Torsten Slok, and Laura Vartia (2006):
"Regulation of Financial Systems and Economic Growth in OECD Countries: An Empirical
Analysis", OECD Economic Studies, 43, 77-113
Koyama, Takeshi and Stephen S. Golub (2006): “OECD's FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness
Index: Revision and Extension to more Economies”, OECD Working Paper, 525.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, and Stefano Scarpetta (2003): “Regulation, Productivity and Growth”,
Economic Policy, 36, 11-72.
OECD (2013): Employment Outlook 2013, OECD Publishing, Paris.

37

38

APPENDIX C: ROBUSTNESS OF MAIN RESULTS

In this Appendix, we complement the main estimation results of Table 1 in the text, by
documenting in Table C1 the robustness of our six detailed preferred impact elasticity
estimates to the sequential omission of the direct and indirect price impact indicators and
wage impact indicators. We also document in Table C2 the robustness of our main results to
the inclusion of interacted fixed effects and the choice of the DOLS method of estimation.

ROBUSTNESS TO THE OMISSION OF PRICE AND WAGE INDICATORS OF IMPACT
Table 1 in the text shows in column 1 to 5 how our estimates of the three less detailed impact
elasticities are affected when we include sequentially the three overall impact price and wage
indicators in our regression specification. They appear to be very robust since they are
moderately decreasing whenever another indicator is included, but not the point of becoming
statistically different. Table C1 presents similar evidence in columns 2 to5 for our more
informative full specification recorded in column 1(corresponding to column 6 of Table 1 in
the text). We find that the six impact elasticities appear less robust with respect to their
magnitude. Estimated alone, the elasticity of the price indirect non-manufacturing impact
indicator estimated alone varies from -5.1 to-9.4 and that of the high-skilled wage impact
indicator from -3.0 to-4.2. Our preferred regression specification estimates in column 6 of
Table 1, in which manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries are separated for the two
types of price impact indicators and the low and high-skill are also distinguished for the wage
impact indicators, appear less robust with respect to their magnitude, but quite satisfactory
since they remain all negative and statistically very significant.

39

ROBUSTNESS TO FIXED EFFECTS AND TO DOLS ESTIMATION
As explained in Section III of the text, we include in our preferred regression specification (1)
not only the country, industry and year fixed effects
country*industry and country*year fixed effects

and

,

and

, but also the

. Including these interacted fixed

effects is a useful precaution to correct for the biases due to the omission of relevant
explanatory variables, but also to potential sources of endogeneity such as differences in
country multifactor productivity not related to product or labor market imperfections (and not
captured by the presence of

) and changes in prices and wages in response to country

productivity shocks. Furthermore, including the country*industry fixed effects

implies that

the evidence on which we rely for estimation is only based on the within country*industry
changes over time of the price and wage indicator variables in the regression, a necessary
requirement since they are computed from price and wage indices normalized to be equal to 1
in a given reference year (in our case 2000).
We also explained that going one step further by including industry*year fixed effects
also a possibility with a for industry technical changes fuller than the lagged

is

variable

to which they substitute in the regression, as well as a more complete control for other
variations in industry multifactor productivity unrelated to product or labor market
imperfections. This would be, however, at the cost of reducing even more the identifying
variability of the data (see the variance analysis in Appendix A), and it would be at the risk of
exacerbating downward biases from measurement errors in variables. Following Cette, Lopez
and Mairesse (2013), we concluded that the regression results obtained when including either
only or both

and

can be viewed as providing respectively upper and lower bound

estimates, but that we can also put some more confidence on the upper bound estimates and
focus on them as our preferred estimates.
Table C2 recalls our preferred upper bound estimates in columns 1 and 2 (corresponding to
columns 5 and 6 of Table 1 of the text) and documents the lower bound estimates in columns
3 and 4. We observe that indeed the lower bound estimates are much smaller in absolute
values, and significantly so, than their upper bound counterparts, but that they remain all
negative. When we consider in column 3 only the two fully aggregated price and wage impact
elasticities, we see that the two first, which are reduced by a factor of two, are still statistically
significant at confidence levels of 1%. The third one, the wage elasticity, which is smaller by
a factor of four, is statistically significant only at a 10% confidence level. When we separate
40

in column 4 the price direct impact elasticities for manufacturing and non-manufacturing, the
price indirect impact elasticities from manufacturing and non-manufacturing, and the low and
high-skilled real wage impact elasticities, we find that four out of six of these lower bound
estimates remain statistically different from zero at a 1% confidence interval. However, the
price indirect impact elasticity from non-manufacturing and the low-skill wage impact
elasticity, which stand out as very much reduced, are no more statistically significant from
zero (even at a 10% confidence level). Such extreme reduction and lack of significance are
most likely related to the very small residual identifying variability of the two corresponding
price and wage impact indicators

_

and

_

(see Table A1 in Appendix A), and

possibly reflect large attenuation biases due to the exacerbation of measurement errors in
these indicators.
In Section III of the text, we have also justified the choice of a DOLS estimator than the OLS
estimator to make sure that we estimate long-term elasticities, not affected by short-term
correlations between the idiosyncratic error and the variables in the regression. We can see
that the two types of estimates in fact appear quite close for all six elasticities by comparing
the two columns 5 and 6 to columns 1 and 2 in Table C1. However, Hausman specification
test rejects strongly (with a p-value of 0.006) the consistency of OLS estimator and we thus
prefer the DOLS estimator.

41

Table C1: Robustness of main results to the omission of impacts indicators
Dependent variable: MFP (
)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.756***

0.731***

0.713***

0.818***

0.835***

[0.015]

[0.014]

[0.015]

[0.012]

[0.013]

Manufacturing
industries (
_ )

-0.379***

-0.434***

-0.481***

[0.037]

[0.037]

[0.037]

Non-Manuf.
industries (
_ )

-0.827***

-1.072***

-1.051***

[0.090]

[0.088]

[0.085]

Manufacturing
industries ( _ )

-0.446***

-0.475***

-0.488***

[0.069]

[0.070]

[0.072]

Non-Manuf.
industries (
_ )

-5.060***

-7.490***

-9.361***

[0.898]

[0.863]

[0.852]

Dependent variable:

Country wages
Indirect prices Direct prices
* industry
from
in
labour share

US MFP (

Observations

)

High Skills (

_w)

Low Skills ( _ )

-3.043***

-4.239***

[0.329]

[0.320]

-1.743***

-2.037***

[0.215]

[0.223]

2820

2820

2820

2820

2820

0,804
0.792
0.777
0.773
0.779
R-squared
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *significant at 10%. Standard errors between
brackets. Country*industry and country*year fixed effects included.

42

Table C2: Ronustness of main results to industry*year fixed effects
and to DOLS estimation
Dependent variable: MFP (
)

Estimator

DOLS

Country wages
* industry
labour share

Indirect
prices from

Direct prices
in

US MFP (

)

All industries

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.720***
[0.014]
-0.441***
[0.033]

0.756***
[0.015]

_

_

0.687***
[0.013]
-0.460***
[0.031]

0.717***
[0.014]

-0.479***
[0.068]

High-Skilled
( _ )
Low-Skilled
( _ )
Observations
R-squared
Fixed effects:

-0.130***
[0.033]
-0.719***
[0.080]
-0.278***
[0.090]

-0.446***
[0.069]
-5.060***
[0.898]

Manuf. indus.
( _ )
Non Manuf.
(
_ )
All Skills

-0.248***
[0.030]
-0.379***
[0.037]
-0.827***
[0.090]

Manuf. indus.
(
_ )
Non Manuf.
(
_ )
All industries

OLS

-2.091***
[0.170]

-0.406***
[0.034]
-0.785***
[0.080]
-0.392***
[0.064]

-0.271***
[0.091]
-0.798
[0.872]
-0.499*
[0.285]

-3.043***
[0.329]
-1.743***
[0.215]

-0.359***
[0.064]
-4.838***
[0.844]
-1.650***
[0.157]

-2.162***
[0.477]
-0.112
[0.339]

-2.412***
[0.292]
-1.327***
[0.202]

2820
0.798

2820
0.804

2820
0.872

2820
0.877

2820
0.783

2820
0.788

Country*industry

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Country*year

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Industry*year
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *significant at 10%. Standard errors between
brackets.

43

44

APPENDIX D: EX-POST SIMULATION OF MFP GAINS FROM 2008-2013
REGULATORY CHANGES, AND ASSESSMENT OF THE LONG TERM AND
DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENT CALIBRATION RELATIONSHIPS

EX-POST SIMULATION OF MFP GAINS FROM 2008-2013 REGULATORY CHANGES
THE OECD Harmonized Tariffs HT indicators are not available after 2008, so our simulation
is only based on the evidence provided by the OECD Non-Manufacturing Regulation NMR
indicators and the OECD Employment protection Legislation EPL indicators for the different
countries in our sample (with the exception of the USA for which the information is also
lacking in 2008). The Bar chart in Figure D1 documents what have been the changes in these
indicators over the period 2008-2013. It shows that Italy, France and Austria are the three
countries that have implemented the most significant non-manufacturing pro-competitive
regulatory reforms, while such reforms have been very modest in the other countries. Italy in
particular has adopted several reforms in transport and communication industries and in
professional services in the period. It also appears that the EPL type regulatory reforms have
been very limited in countries.
The Bar chart in Figure D2 shows the long-term MFP gains that can be expected from these
regulatory changes. It is similar to Figure 2 in the text for the expected long term MFP gains
under the extreme hypothesis of an immediate implementation in all countries of the 2013
lightest regulatory practices. The evaluation method is the same in the two cases as explained
in section 4 of the text. We have simply aggregated the country*industry estimated MFP gains
at the country level by weighting them by the value added industry shares in national GDP.
The differences in long term MFP gains across countries are thus directly related to the
differences in the changes in NMR and EPL regulatory reforms. The estimated MFP gains are
highest for Italy, then France and Austria. It is important to keep in mind, however, that these
are long term expected gains, and that on the basis of our rough assessment of adjustment

45

speed we can consider that only about 20% to 30% of these gains have possibly been
achieved as of 2014.

ASSESSMENT OF THE LONG TERM CALIBRATION RELATIONSHIPS
The long term calibration relationships that allow us to perform the simulation of the (MFP)
gains resulting from structural reforms of product and labour markets, as quantified by the
OECD NMR, HT and EPL indicators are documented in Table D1. They are estimated as four
distinct OLS projections of respectively: in column (1) the country*industry changes on
production prices in non-manufacturing industries on the NMR indicators; in column (2) the
country*industry changes on production prices in manufacturing industries on the HT
indicators; in column (3) the country changes in low-skilled wages on the EPL indicators for
low-skilled workers; and in column (4) the country changes in high-skilled wages on the EPL
indicators

for

high-skilled

workers.

The

two

calibration

relations

thus

include

country*industry and country*year fixed effects for production prices and separate country
and year fixed effects for wages. The coefficients are all positive as expected, estimated very
precisely for the first three relations, less so for the fourth

ASSESSMENT OF THE DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENT CALIBRATION RELATIONSHIPS
The DOLS estimator provides the long-term coefficients of the estimated relationships. To
assess the dynamic path of impacts of the reforms, we rely on simple error-correction
regressions and proceed in two steps. First, we compute the error-correction terms, noted EC,
as the differences between the current values of our dependent variables (
_ ,

_ ,

_ ,

_ , and

_ ,

_ ,

) and their long-term prediction.10 Then, we regress, the

observed first differences in these variables (with Δ indicating a first difference) on the
corresponding lagged error-correction terms:
Δ

∗

_
∗

,
Δ

Δ

_

∗
∗

,

Δ

_

10

Note that this difference would be equal to the residual of the long-term estimation if we
used OLS, but this not anymore the case with DOLS.
46

, and

Δ

∗

Table D2 presents the corresponding estimation results. As expected, a positive errorcorrection term has a negative and significant impact on the growth of production prices, real
wages and multifactor productivity.

47

Figure D1: OECD NMR and EPL indicators changes over 2008-2013 period
Scale of the indicators in levels: 0-6, 0 for the most pro-competitive level.

Figure D2: Simulated long-term MFP gains expected from the NMR and EPL
regulatory changes over 2008-2013.

EPL – High-Skilled and EPL – Low-Skilled: Long-run impacts through high and low-skilled
wages, respectively.
NMR – Indirect and NMR – Direct: Long-run indirect and direct impacts through production
prices in non-manufacturing industries, respectively.
48

Table D1: Long term calibration relationships
Dep. variable

Relative production prices
(1)
(2)
Non-manuf.
Manuf.
Industries
industries

Real wages
(3)

(4)

High-skilled

Low-skilled

0.024***
0.031***
0.030*
0.087***
NMR, HT and
EPL
regulatory
indicators)
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.017]
[0.017]
Observations
753
2067
238
238
R-squared
0.457
0.201
0.808
0.828
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *significant at 10%. Standard errors between
brackets. Country*industry and country*year fixed effects are included.
(1): The regulation indicators are the NMR indicators in column 1, the HT indictors in column
2 and the EPL indicator in column 3 and 4.

Table D2: Dynamic adjustment calibration relationships

Dependent variable

MFP growth
(
)
(1)

Error Correction
term (EC)

Relative production
price growth ( )
Nonmanuf.
Manuf.
(2)
(3)

Real wage growth (
Highskilled
(4)

Lowskilled
(5)

-0.215***

-0.235***

-0.025**

-0.119***

-0.066**

[0.013]

[0.027]

[0.010]

[0.036]

[0.033]

)

Observations
2820
753
2067
225
225
R-squared
0.095
0.088
0.004
0.056
0.039
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *significant at 10%. Standard errors between
brackets.

49

