NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OUTSIDE PURCHASE CONTRACTS, HUMAN CAPITAL AND FIRM CAPITAL
STRUCTURE
S. Katie Moon
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 20579
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20579

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We thank Ashwini Agrawal, Tony Cookson, David Matsa, Alexandra Phillips, Michael Roberts, Giorgo
Sertsios and seminar participants at George Washington University, Humboldt University, Tsinghua
University, University of Colorado, University of Minnesota, University of Oregon, UBC Summer
Finance conference and USC for helpful comments. All errors are the authors alone. The Securities
and Exchange Commission, as a matter of policy, disclaims responsibility for any private publication
or statement by any of its employees. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Commission, the author's colleagues on the staff of the commission,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by S. Katie Moon and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Outside Purchase Contracts, Human Capital and Firm Capital Structure
S. Katie Moon and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 20579
October 2014
JEL No. G31,G32,L1,L22,L23,L24
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of outside purchase contracts on firm risk and firm capital structure. We
find that firms with more outside purchase contracts have less risky cash flows. Despite these less
risky cash flows, firms with these contracts also have less financial leverage especially when they
operate in high value-added industries. Examining firm financing decisions, we document that firms
with more outside contracts are more likely to issue private securities. Our results are consistent with
firms with more outside purchase contracts using less leverage to decrease the expected costs of financial
distress on their explicit and implicit contracting parties.

S. Katie Moon
Securities and Exchange Commission
Washington, D.C.
s.katiemoon@gmail.com
Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business, Hoffman Hall
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway
Bridge Hall 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu

1

Introduction

Purchasing and outsourcing from supplier firms has been growing extensively in the 21st century, yet
we know little about how such contracting decisions affect a firm’s real and financial decisions. Evidence from the electronics, pharmaceuticals and automotive industries shows that the use of contract
manufacturing has been growing significantly. In particular, the electronics industry outsourced $75
billion to contract manufacturers in 2000, representing 10 percent of total production (Plambeck and
Taylor (2005)). In addition, firms have been signing extensive contracts with outside firms to run their
communication and informational technology operations.
We examine the effect of outside firm contracts on firm risk and capital structure using a unique
database of purchase contracts (purchase obligation) data that we collect from firm 10-Ks. In a
complete contracting world, using outside contracts would not affect firm capital structure. However,
with incomplete contracts between the firm and its real side claimants, using outside contracts may
affect financial structure through its effect on the firm’s suppliers and own employees. The effect on
suppliers and employees can arise due to potential costs that financial distress could impose on them.
We collect data on outside firm purchase contracts using web crawling and text parsing of firm
10-Ks following the SEC’s rule that requires firms to report significant outside purchase contracts
to investors in their financial statements. These contracts include both traditional supply contracts
and service contracts which outsource tasks like customer call centers, handling communication and
information technology for the firm, and the production of products. A prominent example of this
later type of contracting is Apple Inc. signing contracts for the production of its iPhones.
Our focus is on both domestic and international contracts as our data shows 47.5 percent of
contracts are from the U.S., with 25.5 percent of contracting parties from Asia, and the remaining
from Europe and other regions.1 We note that in our data there is still a large fraction of firms in
each industry that do not use material outside contracts. They might have suppliers, but do not use
explicit contracts as they may purchase on the open market. Thus, the relationship between such firms
and their suppliers is likely not to involve investment in firm-specific assets. This fact enables us to
effectively examine the characteristics of the firms that use suppliers with material outside contracts
and the possible economic link between outside purchase contracts and leverage/financing decisions.

1

See Nunn and Trefler (2012), and Antras (forthcoming) for recent contributions to the international trade literature
based on incomplete contracting and the property-rights theory of firm boundaries. Spencer (2005) and Helpman (2006)
provide surveys of the earlier outside purchase contracts and international trade literature. Also, see Handfield (1994),
Levy (1995), Monczka and Trent (2003) for management literature on international outsourcing.

1

On the real side, we find that firms that use outside purchase contracts have less risky cash flows.
Despite these less risky cash flows, our results show that firms with more outside purchase contracts
have less financial leverage. Given that less risky cash flows should be associated with higher leverage
under the traditional trade-off theory of capital structure, we investigate what characteristics of these
firms drive this result. Firms that have more external purchase contracts have higher value added
per worker and use less debt, especially when they operate in high value-added industries. We recognize that using purchase contracts are endogenous decisions and thus we instrument for purchase
contracting decisions using the geographic location of the firm; specifically how close it is to major
ports, airports or border crossings, and the transportation costs of the inputs used to produce the
products in the firm’s industry.
Our results are consistent with firms with more purchase contracts using less leverage to decrease
the expected costs of financial distress on implicit and explicit contracting parties and to increase
the incentives of contracting parties to invest in relationship-specific assets. Lower leverage decreases
the chances of financial distress and bankruptcy and helps maintain the value of implicit and explicit
contracts. Thus, conceptually we show that the effects of incomplete contracting go beyond ownership
as in Grossman and Hart (1986), extending to how firms with outside firm contracts finance their
operations.
Specifically, we consider several possible channels for how using outside purchase contracts may
affect a firm’s capital structure and financing decisions. The first way purchase contracts may interact
with financial structure is through long-term contracts with suppliers. Grossman and Hart (1986)
model how the decision to be vertically integrated versus maintain separate ownership can affect the
incentives to invest ex ante in relationship-specific assets. They model how control rights should reside
in parties for which ex ante investments are more critical. If both parties’ investments are important
to the final outcome, the firms will be less likely to vertically integrate. In our context, firms in which
relationship-specific investments are important will be less likely to be vertically integrated and more
likely to use outside purchase contracts.
Firms thus use long-term contracts with suppliers to ensure supply, and suppliers use long-term
contracts to guarantee a market for the specified production and to maintain ex ante incentives to
invest in the business relationship, as in Grossman and Hart (1986). However, these outside purchase
contracts can be directly affected by financial leverage. Given that contracts in bankruptcy can be
broken, the expected duration of the contract and the business relationship will be shorter when firms
have a higher probability of bankruptcy. If contracting parties are investing in relationship-specific
assets or resources, they may be worried about the counter-party firm’s financial stability, especially
2

when there is a possibility of bankruptcy or financial distress resulting in a failure to fulfill the implicit
or explicit contractual terms.
One possibility is that suppliers will internalize this possibility and require compensating contractual differentials when dealing with a highly leveraged firm. Alternatively, following the ideas of
Williamson (1979), firms may attempt to minimize contracting costs and maximize the incentives to
invest in the relationship through the use of lower leverage. Thus, conditional on longer term contracts being desirable for the firm, the firm may use less debt ex ante to decrease the probability of
bankruptcy and financial distress in order to obtain more favorable contractual terms.
The second way outside purchase contracts may affect financial structure is through its effect on
a firm’s human capital and type of employees. The idea is similar to the previous effect on suppliers
in that the firm faces a limited commitment problem and is not able to contractually insure its
employees through complete contracts in the event of bankruptcy or financial distress. If firms with
more external purchase contracts employ more high value-added employees who should optimally
invest in firm-specific human capital, the firms will choose a financial structure that increases these
incentives. As Jaggia and Thakor (1994) model, higher financial leverage can decrease employees’
incentives to invest more in firm-specific assets as the bankruptcy can cause the value of their firmspecific assets to decrease. Thus the firm will optimally take on a lower amount of debt to counteract
the effect of potential bankruptcy on an employee’s incentive to invest in relationship-specific capital.
The reasoning is that an increase in the probability of bankruptcy that lessens the likelihood that
long-term wage commitments will be honored ex post imposes a greater cost on firms and employees
when the firm has greater investment specificity. Such a firm, therefore, is predicted to optimally take
on a lower amount of debt. Berk, Stanton, and Zechner (2010) analyze the human cost of bankruptcy
more generally. Their model shows that even without firm-specific human capital, more human capital
intensive firms will have less financial leverage as the optimal contract involves firms providing a more
stable fixed compensation contract when employees are risk averse with respect to their human capital.
This idea has other empirical support. Bankruptcy and financial distress have been recently shown
to affect a firm’s ability to hire high quality employees as the number and quality of job applicants
decrease with an increase in financial distress, as Brown and Matsa (2013) recently show. Lastly, firms
may also use less leverage to help insure workers as in Agrawal and Matsa (forthcoming 2013).
After examining the amount of financial leverage that firms use, we examine firms’ financing decisions more closely. We examine whether using outside purchase contracts affect the source of debt
and equity that firms use. The idea we investigate is whether firms that have proportionally more

3

high value added employees and use long-term contracts with suppliers have a more flexible financial structure. Given that private debt with fewer creditors is more flexible and easier to renegotiate
than public debt, as Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) model, firms that use debt and wish to have more
flexibility in their capital structure are predicted to use more private debt. We find support for this
prediction.
Our results show that firms with outside purchase contracts have lower firm cash flow volatility
and this lower volatility is particularly evident during the recent financial crisis. During the recent
financial crisis, firms with more external purchase contracts were able to better match costs with
sales fluctuations. Firms that use long-term purchase contracts incur fewer fixed costs thus reducing
their operating leverage. Second, on the financial side, we show that despite the reduction in cash flow
volatility, firms with outside purchase contracts use less financial leverage after controlling for the cash
flow volatility and the fixed assets firms use. This reduction in leverage is especially found for firms
with more outside purchase contracts in high value-added industries or for firms with suppliers that
likely invest more in relationship-specific assets. Third, we find that when firms with outside purchase
contracts issue securities, they are more likely to issue private securities. When issuing debt, they are
more likely to choose private debt over public debt. Thus, firms with outside purchase contracts are
more likely to use less debt and change the composition of their debt to include more private debt, as
they have proportionally more high value added employees and contracts with external suppliers.
Our results are robust to taking into account that using long-term purchase contracts is itself an
endogenous decision. We use the geographic location of the firm; specifically how close it is to major
ports, airports or border crossings to instrument for the decision to using outside purchase contracts.
We also use the transportation costs of the inputs of the products that the firm’s industry produces.
The idea is that geographic location and industry input transportation costs can make it easier for
some firms to purchase from suppliers but should have limited or no impact on financing decisions
of firms other than through the purchase contracting channel after controlling for industry.2 We also
consider alternative instruments that capture how “fearful” or concerned suppliers may be that the
firm will stop using them as suppliers. We thus use the amount of competition in the supplier’s
industry and the distance of the supplier to the firm. The idea is that firms are more likely to sign a
contract with the supplier to assuage the supplier’s fear that the customer firm will switch suppliers
after the supplier has made relationship-specific investments to serve the firm. We confirm that all

2

Geographic proximity has also been used to study investment in local plants by Giroud (2012). In our case, geographic
location directly impacts investment but should not affect financing decisions except through the effect of location on
the type of investment.

4

our instruments used in the instrumental variable regressions pass the standard weak, under- and
over-identification tests.
Our results are consistent with outside purchase contracts affecting not only who should own the
asset but also the amount and composition of external financing. In our context of separate ownership
with long-term contracts, our results are consistent with firms choosing more flexible capital structures
through the use of equity and private debt in order to reduce the costs of financial distress on employees
and suppliers. The implication of our results is that contracting counter-parties of a firm will be more
willing to invest in specialized assets and maintain these assets when the firm uses less debt and less
publicly traded debt to finance its operations since then the firm has a greater chance of long-term
survival.
Our paper adds to several literatures. We add to the outsourcing literature (see Antras (forthcoming) for recent contributions and Spencer (2005) and Helpman (2006) for extensive surveys) and
show that there is a financial dimension to using outside purchase contracts that has not been studied
before. Conceptually, we add to the incomplete contracting literature showing that incomplete contracting and relationship-specific assets affect firm financing decisions. Previous literature, including
both the theoretical literature beginning with Grossman and Hart (1986) and the empirical literature
such as Baker and Hubbard (2004) shows that residual rights of control affect firm ex ante incentives
to invest in relationship-specific assets and thus who should own the assets. However, this literature
does not deal with how the assets should be financed and whether capital structure is influenced when
firms choose not to integrate. Our paper shows that purchase contracts impact the capital structure
of the firm and the source of its debt and equity financing.
We also add to the literature that studies labor-finance interactions on how the composition of
a firm’s labor force and its assets interact with its financial leverage and financing decisions (Jaggia
and Thakor (1994), Berk, Stanton, and Zechner (2010) and Brown and Matsa (2013)). Lastly, we
add to the literature on customer and supplier relations. Allen and Phillips (2000) show that firms
with product market relationships where one party owns equity in another experience better operating
performance and more investment. Fee, Hadlock, and Thomas (2006) show that firms are more likely
to invest in ownership positions in firms in which they have business relations. Kale and Shahrur
(2007) show that competition and the characteristics of customers and suppliers affect firm financial
structure.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes data we use, and in particular, the long-term purchase contracts. Section 3 discusses our identification strategy and empirical

5

methodology. Section 4 presents our results on the effect of purchase contracts on financial structure
and examines the public versus private financing choices of firms with these outside purchase contracts.
Section 5 concludes.

2

Data and Summary Statistics

2.1

Purchase Contracts Data

We examine outside purchase contracts for public firms whose 10-K filings we download and process
electronically from the SEC’s Edgar website. These contracts involve traditional supply contracts and
also contracts where the firm outsources tasks like information technology or production to outside
firms. Our data begins in 2004, since in January 2003 the SEC issued a final rule on Disclosure about
off-balance sheet arrangements and aggregate contractual obligations.3 This rule requires all public
companies other than small business issuers to provide an explanation of their contractual obligations
in a separately captioned subsection of the Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) section.
U.S. GAAP already requires firms to aggregate and assess all of the following specified categories of
contractual obligations: long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, and operating lease obligations. The SEC’s final rule on disclosure about contractual obligations in January 2003 particularly
includes the “purchase obligations” category.
The SEC defines a purchase obligation as an agreement to purchase goods or services that is
enforceable and legally binding on the registrant in the future. Therefore, a firm’s purchase obligations
represent the amount of inputs in production that will be purchased in the future (Lee (2010)).
Purchase obligations are different than open-market orders in that a company legally signs purchase
contracts with third parties. Thus, purchase obligations capture a firm’s contractual outside activities.
These contracts are considered “executory contracts” under American bankruptcy law. An executory contract is a contract in which continuing obligations exist on both sides of the contract at
the time of the bankruptcy petition, i.e. one which still requires both the debtor and its counterparty to make further performance. In this context, a trustee or debtor in possession may assume
any prepetition executory contract of the debtor, preserving both the debtor’s and the counterparty’s

3
This rule is to implement Section 401(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. See Final Rule: Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations, Securities
Act Rel. No. 33-8182, Exchange Act Rel. 34-47264, Financial Reporting Rel. No. FR-67, International Series Rel. No.
1266, http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8182.htm (Jan. 27, 2003).

6

obligations through the bankruptcy process, or reject it, thereby breaching it as of the date of the
petition. In bankruptcy, the supplier would have to keep supplying products to the bankrupt firm to
receive payment - without any guarantee of payment as the contract can be breached unless the terms
of payment are renegotiated under Chapter 11. Thus, importantly and related to the context of our
paper, purchase obligations should not be regarded as liabilities (in other words, as another form of
debt or financing), because the counter parties of contracts have not delivered goods or services yet at
the time and payment can be made in the future through raising equity, issuing debt or cash. A firm’s
purchase obligations are the firm’s promises to purchase from its counter-parties and thus estimated
amounts of cash outflows to the counter-parties within the pre-specified period. These contracts are
best viewed as forward contracts with escape clauses and also not as leases. In a lease, the firm receives
the product in advance and payments are a form of financing. In supply contracts, no money changes
hands at the time of signing and future payments occur on delivery of the product. At the future time
of delivery of the product, the firm then chooses how to arrange payment, either financing through equity or debt at that point or paying via cash. In a recent study on leases, Damodaran (2009) explicitly
excludes purchase obligations in his calculations of firm leases. Damodaran (2009) states (p. 14) that
“Purchase obligations are generally less binding than operating leases and have more escape clauses
built into them” and notes that if the firm cuts back on production or cancels production the contracts
do not apply and the purchase can be canceled, unlike leases where the firm takes delivery of a product
or asset upfront. Even though purchase obligations are not regarded as liabilities, as we discuss later,
to mitigate any concerns related to these contracts being suppler financing, we additionally test the
link between this measure and leverage by including account payables as part of total debt.
For the fiscal years ending on or after December 15, 2003, all public firms (other than small
business issuers) started disclosing purchase obligations in their financial statements. Therefore, our
primary sample includes all 10-K filers in the manufacturing sector associated with fiscal years ending
in 2004 and up to 2010. Firms generally do not sub-categorize purchase obligations in their tabular
disclosures. They sometimes provide limited information on the types of purchase obligations in their
following footnotes. For manufacturing firms, the most common type of purchase obligation is an
inventory purchase commitment. A service agreement, including advertising, marketing and IT, is
another common type of purchase obligation.4 The payment due is classified by specified periods in
the tabular disclosure format. Firms commonly disclose total amounts of purchase obligations and
then break those amounts into the specified periods (e.g. within one year, between one and three

4

See Lee (2010) for discussion about the across-industry variation in the type of purchase obligations.

7

years, between three and five years, and beyond five years). Purchase obligations due within the one
year category must exist in the disclosure, while firms can arbitrarily choose to report other future
periods. In general, the purchase obligations due beyond one year are frequently minimum amounts
specified in the contracts that the firm must purchase from the counter parties. Therefore, the purchase
obligations beyond one year sharply fall over time, and do not capture the correct amounts of purchase
contracts for the specified longer period. Hence, we use the amount of purchase obligations within the
closest fiscal year, normalized by cost of goods sold for our measure of purchase contract intensity.
Figure 1 shows an example of Apple Inc.’s purchase obligations disclosure in its 10-Ks. We present
purchase obligations data for Apple Inc. for 2005 and 2008. From the data presented, we can see that
purchase obligations have increased almost three-fold for Apple Inc.

[INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]

Appendix A gives three further detailed firm examples in the semiconductor industry to illustrate
the relation between external purchase contracts and leverage that we explore both cross-sectionally
and in time series. The examples show that companies within the same industry have different external
contracting strategies. Marvell Technology Group is a leading fabless semiconductor company, while
Fairchild Semiconductor owns continuously operating semiconductor manufacturing facilities. Xilinx
has substantially changed its outside purchase contracts over time and provides more variation in its
external contracting intensity. All three companies operate in the same geographic region.
The appendix shows large cross-sectional differences between Marvel Technology and Fairchild.
Fairchild owns and operates semiconductor facilities and has significantly higher leverage than Marvel
Technology which does not own its own semiconductor facilities and outsources the production of
its semiconductors. Marvel Technology has almost no financial leverage. The last firm, Xilinx, has
experienced variation in external production over time. It thus illustrates the within-firm time-series
relation between outside purchase contract intensity and leverage. What is also interesting to point
out is that there is a sharp decrease in external purchase contracts that occurs for all three firms during
2008, the year after the financial crisis began. Firms are thus able to change the amount of goods and
services they obtain from outside suppliers in subsequent years as demand conditions fluctuate.

2.2

Sample

We gather purchase obligation data using “web crawling” of the SEC Edgar website and processing
firm 10-Ks using PERL scripts. We provide the detailed collection procedure in Appendix B. After
8

downloading the firm 10-Ks, we parse the documents to extract the actual purchase contracts data.5
We extract these data from either tables or text where search keywords indicate the presence of
purchase contracts data. The search keywords we use are the combinations of “purchase” and one
of the following terms: “obligation”, “commitment”, “agreement”, “order” or “contract”. From the
tables or text including the search terms, we extract the rows that contain the amount of purchase
obligations. We link this data to the Compustat database and to the security issuance database that
we describe later in this section.
We study public manufacturing firms, given that using outside purchase contracts for production
prevails in the manufacturing sector, while purchase contracts in the service sector may exist just to
supply finished goods that are then resold. We create the primary sample by merging all of the public
manufacturing firms in the 10-K filings database to the CRSP/Compustat database by the central
index keys (CIK). We exclude firms whose sales revenue is less than $50 million because they are
regarded as small business issuers which are not required to disclose contractual obligations.6
This sample construction procedure leaves us with 1,806 firms operating in 20 different two-digit
SIC code industries and about 9,000 firm-years during the sample period from 2004 to 2010. We
supplement this database with a new security issues data from the Securities Data Corporation (SDC)
and DealScan databases, and with a supplier database that we create by obtaining supplier information
from Capital IQ database. In the rest of this section, we describe the purchase contracts data and the
other data we analyze in detail.
Panel A in Table 1 presents industry descriptive statistics for outside purchase contracts by twodigit SIC code industry in the manufacturing sector. We assume that if the firm does not disclose an
amount of purchase obligations in its 10-K, it has no contractual purchase obligations.7
[INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]

5

Lee (2010) first collects and studies purchase obligations data. The description of his data can be found at
http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/klee/Kwang Lee Purchase Obligations Data.htm. Also, a contemporaneous paper by
Williams (2012) uses similar data to explore supplier-customer relationship.
6

The SEC defined a small business issuer as a company that had less than $25 million in revenues in its previous fiscal
year, and whose outstanding publicly-held stock is worth no more than $25 million. In 2008, the SEC adopted a new
terminology of ‘smaller reporting companies’ and amendments to its disclosure and reporting requirements to expand the
number of companies that qualify for smaller reporting companies. In the new amendments, smaller reporting companies
are defined as companies that have less than $75 million in public equity float, or less than $50 million in revenues in
the previous fiscal year if public equity float is not calculable.
7

The SEC’s final rule adopted the “reasonably likely” disclosure threshold that currently applies to other portions of
MD&A disclosure. As stated in the SEC’s 1989 MD&A Release, a company has an obligation to disclose prospective
information in its MD&A “where a trend, demand, commitment, event or uncertainty is both presently known to
management and reasonably likely to have material effects on the company’s financial condition or results of operations”.

9

Panel A in Table 1 shows that across all industries more than 65 percent of manufacturing firms use
outside purchase contracts, and the mean value of such contracting amounts reaches about 10 percent
of the total cost of goods sold. The last two columns show that outside purchase contracts comprise
almost 15 percent of the total cost of goods sold within firms with purchase contracts. Inspection of
the table also shows that the use of outside purchase contracts is not just in high-technology industries;
purchase contract intensity is also high in food and kindred products, paper products, petroleum and
coal products, and leather products. Importantly, there are in general 30-50% of manufacturing firms
in each industry sector that do not have any material long-term purchase contracts. They might have
suppliers but the relationship with these suppliers is not based on explicit contracts. This important
difference between firms with and without contracting-based suppliers enables us effectively examine
the characteristics of the firms that use purchase contracts and the possible economic link between
purchase contracts and leverage/financing decisions.

2.3

Customer and Supplier Relationship Data

We examine the potential reasons for the impact of outside purchase contract intensity on firm financial
structure in depth by exploring customer and supplier relationships identified in the Capital IQ business
relationship database. Previous studies use either the input-output benchmark table from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis or the customer data from the Compustat segment file to identify customer
and supplier relationships. However, the input-output benchmark table represents interdependencies
between industries, not between firms. Also, the Compustat customer data do not include business
relationships with foreign or private supplier firms, as the database only compiles information on major
customers of U.S. public firms. On the other hand, the Capital IQ database collects data on foreign
or private suppliers and provides information on their revenue, assets, total number of employees, SIC
code, and main business location, by compiling more than 20,000 news sources. We note that we
cannot identify the extent each supplier supplies the firm with this database as these suppliers are just
listed by name and not by the amount of goods that they supply.
We identify approximately 7,000 suppliers (3,715 unique suppliers as some suppliers supply more
than one firm) for 884 customer firms by merging our sample and Capital IQ database with the
customer firm’s CIK, ticker, or name. On average, customer firms in our sample have 7.82 suppliers.
Our focus is on both domestic and international purchase contracts as we find that 47.5 percent of
purchase contracts are from the U.S., with 25.5 percent of suppliers from Asia, 17.2 percent from
Europe, 0.3 percent from Africa, 1.9 percent from the Oceania, and 1.6 percent from countries we
are not able to identify. Most of the suppliers are in the manufacturing sector (47.5%). Other
10

than manufacturing, the suppliers are in the following industry sectors: services (17.2%), retail and
wholesale trade (2.5%), transportation and utilities (3.2%), mining (2.0%), others (2.4%) and unknown
(25.2%). Panel B in Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for the characteristics of these suppliers.

2.4

Security Issuance Data

We study the impact of purchase contract intensity on financing decisions by U.S. public manufacturing
firms from 2005 to 2011. We classify corporate financing in 6 different types by issuing markets and
securities; first by public versus private market and second by debt, convertible versus equity. We
include both convertible preferred stock and convertible debt in the convertible security category.
The security issuance data come from the three different databases. We obtain public securities
issuance data from the SDC new issues database. The SDC new issues database also provides private
securities data, but its coverage of private placement is minimal and incomplete.8
Our private debt placement data come from the DealScan database of the Loan Pricing Corporation.
A private placement is an unregistered offering of securities by a public firm to a selected group of
investors.9 The DealScan database contains private placement information including term loans and
revolving credit lines made to U.S. firms by banks and syndicates of lenders (Gomes and Phillips
(2012)). Following Gomes and Phillips (2012), we exclude 364-day facilities and any other loan with
less than one year of maturity from our sample.
Our private equity and convertible securities consist of private equity investments in public companies data (frequently called PIPEs for private investment in public equity) and come from the
Capital IQ database. The Capital IQ database provides comprehensive and detailed information on
transaction features and market participants in the private transactions, especially after 1999.10
Table 2 provides the summary statistics of the issuance decisions. We can see that the private

8

The number of private debt issues in the SDC database is less than one-tenth of the number in the DealScan database.
Our private equity and convertibles issue data come from the Capital IQ. The Capital IQ database has three times as
many private convertibles securities data as the SDC database. The number of private equity issues (PIPEs) in the SDC
database is comparable to that in the Capital IQ database.
9
For example, according to the SEC’s Rule 505 of Regulation D, a company can offer Regulation D (Reg D) securities
to an unlimited number of “accredited investors” and up to 35 other persons who do not need to satisfy the sophistication
or wealth standards associated with other exemptions. The Reg D securities are “restricted” securities, meaning that
the securities cannot be re-sold for six months or longer without potentially needing to register the re-sales. The issuers
cannot use general solicitation or advertising to sell the securities.
10

See Stromberg (2008), Lerner, Sorensen, and Stromberg (2011), and Hsu, Reed, and Rocholl (2012) for further
discussions on the Capital IQ database.

11

markets are significant for public firms. Approximately 60 percent of security issuances are private
debt.

[INSERT TABLE 2 HERE]

In addition to the public and private securities, we also include Rule 144A issues in our sample,
but we aggregate them with other security types as Rule 144A securities are not a large part of
the issuance activity. Rule 144A issues have three security types; Rule 144A debt, convertibles, and
equity. Most of the Rule 144A issues by public firms are in the debt form, either debt or convertible
debts. Rule 144A debt securities are similar to medium-term notes, but they are unregistered and also
offered to only Qualified Institutional Buyers (QIBs). In general, QIBs are large domestic or foreign
institutional investors that in aggregate own and invest at least $100 million in securities ($10 million
for a broker-dealer).11 As in Gomes and Phillips (2012), the institutional details indicate that 144A
issues and public issues are similar. Thus, in Table 3 and throughout the rest of our analysis, we
combine Rule 144A securities with other public securities – either debt, equity, or convertibles.
We merge all the above security databases with our purchase contract database from the previous
section and the CRSP/Compustat database.12 Following Huang and Ritter (2009), firm years in which
multiple types of securities are issued are excluded from the sample, but results are robust when we
include these issuance observations.
Table 3 shows summary statistics for issuance decisions and the issuing firms’ purchase contract
intensity captured by their purchase obligations scaled by cost of goods sold. Table 3 shows that both
security issuance decisions and purchase contract decisions vary strongly with firm size. Firms that
issue public debt are larger with most of the firms in the upper four deciles of the market value of
assets. Private debt and equity issuers exist at all deciles of firm size. Equity issuers in particular are
skewed to smaller firms, especially so for private equity issuers. With respect to purchase contract
intensity, we can see that firms using more purchase contracts tend to be larger firms, especially firms
that issue convertibles and private debt securities. By comparing private versus public issues for each
security, we also find that firms that use the private market to issue any type of security tend to have
greater purchase contract intensity in each firm size category.

11
In addition to the qualification above, banks and savings and loan associations that have a net worth of at least $25
million are regarded as QIBs.
12
To match the private debt placement data from the DealScan database to other databases, we use the DealscanCompustat link file provided by Chava and Roberts (2008) through the WRDS website. To merge private equity and
convertible placement data from the Capital IQ, we use the CIKs along with the exchange-ticker information.

12

[INSERT TABLE 3 HERE]

3

Empirical Strategy and Variables of Interest

We analyze the effect of using outside purchase contracts on financial leverage and security issuance
decisions. However, firms using external purchase contracts are not randomly selected, so we face the
identification problem that both external purchase contracts and financing decisions may result from
common factors, such as demand conditions or cost shocks. Empirical evidence from the data suggests
that using outside purchase contracts is relatively more invariant than other corporate decisions.
However, outside purchase contract intensity (how much to purchase from outside of the firm) is
associated (as we show later) with the firm’s growth and cash flow stability, which, in turn, are highly
likely to be related to financing decisions. Therefore, we address this endogeneity problem using
instrumental variables. We begin by discussing our instrumental variable regression approach and the
instruments we use. Also, in this section we discuss the control variables we use in our analysis.

3.1

Proximity to Sourcing Locations and Input Transportation Costs

A valid instrument for our analysis is a variable that affects the amount of outside purchase contracts,
but whose effect on the firm’s financing decisions comes through the outside purchase contract channel.
It has to thus be relevant and also satisfy the exclusion restriction. The instruments we use are 1) the
distance to the closest port of entry including seaports, hub airports with cargo services, and border
crossings and 2) the transportation cost of inputs used in the industry. Given that a firm’s location is
relatively permanent and the industry transportation costs of inputs used are at the industry-level, it
is likely that both instruments do not affect a firm’s capital structure choices over time except through
the outside purchase contract channel.
In particular, the distance to the closest seaport (for water transportation) has been used as an
exogenous instrument in Fort (2011) and Moon (2012). Fort (2011) shows that plants over 200 miles
away from a deep water port are 2.4 percentage points less likely to fragment (outsource) relative to
plants within 50 miles of the closest port. Moon (2012) also shows that whether the firm is close to
the seaport is associated with a 1.2 percentage point increase in a firm’s purchase contract intensity.
We construct our measure of a firm’s proximity to potential sourcing locations by calculating the
distance between the firm’s main business location and its closest port of entry among seaports,
airports, and border crossings. The information on the U.S. seaports is provided by the Port Import

13

Export Reporting Service from the Maritime Administration’s website. We identify 48 seaports within
the U.S. 50 states that carry imports with a value of 500 TEUs or greater.13 The information of the
U.S. airports is available on the Passenger Boarding and All-Cargo Data for U.S. Airports from the
Federal Aviation Administration website. We identify 105 hub airports with cargo services using the
information. In addition, we identify 21 Mexican border crossings and 79 Canadian border crossings
with truck traffics.
We obtain latitude and longitude for these ports of entry and firms’ main business locations, then
calculate the great-circle distances between the firm’s main business location and its closest port
of entry. Figure 2 shows firm main business locations and also the locations of the ports, border
crossings and hub airports. From these maps we can see that many firms are some distance from
external sourcing locations in the West and the Midwest regions and especially so in the East region
such as Connecticut.
[INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE]
The distance to the closest port of entry captures a firm’s feasibility to purchase products or
services from suppliers in other countries or other states far from the firm’s location. It is likely to be
an exogenous instrument that affects a firm’s transportation costs from potential sourcing locations.
The closest port of entry is likely to affect a large number of U.S. manufacturing firms that hire foreign
suppliers, and thus is an important factor in the firm’s decision to increase or decrease its level of the
procurement through purchase contracts. We also note during the time period of our data that firms
do not change their main business locations, while firm financing decisions frequently change.
We use both cross-sectional and time series regressions to predict outside purchase contracting
decisions. The economic interpretation is that the cost of external purchase contracts is different
between firms and is also changing over time thus allowing variation in the advantages of being closer
to a sourcing location. In our regression analysis, we mainly use a discretized version of the distance
to the closest port of entry. This variable, close to port, equals one if the minimum distance to any
entry ports is in the lowest tercile of the sample. This discretization allows for a likely nonlinear
relation. For robustness, we have also used different cutoffs including below the median and similar
results obtain.
We create the industry-level transportation costs of inputs using the 2002 input-output use tables

13

A TEU is a nominal unit of measure equivalent to a 20 x 8 x 8 shipping container. The results remain similar, when
we use 100, 300 or 500 TEUs for the cutoff.

14

from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.14 At the detailed IO-code level, the input-output use tables
provide railroad, truck, water, air, pipeline and gas transportation costs, which indicate the costs to
deliver inputs from other industries to the given industry. We aggregate the transportation costs across
all transportation methods at each input industry level. Then, we capture each industry’s average input
transportation costs by calculating the purchase value-weighted average of the transportation costs
across all input industries. A discretized version of this variable indicating high input transportation
cost industries is used in our regression analysis. The variable, high transp cost, equals one when it is
in the highest tercile of the sample.
We conduct a set of tests to verify that the geographic location and the industry input transportation costs variables are valid instruments. All instrumental variable regressions pass the weak, underand over-identification tests. In the leverage regressions discussed later for example, the F-test statistic
of excluded instruments is 10.85. The regressions are not under-identified with Anderson canon LM
statistic of 17.21 and also not over-identified as the Hansen’s J-statistic is 3.32.

3.2

Supplier-based Instrumental Variables

Given that no one set of instruments will assuage all concerns about the exclusion restriction requirement for instruments, we also use an alternative set of supplier-based instruments that capture the
competition that the supplier faces and also the difficulty of ensuring trust over longer geographic
distances. The idea that we are trying to capture with these variables is that suppliers may be worried
or fearful that firms will switch to other suppliers or fail to buy from them after they have made
investments to serve the firm. In order to assuage these concerns, firms thus have incentives to sign
purchase contracts ex ante with their suppliers.15 Given that these are supplier-specific variables, it is
economically unlikely that the existence of these contracts would affect firm leverage except through
the contracting channel as less leverage would make the contracts more secure.
As mentioned earlier, these contracts are considered “executory contracts” under American
bankruptcy law. Thus while the contract does help with the supplier’s concerns, it will not totally
mitigate them, especially in bankruptcy. In bankruptcy, a trustee or debtor in possession may assume
any prepetition executory contract of the debtor, preserving both the debtor’s and the counterparty’s
obligations through the bankruptcy process, or reject it, thereby breaching it as of the date of the

14
Input output benchmark tables are publicly available from the website of Bureau of Economic Analysis at
http://www.bea.gov/industry/io benchmark.htm.
15

We thank Santiago Bazdresch for this suggestion.

15

bankruptcy petition. This ability to breach the contract in bankruptcy thus would increase suppliers’
concerns about the contract’s stability if the purchasing firm has too much leverage.
Specifically, we use supp compete (TNIC) and log(supp distance) as instruments for PC/COGS. supp
compete (TNIC) is average supplier competition based on the TNIC Herfindahl index byHoberg and
Phillips (2010a). We obtain the supplier data from the Capital IQ database which tracks each supplier
firm’s SIC code even for foreign or U.S. private supplier firms. Thus, the median TNIC competition
index of U.S. public firms within the same 3-digit SIC code group as the supplier is used to approximate
each supplier’s competition. log(supp distance) is the average distance from the customer firm in U.S.
to domestic or foreign suppliers, computed using the latitude and longitude information of the supplier
country’s capital city. We use both industry-level medians for these variables and firm-specific supplier
values for a subsample of customer firms whose suppliers are identified with the Capital IQ business
relationship database.

3.3

Industry and Firm-specific Variables

In our analysis of firms’ financial decisions, we include the firm-specific variables that have been
shown to influence security issuance decisions by Gomes and Phillips (2012). These variables include
downstream demand shocks, a firm’s default probability, the proportion of tangible assets, cash flow
volatility, stock return volatility, abnormal stock returns, the percentage foreign tax a firm pays out
of total taxes and a firm’s marginal tax rate from Graham (1996). We include the percent foreign tax
to control for the fact that firms with outside purchase contracts may use less leverage as their foreign
operations may be subject to less taxation, thus reducing the need for leverage as a tax shield. Details
on the control variables other than the variables below that require more processing are available in
Appendix C.
To examine how firms with external purchase contracts respond to demand shocks, we create a
measure of downstream demand changes and compare the factor loadings for this variable between
firms with external purchase contracts and firms that do not have such contracts. We capture each
industry’s demand condition using the chain-type quantity indexes for gross output by industry from
the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The BEA provides publicly
available series on gross output by industry at the detailed IO-code and NAICS level. For consumer and
government demand, we use personal consumption indexes and government spending and investment

16

indexes, which we also obtain from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.16 We then link these data to each
supplier industry by a downstream matrix using the input-output benchmark table from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis. A downstream industry is defined as an industry that uses the industry’s output
in the input-output use table.17
Following Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), a demand shock is the detrended annual percentage
change in the downstream industry demand. To detrend, we regress the raw downstream industry
demand on industry and year fixed effects indicator variables and then take the residuals from the
regression. To capture the response to industry downturns, we use a discretized version of this variable
indicating negative demand shocks in our regression analysis. This variable, negative demand shock,
equals one when the demand shock is negative and zero otherwise.
To control for industry- and year-specific factors, we include the 25-Fixed Industry Classifications
(FIC) dummies made available by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a) and year dummies.18 For robustness,
we also include the economy-wide variables (Aaa bond yield and a credit spread between Baa and
Aaa bond yield) instead of using year-fixed effect estimations, to capture aggregate market conditions.
Also, we control for industry competition from Hoberg and Phillips (2010a)’s Text-based Network
Industry Classifications (TNIC) industries and a high-tech industry indicator variable, to capture
industry-wide effects.

3.4

Summary Statistics

In this section we present summary statistics for our key variables (purchase contract intensity and
leverage) along with other control variables we include in our regressions. These variables are firm size
as captured by the market value of assets, firm market to book, profitability, sales growth, patenting
activity, abnormal stock returns, cash flow and stock market volatility, competition from the Hoberg
and Phillips (2010a) TNIC industries, and a high-tech industry indicator variable.

[INSERT TABLE 4 HERE]

16

These data are available at http://www.bea.gov/industry/gdpbyind data.htm, for the period of 19982011.
For the chain-type quantity indexes for gross output by industry, we specifically use the data at
http://www.bea.gov/industry/xls/GDPbyInd GO NAICS 1998-2011.xls.
17

Input output benchmark tables are publicly available from the website of Bureau of Economic Analysis at
http://www.bea.gov/industry/io benchmark.htm. We use the 2002 standard use tables at the detailed IO-code level,
and match this data into NAICS codes by correspondence tables between IO and NAICS codes.
18
In unreported results, we use three-digit SIC or four-digit NAICS codes instead. Results are robust to these industry
classifications.

17

Panel A in Table 4 presents summary statistics for firms with and without outside long-term
purchase contracts separately and test for significant differences across these groups of firms. The
table shows that nearly all control variables are significantly different across firms with and without
external purchase contracts. Inspection of the table also reveals that operating margins and the return
on assets are higher for firms with external purchase contracts. Firms with external purchase contracts
are larger, older, with less debt and higher market to book than firms without such contracts. We
also note that firms that use outside purchase contracts have higher value-added per employee.
Panel A also shows that firms with external purchase contracts are less risky than firms that do not
have such contracts. The default probability and the standard deviation of the operating margin and
return on assets are significantly lower for firms with external purchase contracts than those without
such contracts. Also, firms with outside purchase contracts are in more competitive, high-technology
industries. Lastly, we note that firms with external purchase contracts are more likely to be located
closely to any types of entry ports, and that the industry medians of supplier competition and distance
of such firms are more likely to be greater. We later use these measures as one of the instruments in our
instrumental variable regressions. The picture that emerges from these results is firms with external
long-term purchase contracts are larger, less risky, more profitable firms that have significantly lower
leverage than firms that don’t have such contracts.
Panel B in Table 4 presents our univariate analysis that examines the variations in outside purchase
contract intensity and leverage. We compare both the variances of market leverage and book leverage
across highest, medium, lowest terciles of the variance in purchase contract intensity. We capture the
variance of leverage and purchase contract intensity by computing their annual percentage growth.
We find that book leverage and market leverage vary with the growth of outside purchase contracts.
We reinforce this point by examining how leverage ratios will vary during the sample period if firms
change the amounts of their purchase contracts substantially, based on standard deviations of both
leverage and purchase contract intensity. We find that the firm-level variation in purchase contract
intensity during our sample period is associated with the firm-level variation in leverage as well.

4

Results

The basic questions we address are the following: First, is the use of outside purchase contracts
associated with a decline in firm risk? Second, what are the characteristics of firms that use purchase
contracts? Third, do firms that sign outside purchase contracts use more or less leverage and are these
firms more or less likely to use private or public markets as their source of capital?
18

We first examine the cash flow risk of firms that use outside purchase contracts. We do so in order
to better understand the effect of outside purchase contracting on firm business risk and to aid in our
analysis of which firms use such contracts. This analysis of which firms use more outside purchase
contracts is used in later regressions to explicitly control for the endogeneity of such contracting
decisions in order to establish a channel from contracting to financial structure.
We examine these questions with a combination of propensity score matching models and regressions that instrument for the outside contracting decision to take into account the endogeneity of such
decisions. We are testing the proposition that firms for which external contracts are more important
will choose less risky financial contracts since the firms cannot sign complete contracts to cover every
contingency, especially in financial distress and bankruptcy.

4.1

Outside Purchase Contracts and Firm Risk

In this section, we examine the risk of firms that use outside purchase contracts by examining their cash
flow volatility using propensity score based matching methods. We consider the standard deviation
of operating income before depreciation from the 12 previous quarters scaled by sales instead of using
returns on assets (ROA), thus it does not include the effect of fewer fixed assets in outside contracting
firms.19 To examine risk in a nonparametric way, we use a matching estimator and compare firms with
outside purchase contracts to firms that have not signed these contracts. We match based on multiple
variables which include size as captured by the market value of assets, market to book (M/B), market
leverage, mean quarterly sales, competition from Hoberg and Phillips (2010a) TNIC industries, and a
high-tech industry indicator variable.
The outside purchase contract variable we consider in Table 5 is an indicator for whether a firm
has long-term purchase contracts (PC exists). It equals one if the firm has disclosed a non-zero
amount of purchase obligations for the given fiscal year. The control observations are the 10 nearest
neighbors across the matching variables with the same FIC-25 code from Hoberg and Phillips (2010a).
In robustness tests, we also use as control observations from the same three-digit SIC or four-digit
NAICS codes.
[INSERT TABLE 5 HERE]
Table 5 shows that cash flow volatility for firms with outside purchase contracts is lower in every

19

Our results are robust to using return on assets.

19

quarter than that of firms without outside purchase contracts. In particular, cash flow volatility is
significantly lower in 12 out of 16 quarters from 2007 to 2010. This indicates that firms with outside
purchase contracts were able to reduce their volatility when faced with the financial crisis.
In Table 6, we further investigate the source of this lower cash flow volatility by regressing firm
cost of goods sold and SG&A on an indicator variable that equals one when the firm experiences a
negative demand shock. Our indication of a negative demand shock is when the downstream demand
industry experiences a decline in sales. We scale cost of goods sold and SG&A by the average sales
of the firm to avoid an effect from changing sales over the period. The idea is to investigate whether
firms with outside purchase contracts can scale their costs down when faced with a negative demand
shock. We include firm fixed effects to focus on the firm-specific difference relative to their time series
average in both their cost of goods sold and SG&A.

[INSERT TABLE 6 HERE]

The analysis presented in Table 6 shows that the outside purchase contracting firms’ cost of goods
sold combined with their SG&A drops more than two times the amount for firms with no outside
contracting when there is a negative demand shock. These results show that firms with outside
purchase contracts are able to significantly reduce their cost of goods sold and SG&A expenses and
thus their cash flow volatility when faced with negative demand shocks.

4.2

The Outside Purchase Contract Propensity

In this section, we report the results of our regressions for the prediction of outside purchase contracting. As discussed earlier, there is a potential endogeneity problem given that a firm’s use of outside
purchase contracts and its financing decisions may respond to the same changes in common external
factors. As the actual intensity of the firm’s outside purchase contracting is endogenous, we thus first
instrument this variable with the geographic location and industry input transportation cost variables
for all firms in the manufacturing sector sample. We report these results in this section. Then, we use
this predicted firm-year level purchase contract intensity measure to examine the impact on financing
decisions.
We first estimate between-regressions at the firm level, where each variable is collapsed into its
time-series average. These specifications thus examine the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the outside
purchase contracting decisions. We report these results in columns one and two. We then estimate
panel regressions at the firm-year level for outside purchase contracting propensity. We estimate
20

standard errors that allow for heteroskedasticity and industry clustering for the firm-level regressions
and industry-year clustering for the firm-year panel regressions. Depending on the column, we include
industry and year fixed effects. We do not include firm fixed effects as the firms in our sample, over
the time period we examine, do not change the geographic location of their main business.
We report several different specifications in Table 7. In the first two specifications – columns one
and two of Table 7 – we estimate a tobit model with a dependent variable that equals the amount
of purchase contracts due within one year scaled by cost of goods sold. We use a between-regression
model that regresses the firm time-series averages of purchase contract intensity (PC/COGS) on the
time-series averages of the right hand side variables.

[INSERT TABLE 7 HERE]

Inspection of the results in Table 7 reveals that, on average, being close to a port of entry results in
a 1.5 percentage point increase in firm outside purchase contract intensity. The results also show that
outside purchase contract intensity is related to firm profitability and sales growth, as we motivate
our inclusion of those measures as control variables in our regressions from Lee (2010) who finds that
the growth in purchase obligations is associated with higher future sales and earnings. In addition,
our results show that industry factors are important in explaining a firm’s outside contract intensity.
A firm is more likely to increase its use of outside purchase contracts in more competitive industries,
as the coefficient for compete (TNIC) from Hoberg and Phillips (2010a) is strongly significant and
positive. A firm is more likely to have higher use of outside purchase contracts as well when its
industry peers also highly use outside purchase contracts, as the coefficient for high ind PC/COGS is
significantly positive.
In the next four specifications, we report the estimated results of the firm-year panel regressions
with a tobit and a linear probability model. Columns three and four, and columns five and six of Table
7 report the tobit and linear probability model estimation results, respectively. In later regressions
where we instrument for purchase contract intensity for each firm in each year, we use the linear
probability regression model from either column five or six of this table based on the fixed effects
included.
Each of these specifications shows that the increase in a firm’s purchase contracting activity can
be explained by whether the firm is closely located to a port of entry and how high its industry input
transportation costs are. Both being close to a port of entry and being in an industry with high input
transportation costs result in a one to two percentage point effect in firm outside purchase contract

21

intensity.
The results also show that the percentage foreign tax paid by firms is significantly positively related
to purchase contract intensity, as firms with higher foreign sales are more likely to use outside (foreign)
purchase contracts. Similar to the between-regression results in columns one and two, firm growth
measured by market to book value of equity and sales growth are significantly related to firm purchase
contract intensity.

4.3

Outside Purchase Contracts and Leverage

We now examine the relation between the use of outside purchase contracts and leverage. One might
expect that given the decreased cash flow risk and increased flexibility on costs, firms with outside
purchase contracts would have higher leverage and use more debt. We find the opposite result –
leverage is lower for firms with outside purchase contracts. We show this finding is robust to using
multiple different matching and regression based methods.
First, in Table 8 we estimate a propensity score based matching model where we match firms that
have high outside contract intensity to firms that do not use outside purchase contracts. Second, in
subsequent tables we use panel regressions to examine the relation of leverage to the use of outside
purchase contracts. In these tables we use the geographic location and industry input transportation
costs variables from the previous table, Table 7, where we examine the propensity to use outside
purchase contracts, in order to control for the endogeneity of the contracting decision.
In Table 8, we report the results of our propensity score matching model estimations. Firms with
high outside contract intensity are based on whether the firm’s disclosed PC/COGS is in the highest
tercile of our sample at the given fiscal year. The control observations are the 10 nearest neighbors
across the matching variables within the same Hoberg and Phillips (2010a) FIC-25 industry group.
The matching variables include log(mv assets), log(quarterly sales), M/B, operating margin, cash flow
volatility, PPE/assets, compete (TNIC), and whether the firm operates in a high-tech industry.

[INSERT TABLE 8 HERE]

Table 8 shows that the leverage is lower for firms with high outside contract intensity in every
quarter. If we collapse over all quarters, leverage is significantly lower for firms with high outside
contract intensity at the 3.5 percentage level. This initial evidence shows that despite the lower cash
flow volatility, firms with more outside purchase contracts use less debt. In the years after the financial

22

crisis, the results show that the flexibility associated with such contracts is greater, as high outside
contracting firms significantly reduce leverage and thus their risk of financial distress.
We now turn to examining the impact of the use of outside purchase contracts on leverage using
multivariate panel regressions. We consider using both the actual amount of outside purchase contracts
and the instrumented outside purchase contract intensity. We instrument outside purchase contract
intensity using the two instruments, close to port and high transp cost as described earlier. Both
instruments should be valid as they are important to the outside purchase contracting decision and
economically likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction since they should affect leverage only through
the contracting channel. We do confirm statistically that our instruments do pass the standard weak,
under- and over-identification tests as described earlier. We do recognize that the exclusion restriction
is impossible to satisfy using correlation data, and thus in a subsequent table we explore the robustness
of our results to alternative instruments that are based on the supplier and not the firm itself.
Table 9 presents the effect of outside purchase contract intensity on leverage in a regression framework. Our outside purchase contract intensity variable is the lagged amount of the purchase obligations
divided by cost of goods sold (PC/COGS). In the table, we report results using the instrumental variable approach with close to port and high transp cost as instruments for the lagged PC/COGS to
conserve space.20 All the control variables from the purchase contract intensity prediction regressions
(column five and six in Table 7) are also included.
In particular, we control for firm risk (cash flow volatility and stock return volatility) and the
extent of the firm’s collateralizable assets through its property, plant and equipment (PPE/assets).
These control variables are important to rule out the possibility that our results arise from the effect of
outside contracting firms’ greater risk; such as exchange-rates risk due to their possibly more extensive
foreign trades, or the effect of reduced collateralizable assets. We also control for the percentage foreign
tax paid by firms, as well as a firm’s sales growth, operating margins and the market to book.
For the dependent variable, we begin with market leverage and move to a more conservative measure, market leverage (with AP). market leverage is the ratio of total debt to the market value of assets.
Market value of total assets is market value of common equity plus book value of preferred stock plus
debt (long-term debt + debt in current liabilities) plus book value of minority interest. For market
leverage (with AP) in columns four to six, we additionally include account payables as part of total

20

The uninstrumented OLS results are available from the authors. Results are qualitatively similar (stronger) in all
cases.

23

debt to mitigate a concern that outside purchase contracting firms are likely to have greater account
payables which can be viewed as a substitute for debt.21 Other variable definitions are available in
the Appendix C.
In columns one, two, four, and five, we estimate the regression with industry and year fixed effects.
We do not include firm fixed effects as the firms in our sample, over the limited time period we examine,
do not change the geographic location of their main business and thus our first stage regression has a
strong firm-specific component. In columns three and six, we do not include industry and year fixed
effects as we include variables that are constant in a given industry (the competition variable and
high-tech industry dummy) and constant in a given year (the Aaa bond rate and the credit spread).

[INSERT TABLE 9 HERE]

Table 9 shows that firms with outside purchase contracts have significantly lower leverage in all
specifications. Leverage decreases with predicted outside purchase contract intensity. These result hold
for both market leverage and book leverage, as well as leverage when we include accounts payables as
part of debt. Our results show that there is a strong effect of the use of outside purchase contracts on
leverage. Using the uninstrumented regression results, we find that a one standard deviation increase
in outside purchase contract intensity leads to a 0.051 standard deviation decrease in firm leverage.
This economic effect is relatively greater than the effect of cash flow volatility, where a one standard
deviation change in cash flow volatility leads to a 0.022 standard deviation change in firm leverage.
The table also shows that firms use more leverage when they have more fixed assets. A one standard
deviation change in property, plant and equipment (PPE/assets) leads to a 0.083 standard deviation
change in firm leverage. Thus, the effect of use of outside purchase contracts (a 0.051 decrease) is
comparable in magnitude to the effect of fixed assets. More importantly, given we control for fixed
assets, our results are not just picking up a reduced collateral effect from the fact that firms with
outside purchase contracts use less fixed assets.

21
We present the analogous test results with alternative measures of book leverage and book leverage with account
payables in Table A.1. Results are qualitatively similar in all cases.

24

4.3.1

Alternative Supplier-based Instruments

We realize that our any potential set of instruments still may affect leverage independent of the
external contracting channel and thus may not satisfy the exclusion restriction.22 We thus explore
some alternative instruments that capture suppliers’ potential concerns that the contracts they sign
with the firm may be potentially broken and thus would cause losses to any human capital or firm
specific investment that they make to serve the firm. We consider two different first-stage instruments
to capture this effect of “fearful” suppliers. Our first instrument is the competition in the upstream
supplier industry, supp compete (TNIC), and our second instrument is the supplier distance from the
U.S. customers. The economic idea that these instruments capture is that the suppliers will want to
sign contracts to decrease customer firms’ incentives to break supply contracts with them and switch to
a different supplier. In the second stage, leverage can be affected as firms can break these contracts in
bankruptcy as they are executory contracts, and thus may use less leverage to assuage their suppliers’
fears by reducing this possibility.
The instruments are constructed as follows: supp compete (TNIC) is the average supplier competition based on the TNIC Herfindahl index by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). log(supp distance) is the
average distance from the customer firm in U.S. to domestic or foreign suppliers, computed using the
latitude and longitude information of the supplier country’s capital city. Both instruments are industry level medians in column one for the full sample, and firm-specific in column three for a subsample
of customer firms whose suppliers are identified with the Capital IQ business relationship database.
[INSERT TABLE 10 HERE]
Table 10 presents the results. Columns one and three report estimates of the first-stage regressions
of PC/COGS. The instrumented PC/COGS from the regression in columns one and three are used
in the second-stage of regressions of market leverage in columns two and four, respectively. All
instrumental variable regressions pass the weak, under- and over-identification tests. In the first set
of regressions for example, the F-test statistic of excluded instruments is 15.68. The regressions are
not under-identified with Anderson canon LM statistic of 31.32 and also not over-identified as the
Hansen’s J-statistic is 3.01.
The results in this table show that firms are more likely to use outside purchase contracts when

22
We do note that the explanation that “close to port” affects profits directly would imply that profits are higher
for these firms and thus they would have incentives to increase leverage. However, we find the opposite. Firm leverage
decreases with closeness to a port.

25

there is greater supplier competition and suppliers are farther from the U.S. customers. Firms are
likely to sign these contracts to convince suppliers that they will be more committed to purchasing
from them. In the second stage where we examine the effect on financial leverage, we can see that
firms use less financial leverage with higher predicted outside purchase contracts consistent with them
doing so to mitigate suppliers’ potential concerns about the stability of the contracts.

4.3.2

Maturity of Financial Leverage

Another potential concern is that these results may come from substituting away from using shortterm leverage toward the increased use of supplier financing. To address this concern, we examine
whether the previous effects we document are only present for short-term leverage.
[INSERT TABLE 11 HERE]
The first two columns of Table 11 show that firms with outside purchase contracts do not change
their short-term leverage significantly. In contrast, the last two columns confirm that the lower leverage
of the firms with more outside purchase contracts is from a decrease in long-term leverage. This result
implies that firms that use outside purchase contracts choose particularly lower long-term leverage to
possibly decrease the chances of financial distress and bankruptcy. This result also effectively rules out
the alternative hypothesis that our results are from a substitution effect between short-term leverage
and supplier financing.
Overall, our results are consistent with firms with outside purchase contracts using less debt to
decrease the potential costs of financial distress on contracts with suppliers and employees. To consider
this explanation more explicitly, we now explore if these effects are stronger for specific types of firms,
in particular for firms with higher value-added per employee and for firms with high R&D suppliers,
relatively more suppliers in number, or a higher fraction of foreign suppliers who may place higher
value on the low leverage of their customers.

4.4

Contracting Parties and Leverage

We now explore in more detail why firms use less financial leverage when they use more outside
purchase contracts. The central idea we examine first is whether firms will choose a financial structure
that decreases the potential for bankruptcy when they have high value-added employees who are likely
to invest in firm-specific human capital. This channel is particularly relevant to our context, as firms
with more outside constructs are likely to keep their high value-added employees with them.
26

As Jaggia and Thakor (1994) model, higher financial leverage can decrease employees’ incentives
to invest more in firm-specific assets as a bankruptcy can cause the value of employee firm-specific
assets to decrease. Thus, the firm will optimally take on a lower amount of debt to counteract the
effect of bankruptcy on an employee’s incentive to invest in human capital. The reasoning is that an
increase in the probability of bankruptcy lessens the likelihood that long-term wage commitments will
be honored ex post and imposes a cost on the firm and its employees with greater specificity. Such a
firm, therefore, is predicted to optimally take on a lower amount of debt.
The model of Berk, Stanton, and Zechner (2010) shows that even without firm-specific human
capital, more human-capital intensive firms will have less financial leverage as the optimal contract
involves firms providing a more stable fixed compensation contract when employees are risk averse
with respect to their human capital.
We explore these arguments in the first column of Table 12. Specifically, we examine if firms in
industries with high value-added per employee have less leverage when they use more outside purchase
contracts.

[INSERT TABLE 12 HERE]

The hypothesis is that financial leverage of firms with more outside purchase contracts should be
lower in industries with high value-added per employee, since it is in these industries that there are
high potential costs of financial distress on employees that may have firm-specific human capital. The
first column of Table 12 shows that firms with outside purchase contracts that produce in industries
with high value-added per employee use less financial leverage. This result supports the conclusion
that firms with outside purchase contracts use less leverage when they operate in industries where
employees are more likely to make firm-specific human capital investments.
We further examine whether the identified link between the use of outside purchase contracts and
firm leverage applies to the firm’s relationship to suppliers with unique characteristics. We ask to
what extent supplier characteristics affect how the use of outside purchase contracts impacts leverage.
We consider those cases where we are able to identify the exact suppliers with which the firm is doing
business.
In columns two to four in Table 12, we focus on three different aspects of suppliers; R&D intensity
of suppliers, the total number of suppliers, and the percentage of foreign suppliers. We include supplier
labor and capital intensities in our regression analysis along with the percentage of the suppliers in
the manufacturing sector. We also include an indicator variable that identifies whether the supplier
27

is producing in a concentrated industry and the relative size of suppliers versus their customers, to
control for the potential that the firm uses less leverage in situations where it needs to increase its
bargaining power vis-a-vis its suppliers as in Kale and Shahrur (2007).
In column two, we examine if the firm uses less leverage when it is dealing with suppliers who
need to invest in R&D so as to provide more assurance of their safety. As each supplier’s SIC code is
available from the Capital IQ suppliers data and not the supplier’s actual R&D, we use the three-digit
SIC code industry median of R&D/sales from Compustat for each supplier’s R&D intensity variable.
High supp R&D in the table is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the average supplier
R&D intensity of a given firm is in the highest tercile of the sample. The result in column one shows
that firms use less leverage when their suppliers have higher R&D intensity. This result is consistent
with firms that have outside purchase contracts using less leverage when they contract with suppliers
in R&D industries who may place higher value on the low leverage of their customers.
In column three, we explore the same argument for the firms dealing with relatively more suppliers.
The result shows that the number of suppliers is negatively associated with the firm’s leverage. If one
views the number of suppliers as a measure of firm bargaining power vis-a-vis its suppliers, this result
is not consistent with firms using leverage when they have more bargaining power. It is consistent
with the firm using less financial leverage to reduce the probability of financial distress and bankruptcy
when it signs more contracts externally.
The last column in Table 12 examines whether the firm uses less leverage when it has more foreign
suppliers. The result shows that the higher percentage of foreign suppliers is negatively related to
the firm’s financial leverage. Overall, the results related with supplier characteristics support the
conclusion that firms that use more outside purchase contracts choose less financial leverage to to
mitigate suppliers’ worries about potential financial distress.

4.5

Robustness: Outside Purchase Contracts, R&D, and Leverage

One possibility is that our results are driven by the fact that firms with outside purchase contracts
also conduct more R&D and the high R&D by the firms leads to a decrease in leverage. In order to
examine this possibility, we separately include both the actual R&D and the instrumented R&D as
control variables in our leverage regression. We particularly include the instrumented R&D as R&D
itself is clearly an endogenous variable.
In addition to our previous instruments, we add the percentage of residents that received higher
education within the same area as the firm because this is likely to affect R&D but not firm capital
28

structure directly. The variable, area % higher education is the percentage of the population which has
a graduate school degree in the same three-digit zip code as the firm’s main business location. We thus
use close to port, high transp cost, and area % higher education as our instrumental variables for both
PC/COGS and R&D/sales. Columns one and two report estimates of the first-stage regressions of
PC/COGS and R&D/sales, respectively. Column two shows that the instruments are indeed relevant
for R&D, and we confirm that our instruments used in the instrumental variable regression pass the
standard weak, under- and over-identification tests. Columns three and four present the supplemented
results of our previous tests and include both the actual R&D and the instrumented R&D. The
instrumented PC/COGS from the regression in column one is used in column three with the lagged
R&D/sales. In column four, both the instrumented PC/COGS and R&D/sales are used.

[INSERT TABLE 13 HERE]

The results presented in this table show that our previous results on the negative relation between
outside purchase contracting and leverage are robust to the inclusion of either the actual R&D or the
instrumented R&D.

4.6

Outside Purchase Contracts and Security Issuance

In this section, we examine security issuance decisions directly. The tests in this section avoid the
problem of changes in leverage being potentially driven by stock market movements or accounting
changes. The hypothesis is that the use of outside purchase contracts affects not only equity versus debt
financing, but also whether the firm raises capital in the public versus the private markets. We examine
firm security issuance decisions using both a multinomial and a nested logit framework. We consider
six different security types: public and private debt, public and private convertibles, and public and
private equity. We begin with the multinomial framework where each alternative is independent of the
other alternatives. This assumption is called independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) and while
strong, it allows us to present initial evidence. We relax this assumption in the subsequent table when
we estimate a nested logit model.
Table 14 presents coefficient estimates from the multinomial logistic regression testing the impact
of outside purchase contract intensity on public and private security issues. The dependent variable
is the relative log-odds of issuing each security type versus the base choice of public debt. PC/COGS
(instr.) is outside purchase contract intensity instrumented using the variables, close to port and high
transp costs. Industry and year control variables are included, but not reported.
29

[INSERT TABLE 14 HERE]
Table 14 shows that outside purchase contract intensity significantly increases the probability of
issuing public convertibles over public debt. In addition, we see that the probability of choosing
private debt over public debt is significantly greater than zero. The results also show that riskier
firms are more likely to choose other securities over public debt and that firms with a higher marginal
tax rate are more likely to issue private debt. Overall, the results indicate that firms with outside
purchase contracts choose more flexible financial structure, consistent with their financial structure
being influenced by firm contracting with their own employees and suppliers in order to reduce the
possibility of financial distress.
We now examine security issuance decisions using a nested logit approach. This approach allows
correlation in the errors within the public versus private market choice, and also allows correlation
in the errors for the type of security – debt, convertibles, and equity – within the public or private
market choice. The interpretation of this structure is that firms’ choices of security type are correlated
within markets (public versus private). Tests indicate that the assumption of IIA within each market
is rejected. Thus, unobserved factors affect security choice conditional on the market, causing errors
to be correlated across securities within markets.
Table 15 presents the coefficient estimates from the nested logit regression testing the impact of
outside purchase contract intensity on public and private security issues. The table presents the choice
of market (private versus public) in the first column and the type of securities (equity or convertible
verses debt) within markets in columns two through five. PC/COGS (instr.) is the predicted outside
purchase contract intensity using close to port and high transp cost as instruments for PC/COGS. All
control variables are the same as the outside purchase contract intensity prediction regression (column
six in Table 7). Industry and year control variables are included, but not reported.
[INSERT TABLE 15 HERE]
Examining the results presented in Table 15, we can see that the instrumented outside purchase
contract intensity significantly impacts the private versus public market choice. Firm outside purchase
contract intensity increases the probability of firms choosing to issue securities in the private market
over the public market. Within markets, the choices show that firms that use more outside purchase
contracts avoid issuing debt, significantly so for the choice of issuing public convertibles over public
debt. The results indicate that firms with outside purchase contracts choose to issue in the private
market, consistent with these firms choosing securities that give them more flexibility and lower risk.
30

Overall, the results are consistent with a desire to reduce the probability that employees and suppliers
will suffer from a loss in their human and firm-specific capital.

5

Conclusions

We examine the impact of outside purchase contracting on firm risk and capital structure using a
unique database of external purchase contracts. We analyze the hypothesis that incomplete contracting
between firms and their suppliers and employees affects how firms finance their operations. We thus
extend the extensive incomplete contracting literature that begins with Grossman and Hart (1986)
and Hart and Moore (1990) by showing that incomplete contracting affects not just the vertical
integration decision but also the financing decisions of firms in contracting relationships with suppliers
and employees.
We document that a firm’s use of outside purchase contracts is associated with a reduction in the
firm’s cash flow volatility relative to matched firms that do not use external purchase contracts. In
particular, during the recent financial crisis, firms with outside purchase contracts were able to better
match costs with sales fluctuations, as firms that use purchase contracts incur fewer fixed costs thus
reducing their operating leverage.
Despite the reduction in cash flow volatility, we document that firms with external purchase contracts use less financial leverage. We take into account the fact that the decision to use outside purchase
contracts is itself an endogenous decision. We instrument for the external purchase contracting decision using firm, industry or supplier-level instruments that affect the external contracting decision
and are not likely to affect leverage economically and directly. We show that firms are more likely to
use outside purchase contracts when they are geographically close to potential sourcing locations or
deal with suppliers that are in competitive industries and located far away from the firm.
We show that firms with external purchase contracts particularly use less debt. This effect is
magnified when firms operate in high value-added per employee industries. Examining actual firm
supplier data, we also find that the high R&D intensity of suppliers, the number of suppliers, and the
high proportion of foreign suppliers are negatively associated with own firm leverage. If one views the
number of suppliers as a measure of firm bargaining power vis-a-vis its suppliers, this result is not
consistent with firms using leverage when they have more bargaining power. Thus, our results are
consistent with the firm using less financial leverage when it signs more contracts externally, to mitigate
the expected financial distress and the potential bankruptcy that might cause losses on contracting

31

parties.
Examining firm security issuance decisions, we document that firms with outside purchase contracts
are more likely to issue equity and more private securities. We find that when firms with outside
purchase contracts do issue debt, they choose private debt over public debt. These results show
that firms with outside purchase contracts choose more flexible securities that can be more easily
renegotiated. In our context of separate ownership with outside purchase contracts, our results indicate
that these firms with outside purchase choose more flexible capital structures through the use of more
equity-based and private securities.
These findings are consistent with firms with outside purchase contracts choosing a capital structure
that increases their flexibility in order to reduce the costs of financial distress on their higher valueadded employees and suppliers. Overall, the results are consistent with incomplete contracting between
firms and their employees and suppliers affecting not only who should own the assets, but also how
firms should finance their assets.

32

Appendix A

Semiconductor Firms and Outside Purchase Strategies

This appendix presents three examples of firms operating in the semiconductor industry with different outside firm contract
strategies. It shows their purchase contract obligations and their financial leverage over time. Fairchild Semiconductor owns
continuously operating semiconductor manufacturing facilities, while Marvell Technology Group is a leading fabless semiconductor
company. Xilinx has substantially changed its outside purchase contract intensity over time. PC is the total amount of outside
purchase contracts due within the next fiscal year. PC/COGS is the total amount of purchase contracts scaled by cost of goods
sold. Book (market) leverage is the book value of debt scaled by the book (market) value of total assets.

year

sales ($million)

PC ($million)

PC/COGS

CAPX/sales

book leverage

market leverage

FAIRCHILD SEMICONDUCTOR INTERNATIONAL INC
2004-2010

1529.8

84.2

0.087

0.092

0.284

0.236

2004

1601.0

77.9

0.077

0.138

0.357

0.274

2005

1425.1

125.9

0.128

0.062

0.335

0.219

2006

1651.1

123.8

0.117

0.080

0.290

0.199

2007

1670.2

79.9

0.074

0.086

0.276

0.218

2008

1574.2

28.5

0.028

0.104

0.289

0.383

2009

1187.5

52.2

0.070

0.039

0.268

0.239

2010

1599.7

100.9

0.112

0.133

0.173

0.122

MARVELL TECHNOLOGY GROUP LTD
2004-2010

2485.3

230.3

0.217

0.052

0.029

0.013

2004

1224.6

104.0

0.193

0.056

0.009

0.003

2005

1670.3

224.5

0.312

0.080

0.012

0.002

2006

2237.6

457.0

0.403

0.108

0.096

0.036

2007

2894.7

279.0

0.180

0.051

0.088

0.049

2008

2950.6

62.6

0.046

0.025

0.001

0.001

2009

2807.7

213.3

0.187

0.013

0.000

0.000

2010

3611.9

271.5

0.198

0.032

0.000

0.000

XILINX INC
2004-2010

1858.8

89.2

0.141

0.035

0.172

0.067

2004

1573.2

97.2

0.185

0.044

0.000

0.000

2005

1726.3

76.8

0.127

0.043

0.000

0.000

2006

1842.7

59.1

0.089

0.064

0.314

0.111

2007

1841.4

74.3

0.117

0.025

0.319

0.123

2008

1825.2

46.5

0.076

0.021

0.244

0.108

2009

1833.6

129.5

0.208

0.015

0.111

0.044

2010

2369.4

141.3

0.184

0.035

0.215

0.086

33

Appendix B

Collection of Outside Purchase Contracts (Purchase
Obligations) Data

This appendix describes how we collect the outside purchase contracts data. We first electronically gather
all “10-K”s and “10-K405”s by PERL web crawling23 of the SEC Edgar database, searching for the filings
from 2004 to 2010. We do not include “10KSB”s and “10KSB40”s, because small business issuers (or smaller
reporting companies) are not required to disclose purchase obligations by the SEC’s final rules. Then, using
PERL programming we specifically extract purchase obligations data in the MD&A section and other identifying
information including the CIK number in each 10-K.
There are two types of reporting practices. First, firms use HTML documents. In this case, purchase
obligations are disclosed in tabular formats. Second, firms use TEXT documents. In this case, it is highly likely
that the firms disclose purchase obligations also in textual formats. For the HTML groups, we extract all tables
first and then sort out the certain tables including search keywords. The search keywords are the combinations
of “purchase” and one of the following terms: “obligation” “commitment”, “agreement”, “order” or “contract”.
From the tables including the search terms, we extract the proper rows that contain the amount of purchase
obligations. For the TEXT document group, we use page breaks instead of tables. From the pages including
the above search terms, we extract the proper sentences that contain information on the amount of purchase
obligations.
In the event that the extraction process cannot sort out a table or a page containing search terms, we
reexamine the whole document and search for another terms including either “contract obligation” or “contract
commitment”. When the extracted information does not contain “purchase” or there still exists no match for
the search terms, we conclude that the firm has no purchase obligations.
The reporting units vary with reporting firms. Therefore, we normalize the units of disclosed purchase obligations in million dollars, by matching other information in the extracted tables or pages with the corresponding
Compustat data item.

23

We acknowledge that Andy Leone’s Perl resource page at http://sbaleone.bus.miami.edu/PERLCOURSE/Perl Resources.html
provides a useful help to get started Edgar web crawling algorithms using PERL.

34

Appendix C

Variable Definitions

• PC exists is the firm-level variable that equals one, if a given firm has disclosed a non-zero amount of
purchase obligations in the given year.
• PC/COGS is the total amount of purchase obligations due within the next fiscal year, scaled by cost of
goods sold.
• close to port is one if the minimum distance to any entry ports including sea ports, airports, and border
crossings is in the lowest tercile of the sample.
• high transp cost is one when each industry’s average input transportation costs by calculating the purchase
value-weighted average of the transportation costs across all input industries is in the highest tercile of
the sample.
• supp compete (TNIC) is the average supplier competition based on the TNIC Herfindahl index byHoberg
and Phillips (2010a). The CapitalIQ database tracks each supplier firm’s SIC code even for foreign or
private supplier firms. Thus, the median TNIC competition index of U.S. public firms within the same
3-digit SIC code group as the supplier is used to approximate each supplier’s competition.
• Log(supp distance) is the log of one plus the average distance from the customer firm in U.S. to domestic or
foreign suppliers, computed using the latitude and longitude information of the supplier country’s capital
city.
• area % higher education is the percentage of the population which has a graduate school degree in the
same three-digit zip code as the firm’s main business location.
• log(mv assets) is the log of market value of the firm’s assets. Market value of assets is market value of
common equity plus book value of preferred stock plus debt (long-term debt + debt in current liabilities)
plus book value of minority interest.
• log(1+age) is the log of one plus firm age, defined as a given year minus the year when the firm first
appeared in Compustat.
• M/B is market value of assets divided by book value of assets.
• Return on Assets is net operating income divided by total assets in the prior year. operating margin is
operating income before depreciation, scaled by sales.
• R&D/sales is R&D expenditures divided by sales in the prior year.
• market leverage is the ratio of total debt to the market value of assets.
• market leverage (with AP) additionally includes account payables as part of total debt.
• book leverage is the ratio of total debt to the book value of assets.
• book leverage (with AP) additionally includes account payables as part of total debt.
• PPE/assets is gross property, plant and equipment divided by total assets in the prior year.
• sales growth is the percentage growth in sales in a given year.
• #patent/assets is the total patent count granted to the firm during the 20 year period from 1985 to 2004,
scaled by the average total assets during the period. Under the current U.S. patent laws, the term of a
patent is 20 years from the filing date of the earliest application.
• cash flow volatility or sd(operating margin) is the standard deviation of operating margin from the previous
12 quarters.
• cash flow volatility (ROA) is the standard deviation of Return on Assets.
• abnormal stock return is the estimated stock alpha from a regression of the firm’s daily excess stock returns
(raw returns minus the risk-free rate) in the prior 252 trading days (over the one fiscal year period from
June to May in the next year) using the market model. Results do not change by using the Fama French
3 or 4 factor models.
• stock return volatility is the log of standard deviation of the firm’s daily logarithmic returns over the 252
trading days starting from June to May in the next year, multiplied by the square root of the time period,
252.
• default probability is Merton’s naive default probability (distant to default) based on the approach in
Bharath and Shumway (2008). Refer to our Empirical Strategy and Variables of Interest section and
Bharath and Shumway (2008) for the detailed explanation on how to construct this measure.

35

• demand shock is the detrended annual percentage change in the downstream industry demands using
the 2002 input-output benchmark table from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, following Maksimovic and
Phillips (2001). To detrend this variable, we regress it on industry and year fixed effects indicator variables
and then take the residual from this regression. The downstream industry demands data come from the
chain-type quantity indexes for gross output by industry from the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau
of Economic Analysis. For the consumer and government demands, we use personal consumption indexes
and government spendings and investment indexes.
• negative demand shock is a discretized version of demand shock, which equals one when demand shock is
negative and zero otherwise.
• Aaa bond rate is the Aaa corporate bond yield.
• credit spread: Baa-Aaa is the spread between the Baa and Aaa corporate bond yields.
• compete (TNIC) is one minus the TNIC Herfindahl index. The TNIC Herfindahl index is a measure
of product market competitiveness based on the Text-Based Network Industries by Hoberg and Phillips
(2010a).
• high-tech industry is a dummy variable indicating the 31 four-digit SIC code industries defined as high
technology manufacturing industries by TechAmerica organization. By high-technology, we refer to microelectronics rather than other technologies. We do not include bio-technology firms in the high-tech industries, as biotechnology is not established yet with its own set of SIC codes and rather widely spreads
over the drug sectors. Our high-tech industry classification is compatible with Loughran and Ritter (2004)
classification.
• value added/employee (VAE) is operating income before depreciation divided by the number of employees
in the prior year. This equals zero when operating income before depreciation is negative.
• high ind VAE is an industry-level dummy variable that equals one if the given industry’s value added per
employee (VAE) is greater than the sample median.
• high ind PC/COGS is an industry-year level dummy variable that equals one if a given industry’s mean
PC/COGS level is greater than the median of all industries in the sample at the given year.
• high supp R&D is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the average R&D intensity (R&D/sales)
of the firm’s suppliers is in the highest tercile of the sample. The CapitalIQ database tracks each supplier
firm’s SIC code even for foreign or private supplier firms, but does not report their R&D expenditures.
Thus, the median R&D intensity of U.S. public firms within the same 3-digit SIC code group as the
supplier is used to approximate each supplier’s R&D intensity.
• high supp labor is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the average labor intensity (number of
employees divided by sales) of the firm’s suppliers is in the highest tercile of the sample.
• high supp # is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the firm’s total number of suppliers is in the
highest tercile of the sample
• high % foreign supp is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the percentage of the foreign suppliers
out of all suppliers is in the highest tercile of the sample
• relative supp size small is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the average sales of a given firm’s
suppliers relative to the firm’s own sales is in the lowest tercile of the sample.
• high supp HHI is a dummy variable that equals one if the average HHI of the firm’s suppliers (based on
the TNIC Herfindahl index by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a)) is in the highest tercile.
• % foreign supplier is the percentage of the foreign suppliers out of all suppliers identified for the firm in
the Capital IQ database.
• % manufacturing supplier is the percentage of the suppliers in the manufacturing sector.
• % foreign tax is the percentage foreign income tax paid out of total income tax paid in each fiscal year.
• marginal tax rate is a firm’s marginal tax rate kindly provided to us by John Graham. The marginal tax
rate after deductions for depreciation, interest and leasing expenses is used.

36

References
Agrawal, Ashwini, and David A. Matsa, forthcoming 2013, Labor Unemployment Risk and Corporate
Financing Decisions, Journal of Financial Economics.
Allen, Jeffrey W., and Gordon M. Phillips, 2000, Corporate Equity Ownership, Strategic Alliances
and Product Market Relationships, Journal of Finance 55, 2791–2815.
Antras, Pol, forthcoming, Grossman Hart (1986) Goes Global: Incomplete Contracts, Property Rights,
and the International Organization of Production, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization.
Baker, George P., and Thomas N. Hubbard, 2004, Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board
Computers and Governance in U. S. Trucking, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1443–1479.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner, 2010, Human Capital, Bankruptcy, and
Capital Structure, Journal of Finance 65, 891–926.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting default with the Merton distance to
default mode, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339–1369.
Bolton, Patrick, and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors,
Journal of Political Economy 104, 1–25.
Brown, Jennifer, and David A. Matsa, 2013, Boarding a Sinking Ship? An Investigation of Job
Applications to Distressed Firms, Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Chava, Sudheer, and Michael R. Roberts, 2008, How Does Financing Impact Investment? The Role
of Debt Covenants, Journal of Finance 63, 2085–2121.
Damodaran, Aswath, 2009, Leases, Debt and Value, Working Paper pp. 1–57.
Fee, C. Edward, Charles J. Hadlock, and Shawn Thomas, 2006, Corporate Equity Ownership and the
Governance of Product Market Relationships, Journal of Finance 61, 12171251.
Fort, Teresa, 2011, Breaking Up Is Hard To Do: Why Firms Fragment Production Across Locations,
Working Paper.
Giroud, Xavier, 2012, Proximity and investment: Evidence from plant-level data, Quarterly Journal
of Economics p. forthcoming.
Gomes, Armando, and Gordon Phillips, 2012, Why do public firms issue private and public securities?,
Journal of Financial Intermediation 21, 619658.
Graham, John, 1996, Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate, Journal of Financial Economics.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Vertical and Lateral Integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691–719.
Handfield, Robert, 1994, U.S. Global Sourcing: Patterns of Development, International Journal of
Operations and Production Management 14, 40–51.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1990, Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm, Journal of Political
Economy 98, 1119–1158.
Helpman, Elhanan, 2006, Trade, FDI, and The Organization Of Firms, Journal of Economic Literature
44, 589–630.
37

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2010a, Text-based network industry classifications and endogenous product differentiation, University of Maryland Working Paper.
Hsu, Scott H. C., Adam V. Reed, and Jorg Rocholl, 2012, Competitive Effects of Private Equity
Investments, Working Paper.
Huang, Rongbing, and Jay R. Ritter, 2009, Testing Theories of Capital Structure and Estimating the
Speed of Adjustment, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 237–271.
Jaggia, Priscilla Butt, and Anjan V. Thakor, 1994, Firm-Specific Human Capital and Optimal Capital
Structure, International Economic Review 35, 283–308.
Kale, Jayant R., and Husayn Shahrur, 2007, Corporate capital structure and the characteristics of
suppliers and customers, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 321–365.
Lee, Kwang J., 2010, Purchase Obligations, Earnings Persistence and Stock Returns, Working Paper.
Lerner, Josh, Morten Sorensen, and Per Stromberg, 2011, Private equity and long-run investment:
The case of innovation, Journal of Finance 66, 445–477.
Levy, David L., 1995, International Sourcing and Supply Chain Stability, Journal of International
Business Studies 26, 343–360.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 2004, Why has ipo underpricing changed over time?, Financial Management 33, 5–37.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets: Who engages in
mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains?, Journal of Finance 56, 2019–2065.
Monczka, Robert M., and Robert J. Trent, 2003, International Purchasing and Global Sourcing - What
are the Differences?, Journal of Supply Chain Management 39, 26–36.
Moon, S. Katie, 2012, Firm Risk Taking versus CEO Diversification: Evidence from Outsourcing
Firms, Working Paper.
Nunn, Nathan, and Daniel Trefler, 2012, Incomplete Contracts and the Boundaries of the Multinational
Firm, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.
Plambeck, Erica L., and Terry A. Taylor, 2005, Sell the Plant? The Impact of Contract Manufacturing
on Innovation, Capacity, and Profitability, Management Science 51 133-150.
Spencer, Barbara J., 2005, International Outsourcing And Incomplete Contracts, Canadian Journal
of Economics 38, 1107–1135.
Stromberg, Per, 2008, The New Demography of Private Equity, Working Paper.
Williams, Ryan, 2012, Vertical firm boundaries: supplier-customer contracts and vertical integration,
Working Paper.
Williamson, Oliver E., 1979, Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations,
Journal of Law and Economics 22, 112–123.

38

(a) Source: Apple Inc.’s 10-K for the fiscal year 2005

(b) Source: Apple Inc.’s 10-K for the fiscal year 2008

Figure 1: Examples of Purchase Obligations Disclosures

Description of purchase obligations excerpted from the footnotes of Apple Inc.’s 2008 10-K: “The Company utilizes several
contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of
finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by
the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its
products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through
a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase
commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30
to 150 days. In addition, the Company has an off-balance sheet warranty obligation for products accounted for under subscription
accounting pursuant to SOP No. 97-2 whereby the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. As of September 27, 2008,
the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments, component purchase commitments, and
estimated warranty commitments of $5.4 billion. During 2006, the Company entered into long-term supply agreements with Hynix
Semiconductor, Inc., Intel Corporation, Micron Technology, Inc., Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., and Toshiba Corporation to secure
supply of NAND flash memory through calendar year 2010. As part of these agreements, the Company prepaid $1.25 billion for
flash memory components during 2006, which will be applied to certain inventory purchases made over the life of each respective
agreement. The Company utilized $567 million of the prepayment as of September 27, 2008.”

39

(a) East Coast Region

(b) Midwest Region

(c) West Coast Region

Figure 2: Firm Main Business Locations and U.S. Major Ports of Entry
40

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Outside Purchase Contracting Activities
Panel A shows the outside purchase contracting activity by two-digit SIC code industry in the manufacturing sector. The sample period is 2004-2010. The firm-level purchase contracts
data are from purchase obligations information from 10-K filings. Purchase Contract Intensity is PC/COGS, which is the total amount of outside purchase contracts due within the
next fiscal year scaled by cost of goods sold. PC/COGS is winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of the distribution.
PANEL A:
Industry Description

41

Food and kindred products
Tobacco manufactures
Textile mill products
Apparel and other textile products
Lumber and wood products
Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing
Chemicals and allied products
Petroleum and coal products
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
Leather and leather products
Stone, clay, glass, and concrete products
Primary metal industries
Fabricated metal products
Industrial machinery and equipment
Electrical and electronic equipment
Transportation equipment
Instruments and related products
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
Total

SIC
Code
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

Firms with
Purchase Contracts(#)

Firms with
Purchase Contracts(%)

Purchase Contract
Intensity

Purchase Contract Intensity
(within firms with
Purchase Contracts)

83
6
12
39
16
24
39
46
343
22
37
16
15
59
53
242
359
90
274
32

59
6
8
23
6
13
30
26
239
19
19
13
12
41
34
169
250
49
177
17

0.711
1
0.667
0.59
0.375
0.542
0.769
0.565
0.697
0.864
0.514
0.813
0.8
0.695
0.642
0.698
0.696
0.544
0.646
0.531

0.091
0.169
0.022
0.121
0.008
0.032
0.053
0.02
0.126
0.114
0.044
0.151
0.071
0.089
0.077
0.09
0.111
0.074
0.099
0.051

0.128
0.169
0.033
0.204
0.022
0.059
0.068
0.036
0.181
0.132
0.084
0.186
0.089
0.128
0.12
0.128
0.159
0.134
0.153
0.095

1807

1210

0.67

0.097

0.144

Total
Firms(#)

PANEL B presents the summary statistics of suppliers identified from the Capital IQ’s business relationship database. The sample consists of 6,917 suppliers of 884 customer firms
in the primary sample. Information on suppliers’ revenue, assets, numbers of employees, SIC codes, and countries of incorporation are available from the Capital IQ database. The
statistics are based on the firm-level average of each variable from all available firm-year observations from 2005 to 2011. We use the industry median R&D from all US public firms at
the same four-digit SIC code to proxy foreign or US private supplier R&D.
PANEL B:

42

Supplier Revenue ($million)
Supplier Assets ($million)
Supplier Capital Intensity (sales/assets)
Supplier Labor Intensity (employees/revenue)
Supplier R&D Intensity (R&D/sales)
Supplier TNIC Competition
Supplier SIC Competition
Supplier in Manufacturing
Domestic Supplier
Domestic Public Supplier
Region: America
Region: Asia
Region: Europe
Region: Africa
Region: Oceania
Region: Unknown

Supplier Characteristics
mean

min

p25

p50

p75

max

obs.

4595.580
7794.225
0.944
8.059
0.102
0.812
0.814
0.475
0.481
0.321
0.536
0.255
0.172
0.003
0.019
0.016

0.000
0.000
0.061
0.094
0.000
0.038
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

50.386
63.025
0.577
2.992
0.004
0.739
0.778
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

244.643
305.264
0.845
4.972
0.087
0.845
0.880
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1730.357
2344.114
1.189
8.754
0.125
0.924
0.931
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

2384814.250
2421008.500
3.008
58.148
0.763
0.978
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

5281
5282
5277
4903
5107
5107
5110
6917
6917
6917
6917
6917
6917
6917
6917
6917

Table 2: New Security Issuance
The table presents security issuance decisions by public firms in private and public markets over our sample period. It presents the
number of issues, the total gross proceeds raised in millions of dollars, the mean value of the proceeds of each issue as a fraction
of the market value of the issuer’s asset, and the mean value of the maturity for debt security issues. The sample consists of all
security issues by 1,806 manufacturing firms during the fiscal year period of 2004-2011. Panel B shows the number of security
issues by year and security type.
PANEL A:
Detailed Issue Type

# issues

proceeds($million)

proceeds/market assets

maturity of debt

Public Debt
Public Conv. Debt
Public Conv. Preferred
Public Equity
144A Debt
144A Conv. Debt
144A Conv. Preferred
144A Equity
Private Debt
Private Conv. Debt
Private Conv. Preferred
Private Equity

469
80
15
639
90
176
5
5
1,930
66
49
205

1212.17
365.79
541.01
185.02
361.47
413.55
72.22
17.76
701.36
48.72
196
35.75

0.05
0.12
0.13
0.16
0.15
0.14
0.13
0.09
0.19
0.14
0.14
0.11

10.79
7.19

Total

3,729

590.95

0.16

6.02

PANEL B:
Detailed Issue Type
Public Debt
Public Conv. Debt
Public Conv. Preferred
Public Equity
144A Debt
144A Conv. Debt
144A Conv. Preferred
144A Equity
Private Debt
Private Conv. Debt
Private Conv. Preferred
Private Equity
Total

8.06
8.95

4.44

Data Year - Fiscal
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Total

31
2

29
4
2
69
28
26

47
12

57
11

83
6
35

55
14
1
76
19
27

83
9
4
96

74
8
6
56

3

356
11
4
39

315
9
7
39

193
12
8
25

9
2
4
204
10
5
28

15

377
13
11
34

93
20
2
129
8
10
1
1
145
9
9
25

328
2
5
12

469
80
15
639
90
176
5
5
1,930
66
49
205

226

593

593

562

343

452

454

506

3,729

104
25
47
2
12

43

26
4
7

Table 3: New Security Issuance and Outside Purchase Contracting Intensity by Firm Size
The table reports the number of issues and the mean value of the issuing firm’s outside purchase contracting intensity for each security type by firm size. Size categories are 10 quantiles
based on the prior year’s market value of the assets. The outside purchase contracting intensity, PC/COGS is the total amount of outside purchase contracts due within the next fiscal
year scaled by cost of goods sold. We combine Rule 144A securities with other public securities in the table.
10 Quantiles of the prior year’s Market Value of Assets
Security Type

1

44

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1
0

1
0

1
0

7
0.03

6
0.081

23
0.085

46
0.049

133
0.099

279
0.149

64
0.11

84
0.102

135
0.084

166
0.06

202
0.075

257
0.108

294
0.083

324
0.1

356
0.156

6
0.155

11
0.019

21
0.175

43
0.17

35
0.22

40
0.138

35
0.097

27
0.264

Public Debt

# Issues
PC/COGS

Private Debt

# Issues
PC/COGS

35
0.045

Public Convertible

# Issues
PC/COGS

2
0.032

Private Convertible

# Issues
PC/COGS

37
0.016

14
0.111

18
0.113

11
0.09

10
0.054

5
0.042

6
0.213

3
0.344

4
0.035

4
0.144

Public Equity

# Issues
PC/COGS

25
0.103

36
0.084

73
0.107

75
0.138

76
0.115

66
0.154

52
0.096

46
0.12

46
0.065

19
0.103

Private Equity

# Issues
PC/COGS

42
0.089

42
0.101

39
0.165

33
0.108

19
0.177

8
0.095

7
0.25

8
0.117

1
0

3
0.132

Table 4: Summary Statistics
Panel A of the table presents summary statistics for firms with and without outside purchase contracts. All variable definitions
are in Appendix C. The sample consists of 1,807 manufacturing firms during the fiscal year 2004-2010. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Panel B of the table presents summary statistics of the growth
and variance of leverage for the subsamples of the highest, middle, and lowest tercile groups of the variance in outside contracting
intensity. The terciles for PC/COGS growth or sd(PC/COGS growth) are the annual percentage growth of PC/COGS and its
standard deviation at the firm level, respectively.
PANEL A:

PC/COGS
market leverage
market leverage (with AP)
book leverage
book leverage (with AP)
log(mv assets)
log(1+age)
M/B
sales growth
operating margin
return on assets
PPE/assets
R&D/sales
#patents/assets
value-added per emp
abnormal stock return
stock return volatility
cash flow volatility
cash flow volatility (ROA)
default probability
marginal tax rate
% foreign tax
high ind PC/COGS
compete (TNIC)
high-tech industry
close to port
high transp cost
% gradschool grad
supp compete(TNIC)
log(supp distance)
Observations

Firm with vs. without outside firm contracts
Firms with purchase contracts

Firms without purchase contracts

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

Mean Difference

0.142
0.124
0.177
0.187
0.265
6.894
2.574
2.141
0.153
-0.193
-0.001
0.429
0.294
0.113
0.061
-0.001
0.420
0.278
0.091
0.016
0.144
0.298
0.460
0.761
0.305
0.351
0.327
13.884
0.822
7.484

0.094
0.089
0.143
0.148
0.233
6.722
2.667
1.764
0.089
0.105
0.036
0.346
0.042
0.019
0.033
0.013
0.421
0.038
0.066
0.000
0.085
0.130
0.500
0.847
0.000
0.000
0.000
12.200
0.830
7.821

0.000
0.138
0.201
0.191
0.277
5.659
2.470
2.032
0.146
-0.249
-0.024
0.427
0.278
0.110
0.039
-0.037
0.464
0.429
0.104
0.033
0.155
0.213
0.373
0.686
0.261
0.252
0.326
13.226
0.815
7.355

0.000
0.096
0.156
0.136
0.222
5.491
2.667
1.556
0.086
0.082
0.019
0.352
0.020
0.009
0.020
-0.010
0.465
0.038
0.071
0.000
0.117
0.003
0.167
0.762
0.000
0.000
0.000
11.400
0.814
7.741

0.142***
-0.013*
-0.024***
-0.004
-0.013
1.235***
0.105**
0.109*
0.007
0.056
0.023**
0.002
0.016
0.003
0.021***
0.036***
-0.043***
-0.150**
-0.013***
-0.017***
-0.011
0.085***
0.087***
0.075***
0.044*
0.099***
0.001
0.658
0.006***
0.129*

1168

PANEL B:
Terciles
PC/COGS growth
Low
Medium
High
Observations
Terciles
sd(PC/COGS growth)
Low
Medium
High
Observations

559

Outside Purchase Contracting Intensity and Leverage
PC/COGS growth

market leverage growth

book leverage growth

-0.472
-0.004
0.883

0.071
0.090
0.100

-0.017
-0.001
0.002

sd(PC/COGS growth)

sd(market leverage growth)

sd(book leverage growth)

0.217
0.508
1.148

0.464
0.518
0.557

0.306
0.357
0.381

4767

974

45

Table 5: Outside Purchase Contracts and Cash Flow Volatility: Propensity Score Based Differences
The table presents the differences in firm cash flow volatility between firms with outside purchase contracts and matched firms with
no outside purchase contracts. We estimate a matching model using log(mv assets), M/B, market leverage, mean quarterly sales,
compete (TNIC), and high-tech industry as matching variables. For each quarter, a firm with outside purchase contracts is the
firm in the sample that has disclosed a non-zero amount of purchase obligations for the given fiscal year. The control observations
for a firm with outside purchase contracts are the 10 nearest neighbors across the matching variables within the same FIC-25 code
group by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). The variable of interest is Standard Deviation of (ROS), which is the standard deviation
of operating income before depreciation scaled by sales from the 12 previous quarters. Other variable definitions are available in
the Appendix. Results are robust to using different matching variables or different numbers of control observations. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗
indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Quarter

[Outside Purchase Contracting - Matched Firms]

Std. Err.

z

P>z

N

-1.793
-1.511
-1.65
-1.852
-2.092
-1.757
-1.659
-1.402
-1.559
-2.219
-2.056
-1.821
-1.427
-1.683
-1.782
-1.728
-1.82
-1.28
-1.206
-1.397
-1.477
-2.796
-2.899
-2.752
-2.778
-2.131
-2.321
-2.295
-2.527

0.073
0.131
0.099
0.064
0.036
0.079
0.097
0.161
0.119
0.026
0.04
0.069
0.154
0.092
0.075
0.084
0.069
0.201
0.228
0.162
0.14
0.005
0.004
0.006
0.005
0.033
0.02
0.022
0.012

1685
1243
1258
1258
1259
1416
1427
1428
1426
1381
1391
1388
1388
1338
1346
1349
1351
1288
1295
1297
1293
1067
1069
1069
1069
1010
1011
1011
1011

Standard Deviation of ROS (Operating Margin)
all quarters
2004q1
2004q2
2004q3
2004q4
2005q1
2005q2
2005q3
2005q4
2006q1
2006q2
2006q3
2006q4
2007q1
2007q2
2007q3
2007q4
2008q1
2008q2
2008q3
2008q4
2009q1
2009q2
2009q3
2009q4
2010q1
2010q2
2010q3
2010q4

−0.022∗
−0.025
−0.027∗
−0.029∗
−0.031 ∗ ∗
−0.025∗
−0.024∗
−0.019
−0.021
−0.032 ∗ ∗
−0.030 ∗ ∗
−0.027∗
−0.02
−0.024∗
−0.026∗
−0.025∗
−0.027∗
−0.021
−0.019
−0.023
−0.024
−0.051 ∗ ∗∗
−0.052 ∗ ∗∗
−0.048 ∗ ∗∗
−0.046 ∗ ∗∗
−0.034 ∗ ∗
−0.037 ∗ ∗
−0.037 ∗ ∗
−0.041 ∗ ∗

0.012
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.015
0.014
0.014
0.014
0.013
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.014
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016

46

Table 6: Cost Fluctuations in Firms with versus Firms without Outside Purchase Contracts
The table shows the cost fluctuations based on downstream demand shocks for firms with and without outside purchase contracts.
Each column presents coefficient estimates from an OLS regression with firm-fixed effects. COGS and SG&A represent Cost of
Goods Sold and Selling, General & Administrative Expense, respectively. The dependent variables are scaled by the average sales
of the firm during the sample period. A demand shock is the detrended annual percentage change in the downstream industry
demands using the chain-type quantity indexes for gross output by industry and the 2002 input-output benchmark table from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, following Maksimovic and Phillips (2001). To detrend this variable, we regress it on industry and
year fixed effects indicators and then take the residual from the regression. The variable, negative demand shock, is a discretized
version of the demand shock, which equals one when the demand shock is negative and zero otherwise. The panel A sample
includes firms that disclose a non-zero amount of purchase obligations at least once during the sample period, and otherwise firms
are included in the panel B sample. All specifications have firm fixed effects. t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust and adjusted
for clustering at the firm level. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
PANEL A: Firms with Outside Purchase Contracts

(COGS+SG&A)/avrg sales

COGS/avrg sales

SG&A/avrg sales

-0.0447∗∗∗
(-6.00)

-0.0268∗∗∗
(-4.18)

-0.0161∗∗∗
(-4.00)

6826
0.598

6826
0.671

6826
0.739

(COGS+SG&A)/avrg sales

COGS/avrg sales

SG&A/avrg sales

-0.0224∗
(-1.82)

-0.0152
(-1.57)

-0.00410
(-0.65)

2998
0.574

2998
0.676

2998
0.764

negative demand shock

Observations
Adjusted R2

PANEL B: Firms without Outside Purchase Contracts
negative demand shock

Observations
Adjusted R2

47

Table 7: Outside Purchase Contracting Propensity
The table presents outside purchase contracting propensity estimates from Tobit and Linear Probability regressions. The dependent
variable, PC/COGS is the total amount of outside purchase contracts due within the next fiscal year scaled by cost of goods sold.
The first two results are from the firm-level between estimations, and others are from the firm-year level panel estimations. We
estimate both tobit and linear probability models for panel regressions. We use two instrumental variables, close to port and high
transp cost. close to port equals 1 if the minimum distance to any entry ports including seaports, airports, and border crossings is
in the lowest tercile of the sample. high transp cost equals 1 if the average (purchase value weighted) industry transportation cost
of inputs from other industries is in the highest tercile. Detailed variable definitions are available in the Appendix C. t-statistics
(in parenthesis) are robust and adjusted for industry-year clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

Firm Level Between Regression

Firm-Year Level Tobit

Firm-Year Level OLS

PC/COGS
0.0151∗∗
(2.52)

0.0169∗∗∗
(2.74)

0.0153∗∗∗
(2.83)

0.0223∗∗∗
(4.04)

0.00637∗
(1.74)

0.0103∗∗∗
(2.79)

-0.0180
(-1.46)

-0.00834
(-0.76)

-0.0177∗∗
(-2.50)

-0.00979
(-1.34)

-0.0211∗∗∗
(-4.25)

-0.0151∗∗∗
(-2.92)

0.0271∗∗∗
(7.00)

0.0227∗∗∗
(6.75)

0.0372∗∗∗
(17.05)

0.0343∗∗∗
(15.80)

0.0164∗∗∗
(11.77)

0.0143∗∗∗
(10.41)

log(1+age)

-0.00503
(-0.78)

-0.00680
(-1.17)

-0.00555
(-1.03)

-0.00551
(-0.97)

0.00197
(0.52)

0.00234
(0.59)

PPE/assets

-0.0311
(-1.41)

-0.0294
(-1.64)

-0.0317∗∗
(-2.32)

-0.0307∗∗∗
(-2.67)

-0.0319∗∗∗
(-4.07)

-0.0356∗∗∗
(-5.19)

0.00530∗∗∗
(2.64)

0.00536∗∗∗
(2.84)

0.000812
(0.41)

0.00144
(0.74)

0.000908
(0.75)

0.00117
(1.00)

cash flow volatility

-0.00595
(-0.25)

0.00261
(0.11)

0.00209
(0.15)

0.00677
(0.47)

0.00831
(0.89)

0.0121
(1.25)

M/B

0.00119
(0.31)

0.00196
(0.49)

0.00165
(0.51)

0.00248
(0.70)

0.00458∗∗
(2.29)

0.00584∗∗∗
(2.68)

sales growth

0.0667∗∗
(2.23)

0.0678∗∗
(2.41)

0.0265∗∗
(2.01)

0.0201
(1.45)

0.0181∗
(1.91)

0.0145
(1.52)

#patents/assets

0.0595∗∗
(2.37)

0.0544∗∗
(2.23)

0.0489∗∗∗
(2.91)

0.0479∗∗
(2.21)

0.0278∗
(1.97)

0.0242
(1.40)

abnormal stock return

0.115∗∗∗
(2.69)

0.112∗∗∗
(2.88)

0.0348∗∗
(1.98)

0.0426∗∗
(2.32)

0.0194∗
(1.90)

0.0224∗∗
(2.10)

stock return volatility

0.0252
(0.24)

-0.0200
(-0.20)

0.0772∗∗
(2.09)

0.0546
(1.40)

0.0484∗∗
(2.12)

0.0358
(1.49)

-0.00101
(-0.08)

0.000785
(0.06)

-0.00732∗
(-1.67)

-0.00381
(-0.77)

-0.00827∗∗∗
(-2.77)

-0.00703∗∗
(-2.12)

0.0363
(1.40)

0.0369∗∗∗
(2.74)

0.0249∗∗∗
(2.93)

0.0447∗∗∗
(5.94)

0.0187∗∗∗
(3.22)

0.0310∗∗∗
(6.33)

close to port

high transp cost

log(mv assets)

operating margin

% foreign tax

high ind PC/COGS

compete(TNIC)

0.0779∗∗∗
(3.72)

0.0739∗∗∗
(4.80)

0.0444∗∗∗
(5.52)

high-tech industry

0.0286∗∗
(2.08)

0.0266∗∗∗
(3.61)

0.0112∗∗
(2.40)

Aaa bond rate

-0.0229
(-1.48)

-0.0201∗∗
(-1.99)

credit spread: Baa-Aaa

0.00193
(0.20)

-0.00126
(-0.22)

Observations
Pseudo or Adjusted R2
F
Fixed Effects

1454
0.843
.
Ind

1460
0.766
116.1
None

7675
0.228
43.68
Ind, Year

48

7366
0.182
49.88
None

7675
0.089
71.00
Ind, Year

7345
0.078
50.66
None

Table 8: Leverage: Propensity Score Based Differences
The table presents the differences in leverage between firms with high outside contracting intensity and matched firms without
outside purchase contracts. We estimate a matching model using log(mv assets), log(quarterly sales), M/B, operating margin, cash
flow volatility, PPE/assets, compete (TNIC), and high-tech industry as matching variables. For each quarter, a firm with high
outside contracting intensity is the firm in the sample with PC/COGS in the highest tercile. The control observations for a firm
with high outside contracting intensity are the 10 nearest neighbors across the matching variables within the same FIC-25 code
group by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). The variable of interest is market leverage, which is the ratio of total debt to the market
value of total assets. Market value of total assets is market value of common equity plus book value of preferred stock plus debt
(long-term debt + debt in current liabilities) plus book value of minority interest. Other variable definitions are available in the
Appendix C. Results are robust to using different matching variables and different numbers of control observations. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗
indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Quarter

[High Outside Contracting - Matched Firms]

Std. Err.

z

P>z

N

0.009
0.011
0.011
0.011
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.009
0.009
0.01
0.009
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.011
0.012
0.012
0.013
0.016
0.017
0.015
0.013
0.013
0.013
0.013
0.013
0.012

-4.076
-1.086
-0.65
-1.107
-1.851
-1.232
-1.571
-1.463
-1.898
-1.712
-1.466
-1.618
-1.628
-2.314
-2.236
-3.135
-3.161
-2.582
-2.122
-2.944
-3.544
-1.451
-1.441
-1.845
-1.981
-2.83
-2.65
-2.744
-2.254

0.000
0.278
0.515
0.268
0.064
0.218
0.116
0.143
0.058
0.087
0.143
0.106
0.103
0.021
0.025
0.002
0.002
0.010
0.034
0.003
0.000
0.147
0.150
0.065
0.048
0.005
0.008
0.006
0.024

1687
1156
1164
1163
1170
1311
1334
1331
1340
1288
1300
1287
1294
1253
1262
1264
1270
1208
1222
1222
1226
1015
1024
1020
1026
965
966
962
973

market leverage
all quarters
2004q1
2004q2
2004q3
2004q4
2005q1
2005q2
2005q3
2005q4
2006q1
2006q2
2006q3
2006q4
2007q1
2007q2
2007q3
2007q4
2008q1
2008q2
2008q3
2008q4
2009q1
2009q2
2009q3
2009q4
2010q1
2010q2
2010q3
2010q4

−0.035 ∗ ∗∗
−0.012
−0.007
−0.012
−0.019∗
−0.012
−0.015
−0.014
−0.018∗
−0.016∗
−0.014
−0.016
−0.015
−0.022 ∗ ∗
−0.022 ∗ ∗
−0.032 ∗ ∗∗
−0.035 ∗ ∗∗
−0.030 ∗ ∗∗
−0.026 ∗ ∗
−0.039 ∗ ∗∗
−0.056 ∗ ∗∗
−0.025
−0.022
−0.025∗
−0.026 ∗ ∗
−0.036 ∗ ∗∗
−0.034 ∗ ∗∗
−0.035 ∗ ∗∗
−0.027 ∗ ∗

49

Table 9: Outside Purchase Contracts and Leverage
The table analyzes the impact of outside purchase contracts on leverage. It reports estimates from leverage regressions using an
instrumental variable approach with close to port and high transp cost as instrumental variables for PC/COGS. The dependent
variable, market leverage is the ratio of total debt to the market value of total assets. Market value of total assets is market
value of common equity plus book value of preferred stock plus debt (long-term debt + debt in current liabilities) plus book
value of minority interest. In columns four to six, market leverage (with AP) is computed by additionally including account
payables as part of total debt. Other variable definitions are available in the Appendix C. The sample consists of all firm-years in
the manufacturing sector during the period of 2005-2011. All the lagged control variables from the outside contracting intensity
prediction regression (column five and six in Table 7) are included. Industry fixed effects are at the FIC-25 code group level
following Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust and adjusted for industry-year clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ ,
and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

Instrumental Variable Approach
market leverage
-0.817∗∗∗
(-4.91)

-1.321∗∗∗
(-6.97)

-0.776∗∗∗
(-4.54)

-1.306∗∗∗
(-6.05)

log(mv assets)

0.0354∗∗∗
(11.61)

0.0417∗∗∗
(13.03)

0.0320∗∗∗
(9.95)

0.0393∗∗∗
(11.26)

log(1+age)

-0.0126∗∗
(-2.57)

-0.00774
(-1.63)

-0.00958∗
(-1.97)

-0.00350
(-0.72)

PPE/assets

0.00715
(0.68)

-0.0101
(-0.94)

0.0238∗∗
(2.11)

0.00462
(0.39)

operating margin

-0.00123∗
(-1.94)

-0.000933
(-1.59)

-0.00111∗
(-1.80)

-0.000572
(-0.92)

cash flow volatility

-0.00168
(-0.23)

0.00665
(0.81)

-0.0125
(-1.42)

-0.0116
(-1.15)

M/B

-0.0271∗∗∗
(-9.49)

-0.0220∗∗∗
(-7.82)

-0.0373∗∗∗
(-9.14)

-0.0331∗∗∗
(-8.55)

sales growth

0.0236∗∗∗
(4.49)

0.0300∗∗∗
(5.28)

0.0261∗∗∗
(4.70)

0.0339∗∗∗
(5.54)

#patents/assets

0.0227∗∗∗
(2.64)

0.0196∗∗
(2.37)

0.0160
(1.63)

0.0113
(1.10)

abnormal stock return

-0.0803∗∗∗
(-6.45)

-0.0766∗∗∗
(-6.13)

-0.105∗∗∗
(-7.58)

-0.0995∗∗∗
(-7.40)

stock return volatility

0.308∗∗∗
(13.34)

0.285∗∗∗
(11.78)

0.388∗∗∗
(14.77)

0.378∗∗∗
(13.83)

% foreign tax

-0.00403
(-1.45)

-0.0121∗∗∗
(-3.94)

0.000193
(0.07)

-0.00737∗∗
(-2.18)

high ind PC/COGS

0.00879∗
(1.92)

0.0352∗∗∗
(3.70)

0.00764
(1.55)

0.0222∗
(1.81)

PC/COGS (instr.)

-1.089∗∗∗
(-6.11)

market leverage (with AP)

compete(TNIC)

high-tech industry

0.00277
(0.26)

-0.00295
(-0.22)

-0.0212∗∗∗
(-4.47)

-0.0199∗∗∗
(-3.46)

0.00647
(0.46)

0.0100
(0.65)

-0.0430∗∗∗
(-5.82)

-0.0614∗∗∗
(-6.33)

Aaa bond rate

credit spread: Baa-Aaa

Observations
Adjusted R2
Fixed Effects

8953
0.129
Ind, Year

-1.273∗∗∗
(-6.42)

7801
0.258
Ind, Year

7470
0.217
None

50

8953
0.149
Ind, Year

7801
0.303
Ind, Year

7470
0.267
None

Table 10: Outside Purchase Contracts, Leverage and Concerned Suppliers
The table examines the impact of outside purchase contracts on financial leverage through the channel of supplier competition
and supplier distance to capture suppliers’ potential concerns about the firm switching suppliers. We use an instrumental variable
approach with supp compete (TNIC) and log(supp distance) as instruments for PC/COGS. Columns one and three report
estimates of the first-stage regressions of PC/COGS. The instrumented PC/COGS from the regression in columns one and three
are used in the second-stage of regressions of market leverage in columns two and four, respectively. supp compete (TNIC) is
average supplier competition based on the TNIC Herfindahl index by Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). log(supp distance) is the log
of one plus the average distance from the customer firm in U.S. to domestic or foreign suppliers, computed using the latitude and
longitude information of the supplier country’s capital city. Both instruments are industry level medians in column one for the full
sample, and firm-specific in column three for a subsample of customer firms whose suppliers are identified with the Capital IQ
business relationship database. Other variable definitions are available in the Appendix C. All the control variables are lagged.
t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust and adjusted for industry-year clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

Instrumental Variable Approach
PC/COGS

supp compete (TNIC)

log(supp distance)

market leverage

PC/COGS

0.261∗∗∗
(5.73)

0.0430∗∗
(2.43)

0.00314∗∗∗
(3.91)

0.00355∗∗∗
(4.80)
-0.869∗∗∗
(-4.11)

PC/COGS (instr.)

market leverage

-0.563∗∗∗
(-3.41)

0.0149∗∗∗
(10.47)

0.0349∗∗∗
(10.43)

0.0164∗∗∗
(8.69)

0.0310∗∗∗
(7.96)

0.00338
(0.83)

-0.0100∗∗
(-2.05)

0.00330
(0.72)

-0.0120∗∗
(-2.17)

-0.0382∗∗∗
(-5.34)

0.0104
(1.04)

-0.0401∗∗∗
(-3.74)

0.0311∗∗∗
(2.85)

0.000869
(0.72)

-0.00128∗∗
(-2.31)

-0.00198
(-0.89)

-0.00320∗∗
(-2.37)

0.0105
(1.16)

0.00103
(0.13)

0.0413∗∗∗
(3.69)

0.0150
(1.27)

0.00560∗∗∗
(2.66)

-0.0252∗∗∗
(-7.92)

0.00547∗
(1.78)

-0.0279∗∗∗
(-11.01)

sales growth (lagged)

0.0163∗
(1.66)

0.0219∗∗∗
(3.84)

0.0107
(0.74)

0.0122∗∗
(2.07)

#patents/assets

0.0235
(1.39)

0.00810
(0.90)

0.0126
(0.73)

0.00346
(0.40)

abnormal stock return (lagged)

0.0222∗∗
(2.09)

-0.0843∗∗∗
(-6.57)

0.0366∗∗
(2.09)

-0.0617∗∗∗
(-4.58)

stock return volatility (lagged)

0.0408∗
(1.75)

0.270∗∗∗
(10.71)

0.114∗∗∗
(3.22)

0.271∗∗∗
(7.30)

% foreign tax (lagged)

-0.00749∗∗
(-2.27)

-0.00935∗∗∗
(-3.12)

-0.0139∗∗∗
(-3.09)

-0.0125∗∗∗
(-3.14)

high ind SC/COGS

0.0231∗∗∗
(4.89)

0.0217∗∗
(2.60)

0.0408∗∗∗
(6.16)

0.0173∗∗
(2.12)

compete(TNIC) (lagged)

0.0333∗∗∗
(3.91)

-0.0181
(-1.62)

0.0610∗∗∗
(4.79)

-0.0199
(-1.25)

0.00619
(1.43)

-0.0294∗∗∗
(-5.57)

0.00926∗
(1.95)

-0.0325∗∗∗
(-8.91)

7319
0.081
Year

7444
0.228
Ind, Year

3808
0.097
Ind, Year

3875
0.247
Ind, Year

log(mv assets) (lagged)

log(1+age)

PPE/assets (lagged)

operating margin (lagged)

cash flow volatility (lagged)

M/B (lagged)

high-tech industry

Observations
Adjusted R2
Fixed Effects

51

Table 11: Outside Purchase Contracts and Short-term vs Long-term Leverage
The table analyzes the impact of outside purchase contracts on short-term leverage vs. long-term leverage. It reports estimates
from leverage regressions using an instrumental variable approach with close to port and high transp cost as instrumental
variables for PC/COGS. The dependent variable, short-term leverage (long-term leverage) is the ratio of debt in current liabilities
(long-term debt) to the market value of total assets. Market value of total assets is market value of common equity plus book
value of preferred stock plus debt (long-term debt + debt in current liabilities) plus book value of minority interest. Other variable
definitions are available in the Appendix C. The sample consists of all firm-years in the manufacturing sector during the period
of 2005-2011. All the lagged control variables from the outside contracting intensity prediction regression (column five and six in
Table 7) are included. Industry fixed effects are at the FIC-25 code group level following Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). t-statistics
(in parenthesis) are robust and adjusted for industry-year clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

Instrumental Variable Approach
short-term market leverage

long-term market leverage

0.133
(1.22)

0.0797
(0.60)

-0.915∗∗∗
(-6.16)

-1.391∗∗∗
(-8.56)

log(mv assets)

-0.00515∗∗∗
(-2.75)

-0.00348∗
(-1.76)

0.0372∗∗∗
(13.89)

0.0428∗∗∗
(15.05)

log(1+age)

0.00559∗∗∗
(3.52)

0.00765∗∗∗
(4.24)

-0.0149∗∗∗
(-3.69)

-0.0109∗∗∗
(-2.85)

PPE/assets

0.0200∗∗∗
(3.78)

0.0160∗∗
(2.50)

0.00359
(0.39)

-0.0117
(-1.26)

operating margin

0.000851∗∗
(2.23)

0.00106∗∗
(2.54)

-0.00197∗∗∗
(-3.04)

-0.00164∗∗∗
(-2.69)

cash flow volatility

-0.0167∗∗∗
(-3.04)

-0.0245∗∗∗
(-3.86)

0.00384
(0.56)

0.0128∗
(1.76)

M/B

-0.0153∗∗∗
(-7.28)

-0.0157∗∗∗
(-7.60)

-0.0220∗∗∗
(-9.65)

-0.0173∗∗∗
(-7.69)

0.00194
(0.68)

0.00396
(1.21)

0.0241∗∗∗
(5.44)

0.0298∗∗∗
(6.34)

#patents/assets

-0.0133∗∗∗
(-3.11)

-0.0172∗∗∗
(-3.65)

0.0297∗∗∗
(4.15)

0.0288∗∗∗
(4.06)

abnormal stock return

-0.0594∗∗∗
(-7.56)

-0.0592∗∗∗
(-7.06)

-0.0452∗∗∗
(-4.32)

-0.0394∗∗∗
(-3.75)

stock return volatility

0.152∗∗∗
(10.39)

0.164∗∗∗
(10.46)

0.235∗∗∗
(12.63)

0.212∗∗∗
(10.70)

0.00830∗∗∗
(3.85)

0.00810∗∗∗
(3.16)

-0.00793∗∗∗
(-3.10)

-0.0153∗∗∗
(-5.41)

-0.00591∗
(-1.78)

-0.0176∗∗∗
(-2.62)

0.0134∗∗∗
(3.15)

0.0401∗∗∗
(4.94)

PC/COGS (instr.)

sales growth

% foreign tax

high ind PC/COGS

compete(TNIC)

-0.0249∗∗∗
(-2.88)

0.0223∗∗
(2.38)

high-tech industry

-0.00750∗
(-1.87)

-0.0120∗∗∗
(-2.98)

0.0107
(1.18)

-0.000819
(-0.07)

-0.0298∗∗∗
(-5.69)

-0.0315∗∗∗
(-5.40)

Aaa bond rate

credit spread: Baa-Aaa

Observations
Adjusted R2
Fixed Effects

7828
0.236
Ind, Year

7496
0.201
None

52

7801
0.242
Ind, Year

7470
0.201
None

Table 12: Outside Purchase Contracts, Leverage, and Contracting Counter-Parties
The table examines the impact of outside purchase contracts and contracting counter-party characteristics on financial leverage.
We use an instrumental variable approach with close to port and high transp cost as instrumental variables for PC/COGS. High
ind VAE is an industry-level dummy variable that equals one, if a given industry’s value added per employee is in the highest
tercile. High supp R&D is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one, if the firm’s average value of suppliers’ R&D intensity is
in the highest tercile. High supp # is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one, if the firm’s total number of suppliers is in
the highest tercile. High % foreign supp is a firm-level dummy variable that equals one if the firm’s foreign supplier percentage is
in the highest tercile. The sample in columns two to four is a subsample of customer firms whose suppliers are identified with
the Capital IQ’s business relationship database. All the lagged control variables from the outside contracting intensity prediction
regression (column five in Table 7) are included but not reported to conserve space. t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust and
adjusted for industry-year clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

Instrumental Variable Approach
market leverage

PC/COGS (instr.)

high ind VAE * PC/COGS (instr.)

-0.426∗
(-1.81)

-0.471∗
(-1.87)

-0.195
(-0.55)

-1.713∗∗∗
(-2.68)
-0.870∗
(-1.70)

high supp R&D * PC/COGS (instr.)

-0.697∗
(-1.70)

high supp # * PC/COGS (instr.)

-1.587∗
(-1.70)

high % foreign supp * PC/COGS (instr.)

high ind VAE

-0.581∗∗
(-2.51)

-0.00296
(-0.71)

high supp R&D

0.0954
(1.56)

-0.00603
(-1.32)

-0.00512
(-1.08)

-0.0144∗∗∗
(-3.42)

0.0623
(1.33)

-0.0103∗
(-1.86)

high % foreign supp

-0.00316
(-0.65)

-0.00760∗
(-1.84)

0.162
(1.62)

high supp capital

-0.0101∗∗
(-2.51)

-0.00764∗
(-1.79)

-0.00191
(-0.30)

high supp labor

0.0108∗∗∗
(3.07)

0.000554
(0.11)

0.00832∗∗∗
(2.79)

% manufacturing supp

0.0130∗∗
(1.99)

0.000553
(0.14)

0.0203∗
(1.94)

supp size small

0.00193
(0.34)

0.00428
(0.81)

0.0164∗∗
(2.00)

high supp HHI

-0.0115∗
(-1.68)

-0.0185∗∗∗
(-2.77)

-0.0181∗∗∗
(-2.74)

4669
0.284
Ind, Year

4669
0.284
Ind, Year

4669
0.284
Ind, Year

high supp #

Observations
Adjusted R2
Fixed Effects

7801
0.258
Ind, Year

53

Table 13: Outside Purchase Contracts, Leverage and R&D Investment
The table examines the impact of outside purchase contracts and R&D investment on financial leverage. We use an instrumental
variable approach with close to port, high transp cost, and area % higher education as instrumental variables for both PC/COGS
and R&D/sales. Column one and two report estimates of the first-stage regressions of PC/COGS and R&D/sales, respectively.
The instrumented PC/COGS from the regression in column one is used in column three with the lagged R&D/sales. In column
four, both the instrumented PC/COGS and R&D/sales are used. area % higher education is the percentage population of graduate
school graduates for the same three-digit zip code with the firm’s main business location. Other variable definitions are available
in the Appendix C. All the control variables are lagged. t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust and adjusted for industry-year
clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

close to port

high transp cost

area % higher education

Instrumental Variable Approach
PC/COGS

R&D/sales

0.00608∗
(1.76)

0.0537∗∗∗
(2.87)

-0.0218∗∗∗
(-4.51)

-0.0727∗∗∗
(-3.85)

-0.00131
(-0.05)

0.430∗∗∗
(3.03)

market leverage

-0.795∗∗∗
(-4.91)

PC/COGS (instr.)

R&D/sales

-0.728∗∗∗
(-3.33)

0.00167
(0.62)

R&D/sales (instr.)

-0.0143
(-0.39)
0.0156∗∗∗
(11.46)

0.00496
(1.33)

0.0344∗∗∗
(12.06)

0.0335∗∗∗
(9.63)

log(1+age)

0.00438
(1.33)

0.00431
(0.29)

-0.0107∗∗
(-2.20)

-0.0109∗∗
(-2.22)

PPE/assets

-0.0303∗∗∗
(-3.92)

0.101∗∗∗
(3.05)

0.00903
(0.86)

0.0126
(0.92)

0.000933
(0.78)

-0.396∗∗∗
(-10.96)

-0.000559
(-0.50)

-0.00697
(-0.47)

0.0118
(1.21)

0.408∗∗∗
(4.58)

0.0000958
(0.01)

0.00609
(0.39)

0.00602∗∗∗
(2.81)

-0.0101
(-0.71)

-0.0260∗∗∗
(-9.17)

-0.0266∗∗∗
(-8.88)

sales growth

0.0171∗
(1.84)

0.892∗∗∗
(5.91)

0.0209∗∗∗
(3.38)

0.0340
(1.11)

abnormal stock return

0.0166∗
(1.68)

-0.111∗∗∗
(-2.73)

-0.0827∗∗∗
(-6.54)

-0.0857∗∗∗
(-5.79)

stock return volatility

0.0511∗∗
(2.22)

-0.242∗∗
(-2.42)

0.309∗∗∗
(13.41)

0.302∗∗∗
(9.87)

-0.00819∗∗∗
(-2.76)

-0.0162
(-1.43)

-0.00378
(-1.38)

-0.00341
(-1.21)

high ind PC/COGS

0.0186∗∗∗
(3.21)

-0.00646
(-0.17)

0.00823∗
(1.84)

0.00689
(1.26)

Observations
Adjusted R2
Fixed Effects

7675
0.086
Ind, Year

7828
0.657
Ind, Year

7801
0.258
Ind, Year

7801
0.258
Ind, Year

log(mv assets)

operating margin

cash flow volatility

M/B

% foreign tax

54

Table 14: Multinomial Logit Regression (Base: Public Debt Issue)
The table presents coefficient estimates from a multinomial logistic regression testing the impact of outside contracting intensity
on public and private security issues. The dependent variable is the relative log-odds of issuing each security type versus public
debt. PC/COGS (instr.) is the predicted outside contracting intensity using an instrumental variable approach with close to port
and high transp cost as instrumental variables. All the lagged control variables from the outside contracting intensity prediction
regression (column six in Table 7) are included. Other variable definitions are available in the Appendix C. Industry and year
control variables are included but not reported to conserve space. t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Base: Public Debt

Private Debt

Convertible

Private Convertible

Equity

Private Equity

PC/COGS (instr.)

23.85**
(2.03)

42.24**
(2.01)

26.23
(1.00)

16.21
(0.94)

11.90
(0.53)

log(mv assets)

-1.063***
(-5.28)

-1.027***
(-2.95)

-1.913***
(-4.34)

-1.301***
(-4.41)

-1.671***
(-4.53)

log(1+age)

-0.653***
(-3.22)

-0.852***
(-3.19)

-0.527
(-1.34)

-1.419***
(-5.65)

-1.538***
(-4.99)

PPE/assets

0.491
(0.86)

0.144
(0.14)

-0.693
(-0.61)

-0.697
(-0.90)

-0.118
(-0.11)

operating margin

-0.338
(-0.25)

-1.684
(-1.18)

-1.081
(-0.73)

-1.582
(-1.11)

-1.621
(-1.14)

cash flow volatility

3.701
(1.00)

4.275
(1.12)

5.618
(1.47)

5.567
(1.48)

4.706
(1.25)

M/B

-0.170
(-1.15)

-0.151
(-0.70)

0.148
(0.53)

0.132
(0.68)

0.328
(1.43)

sales growth

1.766**
(2.38)

1.628*
(1.93)

2.096**
(2.18)

1.884**
(2.28)

2.185**
(2.44)

#patents/assets

-1.056
(-1.27)

-1.552
(-1.41)

-1.007
(-0.85)

-0.643
(-0.64)

-0.163
(-0.15)

abnormal stock return

0.0146
(0.02)

-0.358
(-0.30)

-2.063
(-1.56)

1.586
(1.47)

-0.677
(-0.57)

stock return volatility

4.176***
(2.89)

8.603***
(3.96)

8.963***
(2.83)

9.335***
(5.14)

13.08***
(5.50)

0.357*
(1.78)

0.489
(1.35)

-0.480
(-0.81)

0.711**
(2.49)

0.780**
(1.97)

marginal tax rate

2.558***
(2.91)

2.582*
(1.95)

2.396
(1.08)

1.142
(0.88)

1.387
(0.79)

default probability

4.214*
(1.72)

2.332
(0.74)

0.440
(0.12)

2.255
(0.87)

0.721
(0.19)

Observations
Pseudo R-squared
Ind, Year control

1792
0.375
Yes

% foreign tax

55

Table 15: Nested Logit Regression (First Stage: Market Decision)
The table presents coefficient estimates from a nested logistics regression testing the impact of outside contracting intensity on public and private security issues. The first stage is the
choice of market (public vs. private) with coefficients representing the impact of the variables on the propensity to issue securities in the private market versus the public market. The second stage is the choice of security type with coefficients representing the impact of the variables on the propensity to issue convertible and equity relative to debt issues. PC/COGS (instr.)
is the predicted outside contracting intensity using an instrumental variable approach with close to port and high transp cost as instrumental variables. All the lagged control variables
from the outside contracting intensity prediction regression (column six in Table 7) are included. Other variable definitions are available in the Appendix C. Industry and year control variables are included but not reported to conserve space. t-statistics (in parenthesis) are robust. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
First Stage: Market Decision
Private Market
(vs. Public Market)

Second Stage: Security Decision
Public Convertible
Public Equity
(vs. Public Debt)

Private Convertible
Private Equity
(vs. Private Debt)

56

PC/COGS (instr.)

24.63***
(2.62)

20.22*
(1.75)

15.06
(1.37)

-0.329
(-0.01)

-13.20
(-0.66)

log(mv assets)

-0.841***
(-4.99)

-0.520**
(-2.48)

-0.793***
(-3.17)

-0.834*
(-1.73)

-0.555
(-1.48)

log(1+age)

-0.368***
(-2.73)

-0.576***
(-3.94)

-0.907***
(-5.02)

0.135
(0.39)

-0.848**
(-2.03)

PPE/assets

0.941**
(2.07)

0.0970
(0.19)

-0.0227
(-0.05)

-1.337
(-1.18)

-0.584
(-0.64)

operating margin

1.260**
(2.42)

-0.148**
(-2.06)

-0.119*
(-1.86)

-0.892
(-1.37)

-1.420***
(-2.67)

3.742
(1.22)

5.228*
(1.77)

5.574*
(1.86)

1.879*
(1.69)

0.931
(1.12)

-0.287**
(-2.56)

-0.0634
(-0.52)

0.0156
(0.13)

0.350
(1.33)

0.517**
(2.36)

sales growth

1.061*
(1.81)

1.050*
(1.74)

1.098*
(1.78)

0.356
(0.53)

0.374
(0.62)

# patents/assets

-1.076*
(-1.70)

-0.581
(-0.82)

-0.349
(-0.51)

0.304
(0.34)

1.128
(1.30)

abnormal stock return

-0.438
(-0.68)

-0.216
(-0.35)

0.762
(1.15)

-2.066**
(-2.16)

-0.811
(-1.16)

stock return volatility

2.600**
(2.00)

5.691***
(3.31)

6.683***
(3.66)

4.301
(1.34)

8.531**
(2.50)

% foreign tax

0.296*
(1.78)

0.251
(1.13)

0.421*
(1.84)

-0.967
(-1.42)

0.342
(1.00)

marginal tax rate

1.935***
(2.71)

1.275*
(1.69)

0.695
(0.83)

-0.206
(-0.10)

-1.158
(-0.62)

default probability

3.345*
(1.84)

0.532
(0.27)

0.854
(0.49)

-4.104
(-1.24)

-3.562
(-1.11)

cash flow volatility

M/B

Table A.1: Outside Purchase Contracts and Book Leverage
The table analyzes the impact of outside purchase contracts on book leverage. It reports estimates from leverage regressions
using an instrumental variable approach with close to port and high transp cost as instrumental variables for PC/COGS. The
dependent variable, book leverage is the ratio of total debt to the book value of total assets. In columns four to six, book leverage
(with AP) is computed by additionally including account payables as part of total debt. Other variable definitions are available
in the Appendix C. The sample consists of all firm-years in the manufacturing sector during the period of 2005-2011. All the
lagged control variables from the outside contracting intensity prediction regression (column five and six in Table 7) are included.
Industry fixed effects are at the FIC-25 code group level following Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). t-statistics (in parenthesis) are
robust and adjusted for industry-year clustering. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Estimation Method

Instrumental Variable Approach
book leverage
-1.085∗∗∗
(-4.62)

-1.855∗∗∗
(-7.44)

-1.027∗∗∗
(-4.46)

-1.805∗∗∗
(-6.59)

log(mv assets)

0.0553∗∗∗
(13.49)

0.0636∗∗∗
(15.67)

0.0535∗∗∗
(13.26)

0.0623∗∗∗
(14.83)

log(1+age)

-0.0157∗∗∗
(-2.67)

-0.0118∗∗
(-2.09)

-0.0120∗∗
(-2.17)

-0.00780
(-1.42)

PPE/assets

-0.0000176
(-0.00)

-0.0277∗∗
(-1.99)

0.0196
(1.31)

-0.00667
(-0.45)

operating margin

-0.00468∗∗∗
(-3.35)

-0.00450∗∗∗
(-3.12)

-0.00490∗∗∗
(-3.48)

-0.00444∗∗∗
(-3.00)

0.0303∗
(1.79)

0.0475∗∗∗
(2.73)

0.0154
(0.89)

0.0222
(1.18)

-0.0146∗∗∗
(-5.85)

-0.00599∗∗
(-2.33)

-0.0170∗∗∗
(-5.76)

-0.00972∗∗∗
(-3.31)

sales growth

0.0180∗∗
(2.58)

0.0281∗∗∗
(3.69)

0.0184∗∗
(2.55)

0.0297∗∗∗
(3.80)

#patents/assets

0.0727∗∗∗
(4.73)

0.0667∗∗∗
(4.34)

0.0692∗∗∗
(4.38)

0.0622∗∗∗
(3.68)

abnormal stock return

-0.0801∗∗∗
(-5.58)

-0.0690∗∗∗
(-4.61)

-0.0953∗∗∗
(-6.04)

-0.0797∗∗∗
(-5.06)

stock return volatility

0.358∗∗∗
(12.25)

0.292∗∗∗
(10.40)

0.466∗∗∗
(15.62)

0.400∗∗∗
(13.94)

% foreign tax

-0.00655∗
(-1.76)

-0.0168∗∗∗
(-4.02)

-0.00143
(-0.38)

-0.0111∗∗
(-2.58)

high ind PC/COGS

0.0139∗∗
(2.20)

0.0592∗∗∗
(5.07)

0.0135∗∗
(2.05)

0.0427∗∗∗
(3.07)

PC/COGS (instr.)

-0.981∗∗∗
(-3.79)

book leverage (with AP)

cash flow volatility

M/B

compete(TNIC)

high-tech industry

0.0120
(0.86)

0.00671
(0.41)

-0.0325∗∗∗
(-5.56)

-0.0344∗∗∗
(-5.55)

-0.00216
(-0.13)

0.000164
(0.01)

-0.0452∗∗∗
(-6.16)

-0.0697∗∗∗
(-8.17)

Aaa bond rate

credit spread: Baa-Aaa

Observations
Adjusted R2
Fixed Effects

8953
0.088
Ind, Year

-1.070∗∗∗
(-4.08)

7801
0.200
Ind, Year

7470
0.154
None

57

8953
0.089
Ind, Year

7801
0.198
Ind, Year

7470
0.159
None

