                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           U.S. INVESTMENT IN GLOBAL BONDS:
                           AS THE FED PUSHES, SOME EMEs PULL

                                          John D. Burger
                                        Rajeswari Sengupta
                                        Francis E. Warnock
                                     Veronica Cacdac Warnock

                                        Working Paper 20571
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




This paper, prepared for the 60th Panel Meeting of Economic Policy (October 2014), was lightly
circulated as "International Investors in Local Bond Markets: Indiscriminate Flows or Discriminating
Tastes?" The authors thank Sumit Malhotra for excellent research assistance, Robert DeMason of
JPMorgan for returns indices, Randolph Tantzscher of Markit for GEMLOC investabilty data, and
Branimir Gruic of BIS for data on the size of local currency and USD-denominated bond markets.
We also thank for helpful comments the editor (Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln), three anonymous referees,
Anusha Chari, Branimir Gruic, Philip Lane, Louis Miserendino, and participants at INFINITI, Australian
Conference of Economists, Banco Central de Reserva del Perú and NIPFP. Burger acknowledges a
research sabbatical from Loyola University Maryland. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by John D. Burger, Rajeswari Sengupta, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
U.S. Investment in Global Bonds: As the Fed Pushes, Some EMEs Pull
John D. Burger, Rajeswari Sengupta, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 20571
October 2014
JEL No. F21,F31,G11

                                            ABSTRACT

We analyze reallocations within the international bond portfolios of US investors. The most striking
empirical observation is a steady increase in US investors’ allocations toward emerging market local
currency bonds, unabated by the global financial crisis and accelerating in the post-crisis period. Part
of the increase in EME allocations is associated with global “push” factors such as low US long-term
interest rates and unconventional monetary policy as well as subdued risk aversion/expected volatility.
But also evident is investor differentiation among EMEs, with the largest reallocations going to those
EMEs with strong macroeconomic fundamentals such as more positive current account balances, less
volatile inflation, and stronger economic growth. We also provide a descriptive analysis of global
bond markets’ structure and returns.


John D. Burger                                     Francis E. Warnock
Loyola University Maryland                         Darden Business School
4501 N. Charles Street                             University of Virginia
Baltimore MD 21210-2699                            Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
jburger@loyola.edu                                 and NBER
                                                   warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
Rajeswari Sengupta
Indira Gandhi Institute of                         Veronica Cacdac Warnock
 Development Research (IGIDR)                      Darden Business School
Mumbai 400 065, India                              University of Virginia
rajeswari.sen@gmail.com                            Box 6550
                                                   Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
                                                   vwarnock@virginia.edu
“The extent to which distortions in one country may spread to financial market developments in the
other EMEs will depend to a great degree also on whether international investors look at the EMEs as a
homogeneous asset class or whether they take an increasingly differentiated view in their evaluations
of individual EMEs and their respective progress towards achieving macroeconomic stability. The
varying reactions of bond markets in some EMEs following a rise in volatility over the last two years
indicate that international investors are beginning to make a greater distinction between those
countries’ bond markets depending on how the fundamentals are assessed; yet it remains to be seen
whether, and to what extent, this development is a lasting one.”
                                                     Bundesbank, Financial Stability Review 2007

“…our greatest concern is financial market fragmentation…” Mario Draghi, August 2 2012



1. Introduction

       Investor behavior in bond markets is of great interest to policymakers in both emerging market

economies (EMEs) and advanced economies (AEs). For EME bond markets, the Bundesbank opines that

financial stability would improve if global investors differentiated between them. In Eurozone bond

markets, the ECB equates differentiation with a fragmentation that could impede the monetary policy

transmission mechanism, suggesting that differentiation is not always and everywhere desirable. In the

background is an environment for investing in international bonds that has changed dramatically over

the past few decades with the development of EME local currency bond markets (LCBMs). EMEs with

low inflation, stronger institutions, and well defined creditor rights have experienced substantial

development of LCBMs (see Burger and Warnock 2003, 2006; Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai

2006, Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler 2007). The ability to borrow in the local currency is a

positive development that enhances financial stability by ameliorating the currency mismatches that

were at the center of past crises (Goldstein and Turner 2004). However, large inflows of foreign

investment can be problematic, as most extreme capital flow episodes (surges and stops, for example)

are driven by debt flows (Forbes and Warnock 2013), credit booms lead to crises (Mendoza and


                                                                                                       1
Terrones 2008, Gourinchas and Obstfeld 2012, Schularick and Taylor 2012), and large foreign

investment flows into LCBMs can complicate the tasks of EME policymakers by appreciating real

exchange rates, fanning asset price bubbles, and intensifying lending booms. Indeed, the threat of the

virtuous cycle turning vicious when unconventional monetary policy (UMP) by many AE central banks

may have propelled a global search for yield has many EME policymakers worrying about exactly those

problems: excessive upward pressure on the local currency, indiscriminate flows into EMEs creating

bond market bubbles that enable increasingly risky borrowing, and the potential for an external shock

(such as Federal Reserve going from “tapering” to outright tightening) prompting a stampede for the

exits.

         But how do international bond investors actually behave? The literature suggests many

possibilities. In the midst of the recent global financial crisis, the pattern of capital flows was highly

heterogeneous across types of flows and destinations (Milesi-Ferretti and Tille 2012) and international

investors, with their pro-cyclical behavior of reducing international exposure during bad times and

increasing exposure when conditions improved, were destabilizing to markets and exposed countries

to foreign shocks (Raddatz and Schmukler 2012). Another view is that while common shocks – key

crisis events as well as changes in global liquidity and risk – exerted a large effect on capital flows both

during the crisis and in the recovery, the effects were highly heterogeneous across countries, with this

heterogeneity being largely explained by differences in the quality of domestic institutions, country risk

and the strength of domestic macroeconomic fundamentals (Fratzscher 2012).

         In this paper we view global bond markets from the perspective of a U.S. investor, focusing

primarily but not exclusively on LCBMs, and attempt to understand what drives foreigners’

reallocations towards and away from certain bond markets. We begin by describing some salient


                                                                                                               2
features of global bond markets: their size and structure and the returns they have provided US-based

investors. The structure of EME bond markets has improved dramatically over the past decade. Many

EMEs have lessened their reliance on foreign currency bonds; for example, by 2011 even Latin

America, the poster child for Original Sin, had three-quarters of all its outstanding bonds denominated

in the local currency. On average, most EME bonds are now denominated in the local currency and

tend to be sovereign bonds, although local currency denominated bonds issued by the private sector

has increased sharply since 2007. By 2011 USD-denominated EME bonds—once the dominant EME

asset class for many global investors—represented less than 10% of total EME bonds outstanding.1

While the structure of EME bond markets has improved, the returns on EME LCBMs have also been

impressive. Over the past decade unhedged local currency EME bonds have offered USD-based

investors equity-like returns with a higher mean and more volatility than AE bonds, while at the same

time providing some diversification benefits through a low correlation with US bonds. This strong

performance was not just a result of the pre-crisis bubble years: Over the six-year period starting

August 2007 unhedged EME LCBMs outperformed AE and EME equities and AE bonds. Moreover,

efficient frontiers reveal that EME LCBMs—especially a mix of hedged and unhedged—improved the

return-risk tradeoff available to US fixed income investors. Of course, unhedged local currency EME

bonds are largely a currency play against the U.S. dollar (with some yield), so we must caution that

mean returns depend importantly on how EME currencies perform against the U.S. dollar. Hedged

returns, on the other hand, are more stable.

        The description of LCBMs’ returns, size and structure is informative, but our main goal is to

examine the portfolio reallocations of US investors from 2006 to 2011, a period that spans bubble

1
 In AEs, bonds are mostly local currency denominated, with the amount of private-sector and government bonds being
roughly equal. USD-denominated AE bonds are quite small, issued primarily by the private sector.

                                                                                                                     3
years, the global financial crisis, and currency wars. We employ country-level holdings data built from

high-quality security-level data collected by the US Treasury, data that include information about the

bonds’ currency denomination. This dataset allows us to, among other things, analyze the impact of US

monetary policy on US investor positions in local currency bonds, a point central to currency war

claims. We are aware of no study of active portfolio reallocations within international investors’ local

currency bond portfolios; we aim to fill this gap.

       The holdings data show, strikingly, that even during the crisis US investors increased their

relative portfolio weight (that is, the portfolio weight relative to a global benchmark) on EME LCBMs.

EME local currency bonds were 4.9% of the global local currency bond market in 2001 and grew to

7.8% in 2011, so some increase in US holdings might be expected. But US holdings increased even

faster, with EME bonds increasing from 1.1% of US investors’ cross-border local currency bond

portfolio in 2001 to 17.2% by 2011. Indeed, for local currency bonds the relative weight for EMEs now

exceeds that for AEs. In other words, US investors’ portfolios of EME local currency bonds are closer to

benchmark (international CAPM) weights than are their holdings of AE local currency bonds.

       Empirical assessment of the international bond portfolios shows that global factors were

associated with reallocations toward EME local currency bonds, but US investors also differentiated

among bond markets based on country-level macroeconomic factors. Specifically, the variation in US

investors’ allocations in local currency bonds was due almost equally to global (especially the level of

US long-term rates) and local factors (such as inflation volatility). For USD-denominated bonds, the

factors associated with active reallocations are quite different, local factors are far more important

than global factors. For both local currency and USD bonds, we are able to explain portfolio allocations

in EME markets much better than in AE markets; to a first approximation US investors’ portfolios in the


                                                                                                           4
various AE bond markets do not seem to change much (or at least they do not adjust with factors we

consider). Splitting the bonds by sector of issuer (private or government), we find that much of our

results pertain to government bonds; our models do less well at explaining the year-by-year active

reallocations within US investors’ portfolios of private-sector foreign bonds.

         Our paper is related to a number of literatures. It adds to the literature on global and local

factors. Calvo et al. (1993) noted the importance of global factors such as US interest rates in

explaining capital inflows. Chuhan et al. (1998) made the important contribution of separating

different types of flows and found that global factors were important in explaining capital inflows, but

that country-specific developments were at least as important. Many subsequent papers confirmed

the main points of Calvo et al. (1993) and Chuhan et al. (1998), a recent one being Fratzscher (2012)

which, using weekly fund flow data, finds that global factors were the main drivers of capital flows in

the midst of the recent crisis, but that country-specific determinants were dominant in the years

immediately following the crisis. All of these papers use flow data, which as Ahmed et al. (2014) note

include a ‘portfolio growth’ component that is quite directly related to global conditions (such as

investor-country financial wealth). Our paper instead focuses on active portfolio reallocations and finds

an almost equal role for global and local factors. Our paper is also directly related to past work on

international investment in bonds that includes, among others, Lane (2006) and Fidora et al. (2007)

and on US investors’ local currency bond portfolios (Burger and Warnock 2007; Burger, Warnock, and

Warnock 2012).2 A closely related but separate literature is on cross-border banking flows; see, for

example, and Blank and Buch (2007) and Hale and Obstfeld (2014).




2
 Data availability limited past studies of US investors’ foreign bond portfolios to cross-sectional snapshots at a particular
point in time. Available time series now enable a study of portfolio reallocations in local currency bond markets over time.

                                                                                                                                5
       Our assessment of international investment in bonds begins in the next section with a

discussion of a framework for assessing portfolio reallocations. In Section 3 we describe the evolution

of global bond markets as well as their return characteristics. In Section 4 we discuss US investors’

global bond portfolios and analyze factors, including the Fed’s UMP, behind active reallocations within

US investors’ bond portfolios during the 2006-11 period, a period that spans the global financial crisis.

Section 5 concludes.



2. A Framework for Analyzing Portfolio Reallocations

       Our main objective is to analyze active portfolio reallocations within global bond markets. In

this section we discuss the requirements for such an analysis.



2.1 A Suitable Measure

       Our aim is to assess the factors associated with active portfolio reallocations in global bond

markets. A suitable dependent variable for such a study must have two features: it must be free of the

size bias discussed in Bekaert and Wang (2009) and it must not conflate active reallocations (our focus)

with passive reallocations and portfolio growth. On the latter criterion, as noted in Ahmed et al (2014)

a normalized relative weight measure (defined below) is suitable for studying active reallocations,

whereas flows (which, as Tille and van Wincoop (2010) note, conflate portfolio growth and active

reallocations) and portfolio shares (which combine active and passive reallocations) are not. On the

former, a relative weight measure is consistent with the preferred measure of Bekaert and Wang

(2009) and does not have a size bias (whereas portfolio shares and many flow measures are size-




                                                                                                            6
biased). Relative weight is free of a size bias; in addition, normalized relative weight isolates active

portfolio reallocations.

       More formally, a relative weight measure is a measure consistent with an international CAPM-

based model of international portfolio allocation as presented in Cooper and Kaplanis (1986). The

Cooper and Kaplanis model, described in some detail in Holland et al (2014), includes country-specific

proportional investment costs, representing both explicit and implicit costs of investing abroad, and is

designed to optimize an investor’s allocation of wealth among risky securities in n countries in order to

maximize expected returns net of costs. If there are no costs to investing, the allocation collapses to

the global market capitalization allocation; that is, the investor allocates his wealth across countries

according to market capitalizations. If costs are non-zero and non-uniform, allocations deviate from

market weights. The higher the costs in a particular foreign market, the more severely underweighted

that country will be in the investor’s portfolios. The international CAPM is a promising way to get to a

theoretically viable dependent variable—the proportion of the investor’s financial wealth allocated to

country i’s assets—that is actually obtainable to the empiricist. But in practice measures of financial

wealth are not as easily found as one might think, country i’s assets in a study like ours becomes

country i’s bonds, and unscaled portfolio allocations are subject to a size bias (Bekaert and Wang 2009;

Ammer et al 2012) in a way that can bias inference on explanatory variables of interest. That portfolio

shares are strongly related to market size is obvious, because the larger the market, the greater would

be US investment in its bonds. What Bekaert and Wang (2009) show is that including market size as an

explanatory variable to control for this association between size and investment in no way solves the

problem, as inference on other variables of interest is muddied in ways that are not easy to predict. A

remedy for this size bias problem suggested by Bekaert and Wang (2009) is to analyze deviations from


                                                                                                           7
the international CAPM benchmark rather than portfolio shares. Such a measure, which we will call

relative weight, is both suggested by theory (international CAPM) and free of a size bias.

       For this study, country i’s relative portfolio weight in US portfolios is the ratio of its weight in US

investors’ portfolio to its weight in the global market. Relative weight, which is asset-class specific, is

defined for local currency bonds as:


              
                           H US
                           lc i   i lc i
                                      H US
Re lWgtiUS    i ,US                                                                                        [1]
              i.m     lc MCapi /  lc MCapi
                                  i



where lc H iUS is defined as US investors’ holdings of country i’s local currency bonds and     i
                                                                                                     lc   H iUS


represents the global portfolio of local currency bonds held by US investors, while lc MCapi is the

market capitalization of country i’s local currency bond market and     i
                                                                             lc   MCapi is the market


capitalization of the global local currency bond market. Relative portfolio weight is motivated by a

global CAPM; if the portfolio weight assigned to a particular bond market equals its relative weight in

the global bond market, relative weight for that market is one. In reality, US investors’ relative

portfolio weights often fall far short of one—this is one dimension of the well-known home bias in

asset holdings—because over 90 percent of US investors’ bond holdings are issued by US entities. That

said, when we focus on certain asset classes—such as USD-denominated foreign bonds marketed

directly to US investors—relative weights can and sometimes do exceed one.

       If portfolio weights differ from benchmark weights, then changes in relative prices will cause

changes in relative weights. In that case raw relative weights (eq. 1) can include both passive and

active reallocations. A simple normalization—dividing relative weight by the relative weight for the




                                                                                                                   8
home market—isolates active portfolio allocations (Ahmed et al 2014). In our panel regressions we use

normalized relative weights.



2.2 Data Requirements

       Data requirements for international bonds are more challenging than for equities—the

currency denomination of the bond is particularly important information—and at the same time data is

less readily available. Only particular datasets are suitable for research on international bond

portfolios. In this section we detail data requirements and then discuss available data on holdings and

outstandings.

       2.2.1 Ability to Distinguish Sector and Currency Denomination of the Bond

       When studying international bond portfolios, it is essential to use a dataset that can identify the

currency denomination of the underlying bonds, not just the location of the issuer. A local currency

Thai baht bond, for example, is a very different security from a Thai-issued US dollar-denominated

bond. Only a dataset built from security-level data can identify the currency denomination of the

underlying bonds.

       We focus on local currency bonds, which comprise over 90 percent of the global bond market

and have far-reaching implications. For example, the original meaning of the US exorbitant privilege

came from the ability of the US to borrow internationally through its local currency bonds; that is, even

back in the 1960s foreigners tended to purchase US Treasury bonds (that is, US local currency

sovereign bonds). Also, the original sin of Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) focused on EMEs’

inability to borrow internationally in their own currency; if EMEs can now attract foreign investors to

their LCBMs, the Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) original sin would be alleviated. That said, while


                                                                                                          9
we have a natural inclination to study local currency bonds, foreign currency debt is also important—

the currency mismatches that generated crises in 1980s Latin American, 1990s Asia, and more recently

Iceland are one manifestation of excessive reliance on foreign currency debt—so we also analyze USD-

denominated bonds. Finally, our analysis will distinguish between AE and EME markets and we will

provide analysis of sectoral splits (sovereign v. private).

         2.2.2 Holdings Data

         To study the evolution of foreign investment in local currency bonds, best would be to use time

series data on all foreigners’ holdings of each country’s local currency bonds. One would need time

series data of foreigners’ holdings of Malaysian ringit bonds, Indonesian rupiah bonds, euro-

denominated bonds issued by German entities, and so on for perhaps 40 or more countries.

Unfortunately, such time series data for a large set of countries does not, to our knowledge, exist.

Asian Bonds Online covers foreigners’ holdings of the government bonds of a handful of Asian

countries,3 but we do not know of a source that includes all foreigners’ holdings of the local currency

bonds of many countries and is available through time. The IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment

Survey (CPIS) provides data on foreign holdings of many countries’ bonds by investor country, but for

bond analysis it is severely limited in that it lumps together all bonds without differentiating between

local currency- and foreign currency-denominated bonds. One study, Asian Development Bank (2013),

works around this limitation by assuming that foreign and local currency debt are held by investors in

other countries in proportions equal to the amount outstanding, an assumption we are not

comfortable making.4


3
  Moore et al. (2013) use the Asian Bonds Online data to study the effects of Federal Reserve’s UMP on foreign ownership, a
measure that conflates portfolio growth with active reallocations, of 10 EMEs’ local currency government bonds.
4
  There are two primary limitations of CPIS data for analyzing international bond portfolios. One, because it does not identify
the currency denomination of the bonds, the CPIS dataset might reflect a propensity of one country to issue bonds in the

                                                                                                                            10
        In order to analyze foreign holdings through time without making assumptions on foreign

holdings, we work with data on the holdings of a particular set of investors: US investors. Focusing on

US investors’ cross-border bond holdings is limiting in the sense that we can only analyze the portfolios

of one group of investors (US investors), but this is quite a large group for which we have high quality,

publicly available data. Importantly, US investors’ bond holdings are captured by the US Treasury

Department at the security level, so the exact nature (including currency denomination) of the bond is

known to the data collector. Moreover, no assumptions are necessary. The bond’s security ID, when

combined with an issuer’s dataset, readily provides the country of the issuer as well as the currency

denomination of the bond. The security-level holdings data are not currently available to researchers

outside the Federal Reserve Board, but the country-level aggregates that are built from the security-

level data are available and provide a clean dataset for year-end 2001 and each year-end since 2006. It

is these holdings—in particular, the active reallocations within this portfolio—that we will analyze.

        2.2.3 The “Market Capitalization” of Bond Markets

        The relative weight measure requires data on the relative size of global bond markets. For data

on outstanding bonds by country and currency, placed both domestically and internationally, we rely

on unpublished data provided by the Bank of International Settlements (BIS). Because BIS changed

methodology in 2012 (see Gruić and Wooldridge 2012) and the newer data might not be consistent

with the historical data, our analysis ends in 2011 and our description refers to the pre-2012

methodology.




currency of another. Two, for countries that do not have well developed mutual fund industries and whose residents thus tend
to invest in foreign-domiciled mutual funds, in the CPIS data such investment (even if in bond funds) will be entered as
equity investment (because mutual funds are technically equities); see Felettigh and Monti (2008). While we can imagine
fixes for the first limitation, the second seems damning.

                                                                                                                         11
         Traditionally, the BIS data have come in two complementary datasets. One data set is on

“domestic debt”, which the BIS defines as local currency bonds issued by locals in the local market (i.e.,

not placed directly abroad). Data are available in BIS Quarterly Review Table 16A (Domestic Debt

Securities). Because our study is on bonds, we obtained from BIS the data underlying Table 16A, which

allows us to exclude short-term notes and commercial paper and focus on bonds (that is, debt

securities with original maturity longer than one year). The other data set is on “international bonds”,

bonds issued either in a different currency or in a different market. Certain aggregates of this are

presented in BIS Quarterly Review Table 14B (International Bonds and Notes by Country of Residence).

For our focus we obtained the underlying data from BIS, as we require issuance by currency by

country, a split that is not presented in the Quarterly Review.

         With these two sources (and our calculations), local-currency-denominated debt is the sum of

the long-term debt component of “domestic debt” and the local currency / local issuer portion of

“international bonds”. The dataset also allows us to separately analyze bonds by sector of the issuer

(government or private) and by currency denomination (local currency, as noted, but also foreign

currency).5



3. A Descriptive Analysis of Global Bond Markets

         Before turning to our primary analysis of portfolio reallocations, in this section we present

salient features of global markets, focusing specifically on size, structure, and returns.


5
  Because our focus is on US investment, for foreign currency we will limit our analysis to USD-denominated bonds. US
investors’ holdings of third-currency bonds (i.e., not USD and not in the currency of the issuer) are extremely small,
amounting to only 2.3% of their foreign bond portfolio in 2011. Also, note that in our study a local currency bond is in the
currency of the country that the issuer resides, in keeping with residency-based international accounts. A recent focus on the
ultimate nationality of the issuer—for example, when a Chinese firm issues a yuan-denominated bond through an off-shore
subsidiary—is relevant but beyond the scope of our study (see, for example, McCauley et al 2013).

                                                                                                                             12
3.1 The Size and Composition of Global Bond Markets

        Table 1 presents information by region on the size and composition of global bond markets as

of 2011. Selected data on each country in our sample is provided in Appendix Table 1. Some facts are

worth noting. At the end of 2011, the size of global bond markets was $83 trillion, almost triple the $30

trillion in 2001. For countries in our sample, most bonds—91% of AE bonds and 88% of EME bonds—

are local currency denominated. Bond markets are much larger in AEs (161% of GDP) than in EMEs

(29% of GDP) but have grown substantially in both. AE local bond markets have grown from being

roughly equal to AE GDP in 2001 to 1.6 times GDP in 2011; over that period EME local bond markets

grew from 20 to 29 percent of EME GDP. EME local currency bonds have increased as a share of the

total global bond market, more than doubling from 3.3% in 2001 to 7.1% in 2011. With larger local

currency bond markets, EMEs have become much less reliant on foreign currency borrowing. The share

of EME bonds denominated in a foreign currency has fallen from 29% in 2001 to only 12% in 2011. The

development of local currency bond markets, impressive across of wide set of EMEs, has been

particularly striking in Latin America. In 2001 nearly half of Latin American bonds were denominated in

foreign currency, but by 2011 local currency bond markets had grown to the point where only one

quarter of bonds in the region were issued in foreign currency.6

        The evolution of bond markets is evident in the graphs in Figure 1. As a share of GDP, local

currency bond markets are largest in AEs, whereas EME bond markets are, on average, quite small

(Figure 1, top left). That said, the structure of many EME bond markets has improved dramatically over


6
  Reduced reliance on foreign currency borrowing alleviated the fear of floating (Calvo and Reinhart 2002) and facilitated
new policy regimes with inflation targeting central banks and flexible exchange rates. Improved policies and better developed
local bond markets might have enabled EMEs in general, and Latin America in particular, to weather the global financial
crisis much better than the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s (Alvarez and De Gregorio 2013, Vegh and Vuletin 2013).

                                                                                                                          13
the past decade. Many EMEs have lessened their reliance on foreign currency bonds (Fig. 1, bottom

left). EME bond markets seem to have room to grow (that is, they are all small, as Fig. 1 top left shows),

and recent growth has been accompanied by a move toward an improved structure (that is, growth in

local currency bonds, with less of a dependence on foreign currency denominated debt).

        Digging a bit deeper, we next split on the currency denomination of bonds issued by

governments vs. those issued by private entities. AE bonds (Fig. 1, top right) are mostly local currency

(blue bars for private; green bars for government). In EMEs (Fig. 1, bottom right), most bonds are

sovereign and denominated in the local currency (green bars), although local currency denominated

bonds issued by the private sector (blue bars) have increased sharply since 2007.



3.2 Historical Return Characteristics

        We next describe characteristics of USD returns for various asset classes over the past decade

(Table 2).7 We first examine unhedged local currency EME bonds. Over the period January 2003–

October 2013 (Panel A), unhedged local currency EME bonds provided equity-like returns: strong mean

(0.91% per month), relatively high volatility (variance higher than other bonds but lower than equities),

and moderately negative skewness (in line with the skewness of equities). The high volatility of

unhedged EME local bonds is as expected. Currencies are more volatile than most assets, so the USD

returns on local currency EME bonds are also volatile. Correlations with US government bonds provide

one measure of potential diversification benefits; unhedged local currency EME bonds presented a

very low correlation (0.13) with US government bonds. Since the beginning of the global financial crisis

(the August 2007 to October 2013 period, shown in Panel B), the characteristics of unhedged EME local

7
  The sample period for Table 2 is dictated by data availability. GBI-EM indices begin in December 2002, so January 2003 is
the first monthly return. Our GBI dataset ends October 2013.

                                                                                                                         14
currency bonds have been similar to the full sample period: relatively high returns with elevated

volatility (but less volatile than equities), some negative skewness, and a low correlation with US

government bonds. This strong multi-year performance holds even though 2013, with its taper

tantrum, was the worst year for EME debt since at least 2003 (the first year EME local currency bond

indices were available).

        EME returns hedged against currency changes—although we note that hedging in such markets

might be cost prohibitive for portfolio investors—show moderate returns that are not dissimilar from

the returns on US government bonds and in a sense lie somewhere between hedged and unhedged AE

bond returns.8

        Turning to other asset classes, AE local currency bonds look very much like US bonds. Unhedged

AE bonds are more volatile than hedged AE bonds, not surprisingly, and over the two time periods

these provided higher returns (because the USD depreciated, adding to the returns that unhedged

foreign-currency denominated bonds provided US investors). Skewness is near zero for AE bonds,

whether hedged or unhedged. Dollar-denominated EME bond returns (EMBI) are relatively high, with

moderate volatility but very negative skewness. Over the entire period equity returns were highest in

EMEs, but with very high volatility; since August 2007 US equity markets have provided the highest

return. Notably, EME bond returns compare favorably—or are at least comparable—to US equities.

        We caution that the return characteristics for EME bonds portrayed in Table 2 are likely more

favorable than those in previous periods, because the U.S. dollar depreciated against many currencies

over the past decade, adding to unhedged local currency bond returns translated into dollars. Were

the dollar to appreciate materially, unhedged EME bond returns would suffer. For example, in the

8
 Large institutions, such as mutual funds, that invest in local currency EME bonds can hedge the currency risk using one- or
two-month forward contracts, but for EME currencies hedge products with longer horizons are rare.

                                                                                                                          15
1990s, although systematic local currency EME bond returns were not available, previous estimates

(Burger and Warnock 2007) suggest returns were highly volatile (because inflation and exchange rates

were volatile) and negatively skewed (because spikes in bond yields and, hence, negative returns on

the underlying bonds coincided with financial flight that depreciated the currency). In AE bond

markets, at least prior to the eurozone debt crisis, periods of negative bond returns often coincided

with currency appreciation, eliminating the occasional extremely bad outcome for international

investors. In contrast, in EMEs, the bad outcome of negative bond returns was often exacerbated by a

plummeting currency. The good news for global fixed-income investors is that in the past decade the

improved stability achieved by a number of EMEs has been helpful in alleviating the combined bad

outcomes of losses on bonds and a depreciating currency (hence EME local currency bond returns are

not too negatively skewed).

       Efficient frontiers reveal additional information about the January 2003–October 2013 returns.

Figure 2 (top graph) shows three all-bond efficient frontiers to illustrate risk–return trade-offs facing a

US-based fixed-income investor. Each frontier includes a range of bond portfolios, varying from 100%

U.S. bonds (the common point in each line) to 100% foreign bonds. The figure includes three measures

of the rest-of-world (ROW) portfolio: (1) an unhedged portfolio of 80% AE and 20% EME bonds, (2) a

hedged portfolio of 80% AE and 20% EME bonds, and (3) a 50/50 combination of (1) and (2).

       The frontiers provide a few important lessons. First, the attractiveness of local currency bonds

for cross-border investors can be impeded by significant currency risk. From the perspective of a U.S.

investor, adding unhedged foreign bonds significantly increases portfolio risk. For the January 2003–

October 2013 period, the added risk happened to be compensated by strong returns (in part because

of the depreciating U.S. dollar), but in periods of an appreciating US dollar (not shown), the additional


                                                                                                          16
risk could be accompanied by substantially lower returns. The figure also indicates the gains to

diversification from adding hedged foreign bonds, which over this period (and earlier periods) reduced

portfolio risk without much deterioration of returns. A mix of hedged and unhedged bonds provided a

particularly attractive risk–return trade-off over this period. This finding suggests that, although

choosing not to hedge the currency risk makes a cross-border investment in EME local currency bonds

largely a currency play (with some yield) in an instrument that might not be as liquid as desired, global

investors will likely prefer bonds in countries where they have the option to hedge the currency risk.

       The bottom graph of Figure 2 broadens the set of assets to all those included in Table 2. We

selected weights for each asset class from 2006. Weights for the U.S. portion are based on 2006

estimates from the U.S. Federal Reserve’s flow of funds accounts: 62% equities and 38% bonds—of

which 43% are government bonds and 57% are corporate bonds. For the ROW portion, the weights—

which come from U.S. Treasury Department surveys—are 77% equities and 23% bonds; the equity

portion is 79% AE and 21% EME, and the bond portion is 89% AE, 9% USD-denominated EME, and 2%

local currency EME. As in the top panel, we allowed for bond portfolios being unhedged or hedged

against currency fluctuations, and the 100% US portfolio is the common point in each line. Over the

January 2003–October 2013 period, efficient frontiers for the broader portfolio are upward sloping;

more return was accompanied by more risk.

       In summary, for a USD-based investor unhedged local currency EME bonds are largely a

currency play against the U.S. dollar (with some yield), so mean returns depend on how EME

currencies perform against the U.S. dollar. Hedged returns are more stable but offer somewhat smaller

diversification benefits. A combination of hedged and unhedged EME bonds has provided particularly

attractive return characteristics.


                                                                                                         17
4 US Portfolios

         4.1 Descriptive Analysis

         Table 3 provides an end-2011 snapshot of US portfolios. Evolution through time is provided in

Figures 3 and 4. The local currency bond portfolio of US investors has grown from $152 billion in 2001

to almost $500 billion in 2011 (Figure 3, top panel). The foreign-issued USD-denominated portfolio is

substantially larger at almost $1500 billion; most of the USD-denominated foreign bonds were issued

by private sector entities in just a handful of countries such as Caribbean Financial Centers, Australia,

Canada, the Netherlands, and Sweden (Bertaut, Tabova, and Wong 2013).

         Overall, local currency bonds have been a relatively stable 25-30 percent of US investors’

foreign bond portfolio. But for EMEs the story is quite different: the share of local currency bonds in US

investors’ EME bond portfolios has skyrocketed from about 2% in 2001 to almost 40% in 2011 (Figure

3, bottom panel). Gone are the days when US investors shunned local-currency denominated EME

bonds.

         While most US holdings of local currency bonds are in AEs (Fig. 4.1, top left), US holdings of

EME LCBs have increased substantially over the past decade (Fig. 4.1, bottom left). With both the

amount invested and the size of the markets increasing, it is an open question whether US investors

have become less underweight in these markets. Interestingly, not only have US investors have

become less underweight in many EME LCBMs, they are less underweight in EMEs than in AEs (Figure

4.1, top right). The variation we attempt to understand is within-country changes in US relative

weights. For example, Fig. 4.1 (bottom right) shows variation in US relative weights for one set of

countries—LatAm EMEs—for local currency bonds. With our regressions we aim to understand why,

for example, US investors became less underweight (i.e. relative weight increased) on Mexico in 2011.


                                                                                                            18
        Digging further into the splits of US holdings by issuer type and currency denomination reveals

some interesting facts. The vast majority of US holdings of AE bonds are USD-denominated bonds

issued by private entities (Fig. 4.2, top left, maroon bars). US holdings of AE government bonds are

primarily denominated in local currency (green bars). US EME holdings (Fig. 4.2, bottom left) are more

diverse, with the only split avoided being private-sector issued local currency bonds (a sector that has

grown substantially the past few years). Holdings of sovereign local currency bonds (green) has

increased the most since 2007 and is now the largest component, but holdings of sovereign USD-

denominated bonds (orange) are also quite large. Also sizeable are holdings of EME private-sector

USD-denominated bonds—a potential area of concern due to possible currency mismatches. Note that

relative weights for USD bonds (Fig. 4.2, top and bottom right; Table 3, rightmost block) tend to be

much higher than for local currency bonds.9

        In summary, the weight of EME local currency bonds in US investors’ bond portfolios has

increased relative to the share of EME local currency bonds in the global bond market. EME local

currency bonds were 4.9% of the global local currency bond market in 2001 and grew to 7.8% in 2011,

but US holdings increased even faster, increasing from 1.1% of the cross-border local currency bond

portfolio in 2001 to 17.2% by 2011. The relative weight measure for EME local currency bonds in US

investors’ portfolios, after a dramatic increase over the past decade, now exceeds the relative weight

of AE local currency markets. In other words, in US investors’ portfolios of EME local currency bonds

are closer to benchmark (ICAPM) weights than are AE local currency bonds.




9
 This fact—that relative weights are higher for bonds issued in the investors’ currency—likely holds for other investor
countries and means that datasets like the IMF’s CPIS that do not differentiate by currency denomination mix very different
assets.

                                                                                                                          19
4.2. Empirical Analysis of US Investors’ Foreign Bond Portfolios

        Over the past decade, US investors have increased their cross-border holdings of local currency

bonds, especially in EMEs. We will use a common framework to analyze the evolution US investors’

country-specific relative portfolio weights—that is, their portfolio weights relative to a global

benchmark (as described in Section 2.1)—in various types of foreign bonds. Because changes in relative

weight can be due to passive or active reallocations, we follow Ahmed et al (2014) and normalize (1) by

the home relative weight to isolate active reallocations:



                            i ,US US ,US
         norm Re lWgt            /                                    (2)
                            i.m US .m



        Our annual panel dataset of US investor relative portfolio weights includes 38 destination

countries over the period 2006-2011.10 For explanatory variables, we include country-specific “pull”

factors such as yield (to proxy for expected return), macroeconomic indicators (GDP growth rate,

volatility of inflation, and current account balance), institutional variables, and a proxy for the

openness of a country’s bond market to foreign investment. For global “push” factors we include the

volatility index VIX (which measures variation in expected volatility and risk appetite), the 10-year US

Treasury rate (to capture a “reach for yield”), and a measure of unconventional monetary policy (or

UMP, defined as changes in the size of Federal Reserve securities holdings scaled by nominal GDP).

        The macroeconomic indicators included in our regressions represent factors that likely impact

the attractiveness of an economy as a destination for cross-border bond investment. Inflation volatility


10
 The number of destination countries is limited not by the holdings data, but by data on the size and composition of bond
markets and for explanatory variables.

                                                                                                                            20
(calculated as a rolling, trailing 12-quarter standard deviation) is included as a proxy for the uncertainty

of ex ante real returns; increased inflation volatility will also lead to more volatile nominal bond yields

thus increasing reinvestment risk. We include the current account to real GDP ratio to proxy for

financial imbalances. A country that runs a current account deficit must attract inflows; if those inflows

do not materialize, adverse financial market outcomes (such as currency depreciation and/or a spike in

bond rates) are likely. We also include the annual growth rate in real GDP per capita as an indicator of

the vigor of the destination economy.11 Our primary institutional variable is a measure of regulatory

quality and creditor rights, calculated as a weighted average of the Regulatory Quality Index from the

World Bank’s World Governance Indicators and the Legal Rights Index from the “Getting Credit”

section of the World Bank’s Doing Business report.12 Our measure of the openness of a country’s local

currency bond market to foreign investment is de jure and based on two sources. For 38 EMEs, Markit

(2013) has constructed detailed measures for 2010 and 2011 based on the IMF’s AREAER documents.

We create 2006-11 measures by combining information from Markit’s 2010 and 2011 measures with

AREAER information for the entire period. The resulting measure is 0 if a country’s local currency bond

market is by law completely closed to foreign investors and 100 if there are no impediments to foreign

investment.13

         4.2.1 Panel Results for Local Currency Portfolio Reallocations

         Table 4 presents panel regression results for LCBs. The dependent variable is the normalized

relative portfolio weight for local currency bonds as defined in equation (2), and in each regression we
11
   At a reviewer's request, we re-estimated regressions with two other potential explanatory variables: the level of inflation
(which is likely captured by our yield variable) and volatility of real GDP. Neither offered significant explanatory power.
12
   The regulatory quality index measures a government’s ability to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations
that promote private sector development, while the creditor rights index measures the degree to which collateral and
bankruptcy laws protect the rights of borrowers and lenders. We follow the GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodology
(Markit 2013) by constructing a composite measure with twice the weight on regulatory quality. An equal weighted measure
yields similar results.
13
   In constructing our financial openness measure we assume there are no impediments to investment in AE bond markets.

                                                                                                                            21
include fixed destination-country effects and cluster standard errors by country. In the left half of the

table, in addition to the country fixed effects we also include time fixed effects (and thus must omit the

global “push” factors); in the right half we omit the time fixed effects and include specific global

factors. The time effects capture the impact of global forces on relative local currency bond allocations

during each year in the sample; coefficients for 2007-2011 are reported and should be interpreted

relative to 2006.

       Results from the two-way fixed-effects specification for the full sample as well as the AE and

EME subsamples are reported in the first three columns of Table 4. Two things are striking: the model

has much greater explanatory power for EMEs (to a first approximation, US investors do not appear to

differentiate between AE local currency bond markets) and the time fixed effects suggest substantial

reallocations toward EME bond markets. Specifically, while none of the explanatory variables are

significant in the AE subsample (col. 2), for the EME subsample (col. 3) we find a significant impact for

local and global factors. The coefficients on the time dummies suggest a steady increase in allocations

toward local currency EME bonds over the time period, even during the height of the global financial

crisis. Local factors also mattered: US investors reallocated toward local currency bond markets of

EMEs with higher bond yields, faster economic growth, more positive current account balances and

more stable inflation. Our estimates indicate that the most economically significant local factor is

inflation volatility. For example, the coefficients in column (3) of Table 4 suggest that the stabilization

of South African inflation over our sample period explains roughly 25% of US investors’ reallocation

into rand-denominated bonds.

       The advantage of the two-way fixed-effects specification is that it shows the impact of global

forces on bond allocations over time without having to specify the precise nature of the global


                                                                                                          22
variables. The disadvantage is that all the global factors are rolled into one (the time dummies), which

does not allow specific interpretation of, for example, the roles of US monetary policy and global risk

aversion. Given the difficulty in properly capturing these specific global factors, one could argue that

the two-way fixed effects is the sounder econometric approach, but for completeness in columns 4-6

we omit the time fixed effects and include global “push” factors. Once again the model has much more

explanatory power for EMEs (col. 6) and we again find an important role for both global and country-

specific factors. When US Treasury rates fall, US investors increase positions in EME local currency

bond markets. The positive coefficient on the Federal Reserve’s Large Scale Asset Purchases (LSAP)

suggests a statistically significant “push” effect of UMP that is beyond the conventional channel of US

Treasury rates. In addition, US investors decrease their cross-border exposure to EME local currency

bonds during periods of increased volatility (and/or risk aversion). Local factors also matter in these

specifications. Local currency bond investors tended to reallocate away from volatile inflationary

environments and into economies with stronger economic growth rates. The coefficients on the

country-level institutional variables are statistically insignificant, but given the limited time variation in

these variables much of their explanatory power is likely absorbed by the country-level fixed effects.

       In general, the results in Table 4 are consistent with the notion that UMP pushed US investors

into EME bonds during this time period, but local factors mattered too. To gauge the relative

importance of global and local factors we follow Bekaert and Wang (2009) and conduct a variance

decomposition (VARC) analysis. The relative explanatory power of regressor X is computed as:

                      cov( yˆ , x)
        VARC x  ˆ x                                          (3)
                       var( yˆ )

By construction the VARCs of all the regressors sum to one, therefore the VARC for a particular

explanatory variable represents its relative contribution. Focusing on EMEs, for the model in column

                                                                                                            23
(3) we find that 42% of the variation is determined by our local explanatory variables while 58% of the

variation is explained by global factors.14 Of the local variables inflation volatility has the highest VARC

at 23%. Repeating the exercise for column (6) produces essentially the same split between local and

global factors, with the US 10-yr Treasury rate dominating with a VARC of 51%. That is, the classic

result of low US rates being associated with a surge in EME investment holds when we focus on EME

local currency bonds, providing a plausible channel through which US monetary policy could have

contributed to the appreciation of EME currencies (and thus provides support to currency war claims).

           4.2.2 Panel Results on USD-denominated Portfolio Reallocations

           While our primary focus is on local currency bonds, in Table 5 we analyze portfolio reallocations

in USD-denominated bonds. The dependent variable for our empirical analysis of USD-denominated

bonds is normalized relative weight, where relative weight is defined as:


i ,US            usd    
                        H iUS       usd   H iUS
                               i
                                                                                   (4)
i . m      usd   MCap /   i       usd   MCapi
                                i



where      usd   H iUS is US investors’ holdings of country i’s USD-denominated bonds and               i
                                                                                                             usd   H iUS


represents the global portfolio of USD-denominated bonds held by US investors, while                         usd   MCapi is the

market capitalization of country i’s USD-denominated bond market and                     
                                                                                         i
                                                                                             usd   MCapi is the market


capitalization of the global USD-denominated bond market. Once again we include fixed destination-

country effects, either time fixed effects or global “push” factors, and country-level “pull” factors.

           In contrast to the results for local currency bonds, the time fixed effects in Table 5 are almost

always insignificant; any broad reallocation toward USD-denominated bonds only occurred for EMEs


14
     Note that we are decomposing the variance net of the country fixed effects.

                                                                                                                             24
and only at the very end of our sample (and even then the time dummy is only marginally significant).

The reallocation toward USD-denominated EME bonds is associated with lower US rates and lower VIX

(col. 6). Although most time effects are statistically insignificant, it is notable that we find a negative

and marginally statistically significant coefficient for EMEs in 2008. In other words, in contrast to our

results for local currency bonds, here we find some (weak) evidence that US investors reduced their

cross-border holdings of USD-denominated EME bonds during the global financial crisis.

         While the effects of global factors are muted in Table 5, we do find a significant impact of local

factors on US investment in USD-denominated EME bonds. The results in columns (3) and (6) indicate

that more positive current account balances and lower inflation volatility were also associated with

rising relative US allocations. To gauge the relative importance of global and local factors we again

conduct a variance decomposition analysis, this time for the USD-denominated allocations of columns

(3) and (6). For the time effects specification we find that 78% of the variance is explained by local

factors, with the most important variables being current account (59%) and inflation volatility (17%).

Repeating the exercise with specific global factors reveals a similar local-global split—local factors

matter most for reallocations within the USD-denominated EME bond portfolio—with the most

important global factor being VIX (17%).

         4.2.3 Sectoral Results

         Tables 6 and 7 show results split by the sector (private or government) that issued the bond.15

For local currency (Table 6) or USD-denominated bonds (Table 7), the sectoral results show that our

main regressions are most able to explain portfolio reallocations within government bond portfolios.

Results for the government bonds columns in Tables 6 and 7 are quite similar to those in Tables 4 and

15
  Sectoral splits for US holdings are available beginning in 2007, therefore reducing the sample size relative to the results
reported in Tables 4 and 5.

                                                                                                                                25
5. The time effects in columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 indicate a reallocation away from AE sovereign

bond markets and into EME sovereign bonds throughout the sample period. For samples restricted to

private-sector bonds, there is very limited explanatory power and very few significant coefficients,

although in Table 7 we do find negative coefficients on the time effects (statistically significant for 2011

and marginal for earlier years) for USD-denominated private sector bonds issued by AEs.



5. Conclusion

       In 2007 when market volatility was on the rise (but nowhere near its peak), the Bundesbank

pondered (see opening quote) the role emerging LCBMs would play in promoting (or inhibiting) global

financial stability. The ensuing global financial crisis provided a severe test for these newly developed

markets, EMEs avoided another round of currency crises and US investors did not blindly flee the newly

developed asset class. Our data indicate that, on average, US investors increased their EME local

currency bond allocations during the crisis and this reallocation toward local currency EME bonds

accelerated in the post-crisis period. Moreover, our evidence suggests that US investors do not treat

EME local currency bonds as a homogenous asset class, but rather discriminate among EMEs based on

macroeconomic fundamentals including inflation volatility, current account balances, and real GDP

growth rates.

       Overall, our results have interesting implications for financial stability and help distinguish

between the possibilities of virtuous and vicious cycles in local currency bond markets. The importance

of global monetary conditions and risk appetite/expected volatility lend credence to the concerns of

EME policy makers who worry that volatile flows will influence exchange rates and real activity. Fears

of a vicious cycle with indiscriminate herd-like flows into and out of EMEs are quelled somewhat by our


                                                                                                         26
finding that US investors’ discriminate among EMEs based on macroeconomic fundamentals. Strong

macroeconomic conditions should help EMEs attract and retain cross-border investment, which would

reinforce a more virtuous cycle in local currency bond markets.




                                                                                                 27
References

Ahmed, S., S. Curcuru, F. Warnock, and A. Zlate, 2014. The Many Forms of International Capital Flows.
    mimeo.
Alvarez, R. and J. De Gregorio, 2013. “Why did Latin America and Developing Countries Perform Better
    in the Global Financial Crisis than in the Asian Crisis?” working paper presented to IMF’s 14th
    Annual Research Conference.
Ammer, J., S. Holland, D. Smith, and F. Warnock, 2012. US International Equity Investment. Journal of
    Accounting Research 50(5): 1109-1139.
Asian Development Bank, 2013. Broadening the investor base for local currency bonds in ASEA+2
    countries.
Bekaert, G., and X. Wang, 2009, Home bias revisited, unpublished working paper.
Bertaut, C., A. Tabova, and V. Wong, 2013. “The replacement of safe assets in the US financial bond
    portfolio and implications for the US financial bond home bias,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve
    Board.
Blank, S., and C. Buch, 2007. The Euro and Cross-Border Banking: Evidence from Bilateral Data.
    Comparative Economic Studies 49: 389-410.
Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2003. “Diversification, Original Sin, and International Bond Portfolios,”
    International Finance Discussion Paper #755, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2006. “Local Currency Bond Markets,” IMF Staff Papers 53: 133-146.
Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2007. “Foreign Participation in Local-Currency Bond Markets,” Review of
    Financial Economics 16(3): 291-304.
Burger, J., F. Warnock, and V. Warnock, 2012. “Emerging Local Currency Bond Markets,” Financial
    Analysts Journal 68(4):73-93.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. (1993). “Capital Inflows and Real
    Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors.” IMF Staff Papers 40(1):
    108–151.
Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart, 2002. “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 177: 379-408.
Chuhan, Punam, Stijn Claessens, and Nlandu Mamingi. (1998). “Equity and bond flows to Latin America
    and Asia: The Role of Global and Country Factors.” Journal of Development Economics 55 (2), 439 -
    463.
Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel, and S. Schmukler, 2007. “Government Bonds in Domestic and Foreign
    Currency: The Role of Institutional and Macroeconomic Factors.” Review of International Economics
    15(2): 370-413.
Cooper, I., and E. Kaplanis, 1986. Costs to crossborder investment and international equity market
    equilibrium. in J. Edwards, J. Franks, C. Mayer and S. Schaefer (eds.), Recent Developments in
    Corporate Finance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.



                                                                                                    28
Eichengreen, B., and R. Hausmann, 1999. Exchange rates and financial fragility. Proceedings, Federal
     Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 329-368.
Eichengreen, B. and P. Luengnaruemitchai, 2006. “Why Doesn’t Asia Have Bigger Bond Markets?” In
     BIS Papers No 30: Asian Bond Markets: Issues and Prospects. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for
     International Settlements.
Felettigh, A., and P. Monti, 2008. How to interpret the CPIS data on the distribution of foreign portfolio
     assets in the presence of sizeable cross-border positions in mutual funds. Evidence for Italy and the
     main euro-area countries. Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper No. 16.
Fidora, M., M. Fratzscher, and C. Thimann, 2007. Home Bias in Global Bond and Equity Markets: The
     Role of Real Exchange Rate Volatility. Journal of International Money and Finance 26: 631-655.
Fratzscher, M., 2012. “Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal
     of International Economics 88(2): 341-356.
Forbes, K., and F. Warnock, 2013. “Debt- and Equity-Led Capital Flow Episodes,” in Capital Mobility and
     Monetary Policy edited by Miguel Fuentes and Carmen M. Reinhart. Santiago: Central Bank of
     Chile. Also available as NBER Working Paper No. 18329.
Goldstein, M., and P. Turner, 2004. Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Economies.
     Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.
Gourinchas, P.‐O., and M. Obstfeld, 2012. “Stories of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty‐First,”
     American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1): 226‐65.
Griever, W., G. Lee, and F. Warnock, 2001. The U.S. system for measuring cross-border investment in
     securities: a primer with a discussion of recent developments. Federal Reserve Bulletin 87(10): 633-
     650.
Gruić, B., and P. Wooldridge, 2012. Enhancements to the BIS debt securities statistics. BIS Quarterly
     Review (December, pages 63-76).
Hale, G., and M. Obstfeld, 2014. The Euro and the Geography of International Debt Flows. mimeo.
Holland, S., S. Sarkissian, M. Schill, and F. Warnock, 2013. Global cross-border equity holdings. Mimeo.
J.P. Morgan, 2002. JPMorgan Government Bond Indices. J.P. Morgan Portfolio Research, January 14.
J.P. Morgan, 2006. Introducing the JPMorgan Government Bond Index-Emerging Markets (GBI-EM):
     Index Methodology. J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Research and Bond Index Research, January.
Lane, P., 2006. Global Bond Portfolios and EMU. International Journal of Central Banking 2(2): 1-23.
Markit Indices Limited, 2013. “GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodlogy,” February 2013,
     https://www.markit.com/assets/en/docs/products/data/indices/bond-
     indices/GEMLOC%20Investability%20Indicator%20Methodology.pdf
McCauley, R., C. Upper, and A. Villar, 2013. Emerging market debt securities issuance in offshore
     centers. BIS Quarterly Review (September, Box 2).
Mendoza, E. and M. Terrones, 2008. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro Aggregates
     And Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14049.



                                                                                                       29
Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., and C. Tille, 2012. The great retrenchment: international capital flows during the
     global financial crisis. Economic Policy 26(66): 289-346.
Moore, J., S. Nam, M. Suh, and A. Tepper, 2013. Estimating the Impacts of U.S. LSAPs on Emerging
     Market Economies’ Local Currency Bond Markets. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports,
     no. 595.
Raddatz, C., S.Schmukler, 2012. “On the international transmission of shocks: Micro-evidence from
     mutual fund portfolios,” Journal of International Economics 88(2): 357-374.
Schularick, M., and A. M. Taylor, 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles,
     and Financial Crises, 1870‐2008.” American Economic Review 102: 1029‐61.
Tille, Cedric, and Eric van Wincoop, 2010. International Capital Flows. Journal of International
     Economics 80(2): 157-175.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the
     Federal Reserve System, 2002. Report on Foreign Portfolio Investment in the United States as of
     December 31, 2001.
________ 2007. Report on Foreign Portfolio Investment in the United States as of December 31, 2006.
________ 2009. Report on Foreign Portfolio Investment in the United States as of December 31, 2008.
________ 2012. Report on Foreign Portfolio Investment in the United States as of December 31, 2011.
Vegh, C. and G. Vuletin, 2013. “The Road to Redeption: Policy Response to Crises in Latin America,”
     working paper presented to IMF’s 14th Annual Research Conference.




                                                                                                       30
                                                  Data Appendix

       Throughout, “bonds” refer to debt instruments with greater than one year original maturity. We focus on
bonds denominated in the currency of the country in which the issuer resides.

Bond Returns
         Our main source of returns data is country-level JPMorgan Government Bond Indexes (GBI) and
JPMorgan Government Bond Indexes-Emerging Markets (GBI-EM). See J.P. Morgan (2002, 2006) for complete
descriptions.
         GBI consists of “regularly traded, fixed-rate, domestic government bonds of countries that offer
opportunity to international investors. These countries have liquid government debt markets, which are stable,
actively traded markets with sufficient scale, regular issuance and are freely accessible to foreign investors.” The
indices should be representative (span and weight the appropriate markets, instruments and issues that reflect
opportunities available to international investors) and investible and replicable (include only securities in which
an investor can deal at short notice and for which firm prices exist). The 13 countries in the original GBI include
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, UK, and the
US.
         The GBI-EM is similar to the main GBI in methodology but tracks emerging markets economies. Some
of the bonds are speculative; some EM bond markets are not directly hedgeable. Countries in the GBI-EM include
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland, Slovakia, South Africa,
Thailand, and Turkey. Bonds in the countries in the narrow GBI-EM should be easy to access, with no
impediments for foreign investors. A few countries with sizeable local bond markets but that have substantial
restrictions on foreigners (China, India, Russia) are added to create the GBI-EM BROAD, which has 16 EMEs.
         JPMorgan returns data are available for positions that are unhedged and hedged using exchange rates and
forward rates from WM Company as of 4pm London time. Hedging for a few countries in the GBI-EM has not
always been possible (e.g., Malaysia, Chile), so hedged returns for some EMs should be viewed as indicative but
not actual. Please see Appendix E of JPMorgan (2006) for complete details.
         We also include for comparison a US corporate bond index, a dollar-denominated EME bond index
(JPMorgan’s EMBI), and three equity indices. The Dow Jones Corporate Bond Index is an equally weighted
basket of 96 recently issued, readily tradable, investment-grade corporate bonds. We use the index with 5-year
maturity. The equity indices are the S&P500 (for the US), MSCI EM, and MSCI EAFE+Canada; see
www.msci.com/products/indices/tools/index.html for details on the MSCI data.

Bonds Outstanding
        We use two complementary sources of data on the amount of a country’s outstanding local currency
bonds. Both are from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), which compiles data from multiple sources.
Note that BIS changed methodology in 2012 (see Gruić and Wooldridge 2012) and the newer data might not be
consistent with the historical data, so our analysis ends in 2011 and our description refers to the pre-2012 BIS
methodology.
        One data set is on “domestic debt”, which the BIS defines as local currency bonds issued by locals in the
local market (i.e., not placed directly abroad). Data are available in BIS Quarterly Review Table 16A (Domestic
Debt Securities). Because our focus is on bonds (with original maturity longer than one year), we obtained the
data underlying Table 16A to separate short term from long term.
         The other data set is on “international bonds”, bonds issued either in a different currency or in a different
market. Certain aggregates of this are presented BIS Quarterly Review Table 14B (International Bonds and Notes
by Country of Residence). For our focus we obtained the underlying data, as issuance by currency by country is
not presented in the Quarterly Review.
        With these two sources (and our calculations), local-currency-denominated debt is the sum of the long-
term debt component of “domestic debt” and the local currency / local issuer portion of “international bonds”.
USD-denominated debt is the USD portion of “international bonds”. Our measure includes all bonds issued by all
types of issuers (government and private).

                                                                                                                    31
US Bond Holdings
         Data on US investors’ holdings of local currency bonds is from periodic, comprehensive benchmark
surveys conducted by the Treasury Department, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. See the actual surveys, for example, Treasury Department et al. (2002, 2009)
or the Griever, Lee, and Warnock (2001) primer for details. Briefly, from Griever, Lee, and Warnock (2001), the
so-called “asset surveys” of US holdings of foreign securities collect data from two types of reporters: US-
resident custodians and US institutional investors. Custodians are the primary source of information, typically
reporting about 97 percent of total US holdings of foreign long-term securities. Institutional investors, such as
mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies, endowments, and foundations, report in detail on their
ownership of foreign securities only if they do not entrust the safekeeping of these securities to US-resident
custodians. If they do use US-resident custodians, institutional investors report only the name(s) of the
custodian(s) and the amount(s) entrusted (and the data are collected from the custodian, but not double counted).
         Reporting on the asset surveys is mandatory, with both fines and imprisonment possible for willful failure
to report. The data are collected at the security-level, greatly reducing reporting error; armed with a security
identifier, a mapping to the currency of the bond and the residence of its issuer is straightforward. Reporting and
the data are comprehensive, and the holdings data form the official US data on international positions (for
example, the number for international bonds in the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s International Investment
Position report is formed by aggregating the survey’s security-level information).
         For our purposes, we needed a split (US holdings of local currency foreign bonds) not usually published
in the Treasury Department reports, and so persuaded Treasury to include an ‘own currency’ column in the
published table on holdings by country by currency (see, for example, Table A.6 of Treasury Department et al.
2009). This is our measure of US holdings of local currency bonds.

Other Variables
         As explanatory variables in Tables 4-7, we use various data series. Yield is the yield-to-maturity in the
GBI indexes from J.P Morgan and enters our regressions as an annual average. See J.P Morgan (2006) Appendix
B. A number of other explanatory variables are from the IMF’s IFS database (inflation volatility is computed
from three years of quarterly CPI inflation), WEO (current account balance is as a percent of GDP) or WDI (GDP
growth, calculated as year-over-year growth in real GDP per capita). VIX and USi10 come from the St. Louis
Federal Reserve Database (FRED) and are year-end observations of the CBOE volatility index and 10-year US
Constant Maturity Treasury rate, respectively. Federal Reserve holdings of US bonds, used to create our LSAP
variable, are from the Fed’s H.4.1 release. regcr is calculated as a weighted average of the Regulatory Quality
Index from the World Bank’s World Governance Indicators and the Legal Rights Index from the “Getting Credit”
section of the World Bank’s Doing Business report. The regulatory quality index measures a government’s ability
to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that promote private sector development, while the
creditor rights index measures the degree to which collateral and bankruptcy laws protect the rights of borrowers
and lenders. We follow the GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodology (Markit 2013) by constructing a
composite measure with twice the weight on regulatory quality. An equal weighted measure yields similar results.
Finally, caopen is our measure of the openness of a country’s local currency bond market to foreign investment is
de jure and based on two sources. For 38 EMEs, Markit (2013) has constructed detailed measures for 2010 and
2011 based on the IMF’s AREAER documents. We create our 2006-11 measures by combining information from
Markit’s 2010 and 2011 measures with AREAER information for the entire period. The resulting measure is 0 if a
country’s local currency bond market is by law completely closed to foreign investors and 100 if there are no
impediments to foreign investment. In constructing our financial openness measure we assume there are no
impediments to investment in AE bond markets.

Country Groupings
        The groupings of “advanced economies”, or AEs, and “other emerging market and developing countries”
(shortened here to emerging market economies or EMEs) follow IMF classification as of April 2013. See
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/statappx.pdf.

                                                                                                                32
                                                

Figure 1. The Structure of Global Bond Markets

                                                                                                                 AE Bonds: LC and USD




                                                                                          40,000
                                                          Amount Outstanding ($ Billions)
                                                           10,000  20,000    30,000
                                                                              0
                                                                                                   2006   2007       2008          2009       2010      2011
                                                                                                          AE Private LC             AE Private USD (ex-US)
                                                                                                          AE Gov't LC               AE Gov't USD (ex-US)




                                                                                                                 EM Bonds: LC and USD




                                                                                     4,000
                                                     Amount Outstanding ($ Billions)
                                                      1,000    2,000     3,000
                                                                         0



                                                                                                   2007      2008           2009           2010         2011
                                                                                                           EME Private LC                 EME Private USD
                                                                                                           EME Gov't LC                   EME Gov't USD




                                                                                                                                                               33
Figure 2. Efficient Frontiers for Bond Portfolios
Returns data are from January 2003 to October 2013. Vertical axes are monthly returns (in percent); horizontal axes are standard
deviation of the monthly returns. In the top graph, each frontier includes a range of portfolios varying from 100% U.S. bonds (the
common point in each line) to 100% foreign bonds. The figure includes three definitions for the rest-of-world (ROW) portfolio: (1) an
unhedged portfolio of 80 percent AE and 20 percent EME bonds (the upward-sloping blue line), (2) a hedged portfolio of 80 percent
AE and 20 percent EME bonds (the downward-sloping red line), and (3) a 50-50 combination of (1) and (2) (the line in the middle).
The bottom graph includes equities as well, with each frontier including a range of portfolios varying from 100% U.S. (the common
point in each line) to 100% foreign. Weights for the U.S. portion are 2006 estimates from the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds
accounts: 62% equities, 38% bonds, of which 43% government and 57% corporate. For the rest-of-world (ROW) portion, weights are
from Treasury Department surveys: 77% equity (of which 79% AE and 21% EME) and 23% bond (89% AE, 9% USD-denominated
EME, 2% local currency EME). While the frontiers are not distinguishable from one another, the figure does include three definitions
for the ROW bond portfolio: (1) unhedged (blue line), (2) hedged (the red line), and (3) a 50-50 combination of (1) and (2) (the line in
the middle).




                 Efficient Frontiers (January 2003 - October 2013)
       1
 .95
   .9
 .85
   .8
 .75




           3.5             4               4.5                5             5.5
                                    Standard Deviation

                          Portfolio 1- equity & unhedged bond (2003-2013)
                          Portfolio 2- equity & hedged bond (2003-2013)
                          50% portfolio 1 and 50% portfolio 2




                                                                                                                                     34
Figure 3. US Investors’ Foreign Bond Holdings by Currency, 2001-2011
The top panel shows, for end of year 2001 and 2006-11, the total amount (in billions of USD) of US investors’ foreign bond holdings
(“Total”) as well as the amounts held in USD-denominated (“USD”) and local currency (“Local currency”) bonds. The bottom panel
shows, for US investors’ foreign bond holdings as of year ends 2001 and 2006-11, the shares of AE and EME holdings that are
denominated in the local currency.
 2500



 2000



 1500
                                                                                                 Total
                                                                                                 USD
 1000                                                                                            Local Currency


  500



     0
            2001       2006          2007     2008       2009        2010       2011



 0.45

  0.4

 0.35

  0.3

 0.25                                                                            Share of AE holdings in Local
                                                                                 Currency
  0.2                                                                            Share of EME holdings in Local
                                                                                 Currency
 0.15

  0.1

 0.05

    0
          2001     2006       2007     2008    2009     2010     2011




                                                                                                                                 35
Figure 4.1 US Investors’ Bond Portfolios

                                                                                     Relative Weight: LC Bonds




                                                             .15
                                           Relative Weight




                                                               .1
                                                             .05
                                                                   0
                                                                       2006   2007        2008          2009          2010          2011
                                                                                                 year

                                                                               Asia EMEs ex-China              Euro area AEs
                                                                               Europe EMEs                     Latin America EMEs
                                                                               Other AEs                       Other EMEs




                                                                                                                                           36
Figure 4.2 US Investors’ Bond Portfolios (continued)

                  AE Holdings: Pvt Govt LC USD                                                       Relative Weight: USD Bonds




                                                                                      .6
 800




                                                                                      .5
                                                                    Relative Weight
 600




                                                                                      .4
                                                                                      .3
 400




                                                                                      .2
 200




                                                                                      .1
                                                                                           2006   2007          2008          2009        2010       2011
                                                                                                                       year
       0




           2007      2008            2009    2010            2011                                        Asia EMEs              Euro area AEs
                     AE Private LC          AE Private USD                                               Europe EMEs            Latin America EMEs
                     AE Gov't LC            AE Gov't USD                                                 Other AEs              Other EMEs




                  EME Holdings: Pvt Govt LC USD
   80
   60
   40
   20
       0




           2007      2008            2009    2010            2011
                    EME Private LC          EME Private USD
                    EME Gov't LC            EME Gov't USD




                                                                                                                                                            37
Table 1. Bond Market Characteristics: Summary Statistics by Region
The table shows summary statistics by region as of end-2011. Data on international bonds are built from data that underlie
two BIS Quarterly Review tables, Table 14B (International Bonds and Notes by Country of Residence) and Table 16A
(Domestic Debt Securities). Local-currency-denominated debt is the sum of the local currency portion of Table 14B and
the long-term debt component from Table 16A. The amount of USD-denominated debt is calculated from data underlying
Table 14B. Country groupings follow IMF classifications of “advanced economies” and “other emerging market and
developing economies” as of April 2013; see http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/statappx.pdf. See
Appendix Table 1 for countries included in our dataset.

                          Total                Local Currency Denominated                      US Dollar Denominated
                          US$b             US$ B %GDP        %total     %govt                US$ B %total      %govt
AEs       Total           75883            69164     161       91         49                 31598      42       37
          Euro area       22106            20147     157       91         39                  1071       5        7
          Other           24369            20387     134       84         71                  1896       7        6
          US              29409            28630     191       97         40                 28630      97       40

EMEs      Total           6607              5818      29        88           61               576       9         49
          Europe          699               500       24        72           89                68       10        88
          LatAm           1406              1053      22        75           80               302       21        44
          Asia            4155              4009      36        96           52               132       3         38
          Other           347               255       11        74           75                75       22        49




                                                                                                                       38
Table 2. Monthly U.S. Dollar Returns, January 2003–October 2013
The table shows return characteristics of various asset classes. AEs and EMEs consist of countries included in the J.P. Morgan GBI
(excluding the United States) and GBI-EM Broad, respectively. EMBI is an index of USD-denominated EME bonds.
                                        Mean                        Correlation with
                                         (%)      Variance Skewness US Govt Bonds
A. January 2003 to October 2013
EME local currency bonds
Unhedged                                 0.91        12.03       -0.85            0.13
Hedged                                   0.47        1.77        0.24             0.41

AE local currency bonds
Unhedged                                 0.49        5.78        0.02             0.55
Hedged                                   0.35        0.60        -0.10            0.77

Other Bonds
EMBI                                     0.84        6.72        -2.46            0.29
US Govt Bonds                            0.37        1.99        -0.08            1.00
US Corp Bonds                            0.55        3.39        -0.02            0.59

Equities
US                                       0.82        17.52       -0.83           -0.24
AE (ex US)                               0.98        27.18       -0.87           -0.20
EMEs                                     1.46        46.19       -0.73           -0.18

B. August 2007 to October 2013
EME local currency bonds
Unhedged                                 0.69        16.89       -0.73            0.07
Hedged                                   0.42        2.50        0.40             0.41

AE local currency bonds
Unhedged                                 0.48        6.37        -0.15            0.54
Hedged                                   0.38        0.68        -0.14            0.76

Other Bonds
EMBI                                     0.73        8.85        -2.65            0.17
US Govt Bonds                            0.43        2.06        0.44             1.00
US Corp Bonds                            0.66        3.99        0.13             0.40

Equities
US                                       0.57        25.93       -0.71           -0.30
AE (ex US)                               0.27        39.59       -0.60           -0.26
EMEs                                     0.44        61.65       -0.46           -0.25




                                                                                                                                     39
Table 3. US Portfolios: Summary Statistics by Region
The table shows summary statistics by region of US investors’ local currency and USD-denominated bond portfolios as of
end-2011. Data are author’s calculations using data on US investment from the US Department of the Treasury et al.
(2012) and the size of local currency bond markets (mostly from the BIS; see Table 1 for details). Relative weight
measures, defined in the text equation (1), are calculated as the the weight of the country in US portfolios relative to its
weight in the world market portfolios. A relative weight measure equals one if the weight of the countries’ bonds in US
and world market portfolios are identical and is less than one if US investors’ underweight the country (relative to its
market size). See Appendix Table 2 for country-level detail on local currency bond portfolios.

                        Total                Local Currency Denominated                        US Dollar Denominated
                        US$b            US$ B Relwgt GovtRelWgt PvtRelWgt              US$ B    Relwgt GovtRelWgt PvtRelWgt
AEs      Total(ex-us)   1140             409      0.04       0.08      0.02             894      0.44       0.58     0.39
         Euro area       374             136      0.03       0.07      0.01             230      0.32       0.14     0.29
         Other           961             273      0.05       0.08      0.03             664      0.51       0.87     0.44



EMEs     Total           226              85     0.06      0.13       0.004             133      0.31     0.46       0.23
         Europe           37              17     0.13      0.22       0.01               14      0.30     0.42       0.14
         LatAm           130              40     0.14      0.26       0.03               88      0.36     0.46       0.33
         Asia             37              20     0.02      0.05       0.001              17      0.20     0.40       0.11




                                                                                                                            40
Table 4. Fixed Effects Panel Regression of US Investor Relative Weights, Local Currency Bonds
The table presents panel regressions using annual data from 2006 through 2011. The dependent variable is U.S
investors’ normalized relative portfolio weight for each country’s local currency bonds. The sample includes
countries listed in Appendix Table 2 with the exception of Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, Croatia, Argentina,
Pakistan, and Phillipines, which are excluded based on availability of explanatory variables. Each panel
regression includes fixed destination-country effects. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at
the country level. Output for constants is not shown. Higher scores on regcr indicate stronger regulatory quality
and creditor rights and higher scores for caopen indicate that a bond market is more open to cross-border
investment. Inflation volatility (infvol_3yr) is computed on a rolling basis using three years of quarterly data
and grrate is calculated as an annual growth rate of real percapita GDP. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01

                 LCTotal All      LCTotal AE     LCTotal EME        LCTotal All     LCTotal AE     LCTotal EME
regcr                0.058             -0.008         0.057            0.063             -0.009         0.064
                     (0.043)           (0.042)        (0.040)          (0.043)           (0.040)        (0.043)
caopen               -0.012                          -0.022            -0.012                          -0.020
                     (0.025)                          (0.016)          (0.029)                          (0.023)
ca_gdp               0.029             0.006          0.122*           0.036             -0.004         0.139*
                     (0.055)           (0.093)        (0.060)          (0.057)           (0.091)        (0.066)
infvol_3yr           -0.858***         -0.077        -0.827**          -0.758***         -0.310        -0.645**
                     (0.286)           (0.285)        (0.316)          (0.244)           (0.302)        (0.282)
yield                0.067             -0.059         0.205**          0.050              0.005         0.174
                     (0.058)           (0.084)        (0.095)          (0.061)           (0.076)        (0.109)
grrate               0.042             0.042          0.107**          0.053*             0.047         0.127***
                     (0.032)           (0.046)        (0.046)          (0.030)           (0.047)        (0.039)
2007.year            0.056             0.053          0.285
                     (0.179)           (0.187)        (0.376)
2008.year            0.470             -0.216         1.212**
                     (0.295)           (0.214)        (0.458)
2009.year            1.157***          -0.064         2.093***
                     (0.379)           (0.358)        (0.395)
2010.year            1.474***          -0.172         2.732***
                     (0.425)           (0.302)        (0.507)
2011.year            2.121***          0.524          3.664***
                     (0.480)           (0.486)        (0.679)
USi10                                                                  -0.896***         -0.295        -1.507***
                                                                       (0.210)           (0.241)        (0.277)
LSAP_gdp                                                               0.098***           0.028         0.165***
                                                                       (0.029)           (0.029)        (0.036)
vix_eoy                                                                -0.064***         -0.028        -0.096***
                                                                       (0.018)           (0.022)        (0.026)
R2                   0.36              0.17           0.58             0.35              0.13           0.55
N                  220               121             99              220               121             99




                                                                                                                  41
Table 5. Fixed Effects Panel Regression of US Investor Relative Weights, USD-denominated bonds
The table presents panel regressions using annual data from 2006 through 2011. The sample is as specified in
note to Table 4 with additional exclusion of Slovakia and Thailand for which we lack USD yield data. The
dependent variable is U.S investors’ normalized relative portfolio weight for each country’s USD-denominated
bonds. Each panel regression includes fixed destination-country effects. Standard errors (reported in
parentheses) are clustered at the country level. Output for constants is not shown. Higher scores on regcr
indicate stronger regulatory quality and creditor rights and higher scores for caopen indicate that a bond market
is more open to cross-border investment. Inflation volatility (infvol_3yr) is computed on a rolling basis using
three years of quarterly data and grrate is calculated as an annual growth rate of real per captia GDP. * p<0.1;
** p<0.05; *** p<0.01


                USDTotal All      USDTotal        USDTotal        USDTotal All    USDTotal AE        USDTotal
                                    AE              EME                                                EME
regcr                 0.461           1.187          -0.003            0.559             1.570           0.040
                     (0.591)          (2.308)        (0.191)           (0.667)           (2.677)        (0.187)
caopen                0.148                           0.107            0.218*                            0.128*
                     (0.119)                         (0.084)           (0.125)                          (0.061)
ca_gdp                0.487           0.572           1.109***         0.466             0.347           1.152***
                     (0.783)          (1.485)        (0.351)           (0.766)           (1.322)        (0.361)
infvol_3yr           -6.689**         -3.831         -3.700**         -7.226***          -6.757         -3.376***
                     (2.654)          (4.993)        (1.581)           (2.604)           (5.423)        (1.097)
usd_yld              -3.294         -5.196**          1.903            -3.085            -3.497*         1.592
                     (2.102)          (2.321)        (1.175)           (1.883)           (1.725)        (1.006)
grrate               -0.427           -1.497          0.087            -0.074            -0.363          0.197
                     (0.538)          (1.427)        (0.240)           (0.519)           (0.814)        (0.220)
2007.year             7.595          14.691          -1.033
                     (9.084)         (14.526)        (1.402)
2008.year            -2.935          -11.342         -4.119*
                     (5.122)          (8.700)        (2.176)
2009.year            -4.487          -16.556          1.692
                     (4.241)         (10.405)        (2.971)
2010.year            -1.164           -6.491          6.092
                     (4.347)          (7.652)        (3.779)
2011.year            -3.596           -9.988          7.952*
                     (4.176)          (6.426)        (3.850)
USi10                                                                  2.554             4.553*         -4.445**
                                                                       (2.589)           (2.246)        (1.554)
LSAP_gdp                                                               -0.357            -0.831          0.298
                                                                       (0.451)           (0.716)        (0.272)
vix_eoy                                                                0.114             0.142          -0.546***
                                                                       (0.259)           (0.236)        (0.117)
R2                    0.11            0.14            0.57             0.09              0.11            0.55
N                   199             115              84              199               115              84




                                                                                                                  42
Table 6. Fixed Effects Panel Regression of US Investor Relative Weights, Local Currency Bonds with
Private and Government Splits
The table presents panel regressions using annual data from 2007 through 2011. The sample is as specified in
the note to Table 4. The dependent variable is U.S investors’ relative portfolio weight for each country’s local
currency bonds. Each panel regression includes fixed destination-country effects. Standard errors (reported in
parentheses) are clustered at the country level. Output for constants is not shown. Higher scores on regcr
indicate stronger regulatory quality and creditor rights and higher scores for caopen indicate that a bond market
is more open to cross-border investment. Inflation volatility (infvol_3yr) is computed on a rolling basis using
three years of quarterly data and grrate is calculated as an annual growth rate of real per capita GDP. * p<0.1;
** p<0.05; *** p<0.01


                      LCGovt All       LCGovt AE       LCGovt EME        LCpvt All      LCpvt AE     LCpvt EME
  regcr                    0.105          -0.316            0.123             0.121        0.118         -0.244
                           (0.187)         (0.697)          (0.133)           (0.331)      (0.104)       (0.497)
  caopen                   -0.105                           -0.056            0.016                      -0.118
                           (0.078)                          (0.103)           (0.559)                    (0.529)
  ca_gdp                   -0.009         -0.233            0.396*           -0.311        0.099          0.087
                           (0.425)         (0.820)          (0.190)           (0.323)      (0.100)       (0.509)
  infvol_3yr               -2.254          1.039            -2.594*           0.357        0.000          3.447
                           (1.594)         (2.322)          (1.266)           (1.519)      (0.243)       (4.850)
  yield                    0.998**         0.627            1.019**           1.831        -0.102         3.366
                           (0.462)         (0.907)          (0.391)           (1.709)      (0.127)       (3.147)
  grrate                   0.245           0.052            0.571**           0.277        -0.007         0.236
                           (0.217)         (0.361)          (0.214)           (0.307)      (0.127)       (0.452)
  2008.year                -1.549         -6.325***         3.623**           5.494        1.637          7.742
                           (1.644)         (2.020)          (1.245)           (5.089)      (1.199)      (10.403)
  2009.year                4.282          -3.905           10.913***          3.588        0.897          1.085
                           (2.892)         (2.660)          (2.784)           (4.131)      (0.671)       (3.636)
  2010.year                0.907          -6.613**          6.729***          2.717        0.827          3.709
                           (2.239)         (2.358)          (1.914)           (2.653)      (0.930)       (4.504)
  2011.year                2.066          -5.241*           8.321***          5.665        1.160         12.988
                           (2.193)         (2.602)          (2.175)           (4.055)      (0.883)      (10.644)
  R2                       0.12            0.16             0.40              0.05         0.08           0.09
  N                      178             100               78               178          100             78




                                                                                                                   43
Table 7. Fixed Effects Panel Regression of US Investor Relative Weights, USD-denominated Bonds with
Private and Government Splits
The table presents panel regressions using annual data from 2007 through 2011. The sample is as specified in
the note to Table 4, with additional exclusion of Slovakia and Thailand for which USD yield data are not
available. The dependent variable is U.S investors’ relative portfolio weight for each country’s USD-
denominated bonds. Each panel regression includes fixed destination-country effects. Standard errors (reported
in parentheses) are clustered at the country level. Output for constants is not shown. Higher scores on regcr
indicate stronger regulatory quality and creditor rights and higher scores for caopen indicate that a bond market
is more open to cross-border investment. Inflation volatility (infvol_3yr) is computed on a rolling basis using
three years of quarterly data and grrate is calculated as an annual growth rate of real per capita GDP. * p<0.1;
** p<0.05; *** p<0.01



                 USDGovt All      USDGovt AE          USDGovt        USDpvt All      USDpvt AE         USDpvt
                                                       EME                                              EME
regcr                   -1.057           -10.402         -0.137            -0.278          0.653           -0.973
                        (2.235)           (18.367)       (0.970)           (0.685)         (3.435)         (0.574)
caopen                  1.369                            0.281             0.083                            0.004
                        (1.677)                          (0.567)           (0.291)                         (0.236)
ca_gdp                  1.204              2.859         4.290**           -0.032          0.266            0.179
                        (5.033)            (9.151)       (1.566)           (0.572)         (1.147)         (1.608)
infvol_3yr            -18.373            -44.485       -22.861***          -5.038         -0.884           -8.549
                       (14.807)           (41.633)       (6.429)           (3.836)         (3.164)         (6.837)
usd_yld                11.397              4.275        10.770             -0.676         -3.165            1.459
                        (8.927)           (11.964)       (6.380)           (2.113)         (1.900)         (3.058)
grrate                  8.092             11.036         1.618             -1.457         -1.697           -3.547
                        (9.670)           (18.743)       (1.866)           (1.263)         (1.843)         (3.260)
2008.year             -18.078             -1.940       -21.646*            -1.350        -19.293          19.254
                       (43.620)           (79.365)       (9.976)          (10.134)        (11.719)        (17.958)
2009.year             157.870            248.712        40.768*           -14.974        -27.126          -16.319
                      (102.253)          (194.147)      (19.299)           (9.648)        (16.746)        (17.846)
2010.year              41.084            107.417       -13.756             -7.883        -17.328            9.234
                       (42.422)           (89.744)      (16.930)           (9.420)        (10.636)         (9.547)
2011.year              11.077             50.371       -24.712             -7.347       -15.840**           5.543
                       (23.554)           (66.754)      (14.501)           (7.311)         (6.711)         (7.930)
R2                      0.08               0.09          0.66              0.07            0.13            0.19
N                     134                 74            60               152              95              57




                                                                                                                44
App Table 1. Bond Market Development
Data on international bonds are built from data that underlie two BIS Quarterly Review tables, Table 14B (International
Bonds and Notes by Country of Residence) and Table 16A (Domestic Debt Securities). Local-currency-denominated debt
is the sum of the local currency portion of Table 14B and the long-term debt component from Table 16A. The country
groupings follow IMF classifications of “advanced economies” and “other emerging market and developing economies”
(shortened to emerging economies) as of April 2013. See
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/statappx.pdf.

                       Total                             Local Currency Denominated
                                               2011                        2006                  2001
                                    US $       % of                  % of                 % of
                   US $ Billions                       % of Total            % of Total            % of Total
                                   Billions    GDP                   GDP                  GDP
         AE           75,883       69,164       161       91         131        91        105           93
  Euro area AEs       22,106       20,147       157       91         133        91         94           89
      Austria          672           588        141       88         132        82         90           74
     Belgium           765           747        145       98         104        97        118           96
      Finland          193           149        57        77          53        85         41           72
      France          4,397         4,012       145       91         112        92         82           91
    Germany           4,269         3,792       105       89         119        91         96           92
      Greece           556           550        190       99         107        97         74           89
      Ireland         1,259         1,020       470       81         285        78         46           65
        Italy         4,021         3,953       180       98         147        97        114           96
   Netherlands        2,817         2,265       271       80         241        81        165           74
     Portugal          400           396        167       99          88        98         57           89
       Spain          2,756         2,676       181       97         135        97         53           92
    Other AEs         24,369       20,387       134       84         102        82         87           82
     Australia        1,216          777        56        64          41        51         30           55
     Canada           1,957         1,527       88        78          65        77         69           72
    Denmark            840           704        211       84         194        86        160           90
 Hong Kong SAR         116            45        18        39          19        53         15           54
      Iceland           41            19        132       45         358        58         78           63
       Japan          12,331       12,253       209       99         158        99        108           99
  New Zealand           64            46        29        72          17        57         22           64
     Norway            430           220        45        51          33        52         27           54
    Singapore          130            90        37        69          40        60         35           69
   South Korea        1,265         1,117       100       88          94        91         85           91
     Sweden            745           449        83        60          72        65         57           63
   Switzerland         327           312        47        95          55        95         58           97
 United Kingdom       4,907         2,827       115       58          65        52         46           62
         US           29,409       28,630       191       97         158        96        131           98




                                                                                                                     45
App. Table 1, continued. Bond Market Development

                   Total                         Local Currency Denominated
                                        2011                      2006                  2001
                   US $       US $      % of                % of                 % of
                                               % of Total           % of Total            % of Total
                  Billions   Billions   GDP                  GDP                 GDP
       EME         6,607      5,818      29       88          24       82         20           71
     Europe         699        500       24       72          30       77         25           76
     Croatia         18         10       15       52          13       49         9            33
 Czech Republic      97         74       34       76          29       88         14           85
    Hungary          75         39       28       52          46       66         28           60
      Poland        223        161       31       72          34       77         20           86
     Slovakia        36         22       23       61          23       81         18           68
      Turkey        249        195       25       78          27       80         36           78
 Latin America     1,406      1,053      22       75          20       70         19           54
   Argentina         93         38       8        40          30       50         14           29
       Brazil       582        456       18       78          15       69         20           59
       Chile        105         79       32       75          24       72         42           77
    Colombia        107         86       26       80          28       76         19           61
     Mexico         477        370       32       78          24       78         17           59
       Peru          41         24       14       59          12       54         12           60
        Asia       4,155      4,009      36       96          28       92         22           90
      China        2,956      2,938      40       99          27       98         18           95
       India        515        489       26       95          30       95         25           97
   Indonesia        113         84       10       74          15       87         27           96
    Malaysia        260        233       81       90          59       79         57           77
    Pakistan         34         32       15       94          15       90         22           96
   Philippines      101         63       28       62          26       50         21           48
    Thailand        175        170       49       97          37       89         28           80
  Other EMEs        347        255       11       74          11       69         10           50
      Russia        156         91       5        59          3        41         2            13
  South Africa      191        164       40       86          39       90         32           87




                                                                                                       46
App. Table 2. US Participation in Local Currency Bond Markets
The table shows US investors’ local currency bond portfolio as of the end of 2001, 2006, 2008, and 2011. Data are
author’s calculations using data on US investment from the US Department of the Treasury et al. (2002, 2007, 2009, and
2012) and the size of local currency bond markets (mostly from the BIS; see Table 1 for details). ωUS and ωmkt are the
weight of the country in US and world market portfolios. The ωUS to ωmkt ratio is a relative weight measure. It equals one
if the weight of the countries’ bonds in US and world market portfolios are identical and less than one if US investors’
underweight the country (relative to its market size).
                                         2011                               2008                  2006                  2001
                         US                                              US                    US                    US
                     Holdings                                        Holdings              Holdings              Holdings
                    ($ billions)   ῳus          ῳmkt     ῳus/ῳmkt   ($ billions) ῳus/ῳmkt ($ billions) ῳus/ῳmkt ($ billions) ῳus/ῳmkt
       EME                85.05     0.44          7.98      0.055        27.72     0.026       19.32     0.025         1.71    0.004
      Europe              16.95     0.09          0.69      0.127         4.55     0.034        4.72     0.038         0.74    0.012
CROATIA                    0.00     0.00          0.01      0.000         0.00     0.000        0.00     0.000         0.00    0.000
CZECH REPUBLIC             0.19     0.00          0.10      0.010         0.04     0.002        0.01     0.001         0.01    0.003
HUNGARY                    3.26     0.02          0.05      0.317         1.52     0.082        0.62     0.037         0.17    0.027
POLAND                    13.24     0.07          0.22      0.309         2.89     0.070        3.83     0.100         0.55    0.034
SLOVAKIA                   0.19     0.00          0.03      0.032         0.00     0.000        0.24     0.047         0.00    0.000
TURKEY                     0.08     0.00          0.27      0.002         0.10     0.002        0.02     0.000         0.00    0.000
  Latin America           40.05     0.21          1.44      0.143        16.74     0.080       10.73     0.060         0.46    0.004
ARGENTINA                  0.36     0.00          0.05      0.035         0.34     0.020        2.39     0.114         0.07    0.005
BRAZIL                    20.11     0.10          0.63      0.166         8.48     0.106        4.72     0.090         0.08    0.002
CHILE                      0.97     0.00          0.11      0.046         0.01     0.001        0.00     0.000         0.01    0.001
COLOMBIA                   4.01     0.02          0.12      0.176         3.37     0.198        1.43     0.096         0.00    0.000
MEXICO                    13.31     0.07          0.51      0.135         3.99     0.052        2.08     0.028         0.29    0.006
PERU                       1.30     0.01          0.03      0.202         0.33     0.064        0.06     0.017         0.00    0.000
       Asia               19.76     0.10          5.50      0.019         5.18     0.008        2.77     0.007         0.06    0.000
CHINA                      0.31     0.00          4.03      0.000         0.20     0.000        0.01     0.000         0.00    0.000
INDIA                      0.34     0.00          0.67      0.003         0.01     0.000        0.00     0.000         0.00    0.000
INDONESIA                  5.83     0.03          0.12      0.261         1.85     0.111        1.08     0.062         0.00    0.000
MALAYSIA                   7.73     0.04          0.32      0.125         2.59     0.058        1.06     0.034         0.02    0.001
PAKISTAN                   0.00     0.00          0.04      0.000         0.00     0.000        0.00     0.000         0.00    0.000
PHILIPPINES                3.97     0.02          0.09      0.237         0.05     0.004        0.04     0.004         0.01    0.001
THAILAND                   1.58     0.01          0.23      0.035         0.48     0.015        0.57     0.023         0.03    0.002
   Other EMEs
RUSSIA                     0.66     0.00          0.12      0.027         0.10     0.008        0.02     0.001         0.00    0.002
SOUTH AFRICA               7.34     0.04          0.23      0.168         0.91     0.034        1.04     0.031         0.44    0.028




                                                                                                                                   47
App. Table 2, continued. US Participation in Local Currency Bond Markets
                                   2011                              2008                  2006                  2001
                      US                                         US                    US                    US
                  Holdings                                   Holdings              Holdings              Holdings
                 ($ billions)   ῳus       ῳmkt     ῳus/ῳmkt ($ billions) ῳus/ῳmkt ($ billions) ῳus/ῳmkt ($ billions) ῳus/ῳmkt
       AE             408.66     2.11      55.87       0.038     268.89      0.027     247.12      0.03      150.33      0.028
    Euro Area          135.8        0.7    27.62       0.030     120.64      0.020     105.49      0.02        82.02     0.030
AUSTRIA                 1.48     0.01       0.81      0.009         0.80    0.005         1.20     0.01         0.75    0.010
BELGIUM                 3.25     0.02       1.02      0.016         4.58    0.024         3.37     0.02         2.77    0.024
FINLAND                 1.09     0.01       0.20      0.028         0.54    0.016         0.92     0.03         0.57    0.026
FRANCE                 27.32     0.14       5.50      0.026        27.86    0.028        29.93     0.04        14.70    0.031
GERMANY                52.30     0.27       5.20      0.052        55.12    0.047        38.63     0.03        38.15    0.050
GREECE                  0.78     0.00       0.75      0.005         0.81    0.007         1.14     0.01         1.38    0.033
IRELAND                10.91     0.06       1.40      0.040         5.25    0.016         5.90     0.03         0.49    0.024
ITALY                  16.52     0.09       5.42      0.016         8.86    0.008         6.18     0.01         9.55    0.018
NETHERLANDS            15.23     0.08       3.11      0.025        12.77    0.021        14.29     0.03         7.82    0.028
PORTUGAL                0.44     0.00       0.54      0.004         0.24    0.003         0.30     0.01         0.16    0.006
SPAIN                   6.50     0.03       3.67      0.009         3.80    0.005         3.63     0.01         5.68    0.041
    Other AEs         272.86     1.41      28.25       0.050     148.25      0.032     141.63      0.04        68.31     0.020
AUSTRALIA              26.87     0.14       1.07      0.130         7.75    0.077         6.20     0.06         3.26    0.068
CANADA                102.85     0.53       2.09      0.253        44.24    0.157        39.99     0.15        21.48    0.103
DENMARK                 1.50     0.01       0.97      0.008         7.98    0.040         8.36     0.05         2.27    0.021
HONG KONG               1.35     0.01       0.06      0.114         0.26    0.021         0.25     0.02         0.07    0.007
ICELAND                 0.54     0.00       0.03      0.109         1.28    0.262         0.34     0.02         0.00    0.000
JAPAN                  50.19     0.26      16.80       0.015       49.67     0.017       39.41     0.02        21.35     0.011
NEW ZEALAND             4.34     0.02       0.06      0.357         1.28    0.246         1.75     0.29         1.29    0.263
NORWAY                  7.04     0.04       0.30      0.120         1.48    0.040         2.06     0.06         0.41    0.021
SINGAPORE               5.54     0.03       0.12      0.232         1.59    0.066         2.48     0.14         0.04    0.003
SOUTH KOREA            12.95     0.07       1.53      0.044         3.43    0.014         2.32     0.01         0.25    0.001
SWEDEN                  7.36     0.04       0.62      0.062         3.61    0.038         6.42     0.07         3.66    0.066
SWITZERLAND             1.65     0.01       0.43      0.020         1.02    0.012         0.25     0.00         0.11    0.002
UNITED KINGDOM         48.40     0.25       3.88      0.064        23.50    0.040        30.39     0.06        13.51    0.047




                                                                                                                           48
