NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILY PLANNING:
PROGRAM EFFECTS
Grant Miller
Kimberly Singer Babiarz
Working Paper 20586
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20586
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

An earlier version of this paper was prepared for the International Encyclopedia of the Social and
Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition (Wright, 2015). We are grateful to Colin Boyle, Sepideh Modrek,
Lant Pritchett, and T. Paul Schultz as well as the Editor and three anonymous referees for helpful comments
and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Grant Miller and Kimberly Singer Babiarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Family Planning: Program Effects
Grant Miller and Kimberly Singer Babiarz
NBER Working Paper No. 20586
October 2014, Revised December 2015
JEL No. I15,J12,J13,J18,N3,O15
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews empirical evidence on the micro-level consequences of family planning programs
in middle- and low-income countries. In doing so, it focuses on fertility outcomes (the number and
timing of births), women’s health and socio-economic outcomes (mortality, human capital, and labor
force participation), and children’s health and socio-economic outcomes throughout the life cycle.
Although effect sizes are heterogeneous, long-term studies imply that in practice, family planning
programs may only explain a modest share of fertility decline in real-world settings (explaining 4-20%
of fertility decline among studies finding significant effects). Family planning programs may also
have quantitatively modest - but practically meaningful - effects on the socio-economic welfare of
individuals and families.
Grant Miller
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
ngmiller@stanford.edu
Kimberly Singer Babiarz
CHP/PCOR
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305
babiarz@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
The twentieth century witnessed the birth of modern ‘family planning’ and its
evolution from an early target of anti-obscenity laws (Comstock, 1873) to a focus of
global efforts to improve human welfare (Cleland et al., 2006). 1 Many observers date the
modern family planning movement to the famous 1916 opening of New York City’s first
birth control clinic. Mid-century, the International Planned Parenthood Federation and the
Population Council were instrumental in both the development of modern contraceptive
technologies (including the first oral contraceptive, Enovid, and plastic intrauterine
devices) and, along with aid agencies and international organizations, promoting their
widespread distribution – ushering in the ‘modern’ era of fertility control.
Heightened concern about world’s unprecedented rate of population growth (and
its potential macroeconomic and environmental consequences) also arose mid-century
(Coale and Hoover (1959) – and Neo-Malthusian alarm grew in tenor with Paul Ehrlich’s
publication of The Population Bomb in 1968. In response, aid agencies supported the
establishment of large-scale family planning programs around the world. Global funding
for family planning tripled during the 1970s and early 1980s – and by the mid-1990s,
large-scale family planning programs were active in 115 countries (Cleland et al., 2006).
Remarkably, the total fertility rate in developing countries also fell by more than half
over this period (Sinding, 2007).

1

For the purposes of this review, we consider family planning to be the use of modern methods of birth
control to attain the desired number of children and timing of births. We consider a ‘family planning
program’ to be any formalized program designed to promote, distribute, or subsidize modern
contraceptives.

2

Academics have long debated the primary forces responsible for global fertility
decline – and in particular, the contribution made by family planning programs. One view
largely credits family planning programs directly (Bongaarts et al., 2012, Bongaarts et al.,
1990, Casterline and Sinding, 2000, Robey et al., 1993). Others give them less credit,
arguing that fertility decline largely reflects reductions in the demand for children, even if
aided by family planning programs (Pritchett, 1994a). These demand-side factors include
economic development, gains in education, industrialization, and an increase in the
opportunity cost of time generally (and for women in particular) (Breierova and Duflo,
2004, Galor and Weil, 2000, Lavy and Zablotsky, 2011, Schultz, 1985); the price of child
‘quality’ (Becker, 1960, Becker, 1991, Davis, 1967, Voigtlander and Voth, 2013);
expectations about future labor market conditions and relative income (Easterlin, 1968,
Easterlin, 1975, Macunovich, 1998); and falling infant and child mortality rates (Angeles,
2010, Cleland, 2001, Kalemli-Ozcan, 2002, Mason, 1997, Palloni and Rafalimanana,
1999, Schultz, 1985). 2 A third view, promoted in part by the European Fertility Project,
emphasizes the importance of social networks in facilitating the diffusion of ‘cultural
innovations,’ including the social acceptability of small families (Coale and Watkins,
1986, Cleland and Wilson, 1987). 3
As dire predictions about Malthusian demographic catastrophe failed to
materialize (Lam, 2011), the rationale for population policy became more nuanced during

2 These factors are not independent of each other – for example, the opportunity cost of women’s time is
related to women’s intra-household bargaining power (Lundberg and Pollak, 1996, Rasul, 2008), and the
mortality environment creates incentives for human capital investments (Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney,
2009)
3
The European Fertility Project’s methodology and central findings have also been called into question
(Brown and Guinnane, 2003).

3

the 1980s and 1990s (Kelley, 2003). 4 Stances on the relationship between population
growth and economic development became more neutral (Finkle and Crane, 1985, NAS,
1986), emphasizing the centrality of mediating institutions. 5 At the 1994 International
Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, feminist, rights-based rationales
supplemented modern macroeconomic justifications for population policy (see Birdsall et
al. (2001). Family planning programs increasingly emphasized individual needs and
desires, stressing socio-economic and health benefits for women and their families
(Glasier et al., 2006). 6
In the spirit of contemporary emphasis on a wide range of individual-level
benefits of family planning programs, this chapter reviews existing empirical evidence on
their consequences for women and children in low- and middle-income countries. In
doing so, it focuses on three types of outcomes: (1) fertility outcomes (the number and
timing of births), (2) women’s health and socio-economic outcomes (mortality, human
capital, and labor force participation), and (3) children’s health and socio-economic
outcomes throughout the life cycle. We exclude studies that simply relate family

4
Many scholars question whether or not alarmism over population growth is justified generally. Some
argue that population growth strengthens incentives for technological progress capable of averting
Malthusian calamity (Boserup, 1965, Simon, 1981). A famous wager between Paul Ehrlich and Julian
Simon illustrates this point. In 1980, Simon bet Ehrlich that the price of any five commodity metals chosen
by Ehrlich (chromium, copper, nickel, tin, and tungsten) would decline over the subsequent decade (rather
than rise). Commodity metals exist in fixed supply, while population growth raises demand for them, all
else equal – exerting upward pressure on prices. However, in response to rising prices, technological
progress (in industrial processes, etc.) also leads to substitution away from them, placing downward
pressure on prices. By 1990, the inflation-adjusted price of all five metals had fallen.
5
Institutions have been proposed to play a central role in a population’s ability to earn a ‘demographic
dividend’ – for example, see Bloom and Williamson (1998), Bloom, Canning et al. (2003), and Bloom and
Canning (2009).
6
As the definition of reproductive health expanded, so did the scope of family planning programs –
growing to encompass safe delivery, prevention and treatment of sexually-transmitted infections, safe
abortion, and violence against women (Greene and Merrick, 2005).

4

planning programs to contraceptive use or knowledge without directly estimating their
effect on these outcomes. 7
The remainder of this review is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes
background debate about the relative importance of supply- vs. demand-side factors in
explaining fertility decline. The third section reviews empirical studies of the
relationship between family planning programs and fertility outcomes, while the fourth
covers program effects on health and socio-economic outcomes among women and their
children. Pooling across studies, the fifth section concludes by summarizing ranges of
estimates that emerge from the empirical literature.

2. Background Controversy: Supply vs. Demand and the Pritchett (1994) Critique
Among the competing explanations for fertility decline, an important distinction
emerges between demand- and supply-side factors. While there is little debate about the
association between use of modern contraceptives and fertility, the underlying
determinants of contraceptive use are controversial. The crux of the debate pits the
relative importance of changes in the demand for children (and for contraceptives)
against changes in the availability and price of contraceptives (generally accomplished
through family planning programs). 8 Before reviewing empirical studies of family
planning in Sections 3 and 4, we first summarize this controversy.

7

Many studies estimate the impact of family planning programs on contraceptive use and knowledge, but
because modern contraceptives may substitute for traditional methods of birth control (prolonged
breastfeeding, rhythm, and postpartum abstinence, for example), inferences by these studies about the net
effect of family planning on fertility and socio-economic outcomes are difficult (Schultz, 1992). Our
review also excludes a large literature relating the number, timing, and spacing of births to downstream
socioeconomic benefits without directly estimating the role of family planning programs on these outcomes
(for a review, see Schultz (2010) ).
8
This distinction is not always clean. For example, some studies that we reviewed analyze family planning
programs that include information or reproductive health education campaigns. These programs

5

Lant Pritchett’s 1994 article entitled “Desired Fertility and the Impact of
Population Policies” published in Population and Development Review is a landmark
paper in this debate. Specifically, it argues that because contraceptive prevalence (or use)
is jointly determined by both supply and demand (and not by supply alone), 9 the close
relationship between a country’s contraceptive prevalence rate and its total fertility rate
fails to isolate the importance of either. In doing so, the paper challenged conventional
wisdom about the centrality of contraceptive supply in determining total fertility rates in
developing countries (Bongaarts et al., 1990).
To disentangle the effect of demand from that of supply (and to address specific
concerns that survey measures of demand may reflect ex post rationalization or may
depend on contraceptive supply), Pritchett uses two different instrumental variables (IV)
estimation strategies. 10 In doing so, the paper finds a nearly one-to-one correspondence
between a country’s total fertility rate and the number of children that women report
wanting. 11 Pritchett therefore concludes that women are largely able to have the number

simultaneously aim to increase both the availability of contraceptives and demand for them. Examples
include programs in Zimbabwe and Tanzania (Rogers et al., 1999), Rwanda (Westoff, 2013), and China
(Hesketh and Zhu, 1997). The debate also distinguishes “distal” and “proximate” causes of fertility decline.
We do not emphasize this distinction because behaviors that change when a key constraint to reproductive
behavior is relaxed are by definition “proximate,” regardless of whether they reflect demand or supply.
9
Except in the unlikely case that demand is perfectly price elastic
10 Specifically, Pritchett addresses concerns about ex post rationalization and about the dependence of
desired fertility on contraceptive availability using two related instrumental variables (IV) methodologies.
First, he uses the proportion of women with four children who desire no more (a forward-looking statistic
free of ex-post rationalization) to instrument for a retrospective measure of the demand for children fertility
(DTFR). Second, he uses a retrospective measure of demand (DTFR) to instrument for a forward-looking
measure (WTFR).
11
Pritchett (1994) uses three measures of desired fertility contained in the Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS): Average Ideal Number of Children (AINC), which is calculated directly from survey
questions about women’s ideal family size; the Desired Total Fertility Rate (DTFR), which is calculated
from “age-specific birth rates after subtracting from the number of actual births those prior births that
exceed each woman's reported desired family size;” and the Wanted Total Fertility Rate (WTFR), which is
calculated using age-specific birth rates after subtracting births determined to be unwanted according to
reported desire for future children .

6

of children that they want – and that contraceptive supply can at best explain 10% of the
cross-country variation in fertility rates. 12
Pritchett’s findings are controversial (Bongaarts, 1994, Knowles et al., 1994,
Pritchett, 1994b), and his econometric strategy requires two important assumptions that
we highlight. 13 The first is that the share of women in a country who have a given
number of children and report not wanting more is unrelated to the country’s total fertility
rate – except through desired fertility (demand). In answering questions about wanting
more children, if women have in mind the costs of fertility control that they face in
practice (despite survey instructions to the contrary), this assumption would be violated. 14
These costs may be difficult for respondents to disregard – the interpersonal costs that
women face in bargaining over fertility with their partners, for example. The second
related assumption is that past and current/future costs of fertility control are
uncorrelated. Because such a correlation is plausible, current/future costs of fertility
control could in fact be related to past fertility decisions. Ultimately, these assumptions
are not directly testable.
On a more general level, Pritchett argues that the financial cost of modern
contraceptives is too small relative to the importance of fertility decisions to exert
meaningful influence. However, these costs may nonetheless be prohibitive for poor

12

This relationship is generally robust to controlling for contraceptive prevalence (coefficient estimates for
DTFR and WTFR decrease from 0.89 to 0.74 and from 0.91 to 0.77, respectively). The rationale for
controlling for contraceptive prevalence is unclear, however, given that it captures demand as well as
supply. Although Pritchett argues women are largely able to have the number of children that they want to
have, the presence of a positive intercept term in his regression results indicates some level of persistent
unwanted fertility.
13
These two related assumptions are required for the IV strategy’s necessary ‘exclusion restriction’ to be
met (Angrist and Krueger, 1991).
14
Pritchett (1994) argues that all female DHS respondents should have costless fertility control in mind; all
that the IV strategy really requires is that women have the same cost of fertility control in mind (regardless
of their magnitude).

7

households facing tight credit or liquidity constraints, and importantly, the total cost of
fertility control extends far beyond the financial cost of contraceptives – bargaining with
spouses over fertility and direct disutility from using of contraceptive devices, for
example. Some empirical evidence suggests that these costs may be substantial. 15
More generally, critics of Pritchett’s analysis argue that although reductions in the
demand for children may be an important determinant in fertility decline, changes in
demand alone are not generally sufficient. Instead, they contend that modern family
planning is necessary for preventing increases in unwanted fertility as wanted fertility
declines (and for reducing unwanted fertility independent of changes in wanted fertility)
(Bongaarts 1994). 16 In practice, few studies examine large, plausibly ‘exogenous’
declines in the demand for children in environments lacking modern contraceptives,
making it difficult to assess this claim empirically. 17 Related work using two decades of
additional data also argues that changes in wanted total fertility rates explain about half of
changes in Total Fertility Rates in more recent decades, implying that reductions in
unwanted fertility (and by extension, family planning – although not directly measured)
have played a more important role (Gunther and Harttgen, 2013, Lam, 2011).

15 On bargaining, Ashraf et al. (2014) show that among the subset of couples in their sample with different
fertility preferences, offering vouchers for contraceptives to women privately is reduces fertility more than
offering vouchers to them in the presence of their husbands (reducing unwanted births by 57%). On the
direct disutility of modern contraceptives, research on commercial sex markets suggests that men are
willing to pay 23% more for sex without a condom (and double that for unprotected sex with attractive
commercial sex workers) (Gertler et al., 2005). See also Casterline and Sinding (2000) for a discussion of
the full cost of contraception.
16
Some studies emphasize meeting an otherwise ‘unmet need’ for contraceptive services (for discussions of
‘unmet need,’ see Bongaarts et al., 2012; Bradley and Casterline, 2014; Casterline and Sinding, 2000).
Both the concept and measurement of ‘unmet need’ is controversial (Westoff, 1988; Bradley et al. 2012;
Pritchett 1996)
17
This contrasts with scholarship on sustained fertility declines observed in Europe and other industrialized
countries prior to the availability of modern contraception. See Coale and Watkins (1986) for a summary.

8

Despite some unresolved concerns with Pritchett’s (1994) analysis, its
overarching point – that the demand for children may be more important than supply-side
factors (including contraceptive supply) in determining fertility – may nonetheless stand.

3. Family Planning Programs and the Number, Timing, and Spacing of Births
The empirical literature on family planning is vast. To aid in our review, we used
a strategy akin to the ‘systematic review’ methodology in the biomedical sciences,
although we emphasize that we did not undertake a formal systematic review. Using
explicit criteria to search four major databases of indexed journals (together with a
‘snowball’ approach), our initial search yielded 9,501 studies for consideration. We then
reviewed abstracts, applying inclusion criteria for: methodological rigor, 18 direct analysis
of family planning program effects in developing countries, and an explicit focus on at
least one of our three types of primary outcomes. Our final list includes 30 studies
meeting these criteria 19 (studies estimating the relationship between family planning and
fertility are summarized in Table 1).

18

For non-experimental (observational) studies, we restricted our review to those using commonlyaccepted methodologies for addressing the role of confounding factors and endogenous program
placement/intensity. These include (but are not limited to) conventional panel data techniques, differencein-difference estimation, and instrumental variables strategies using plausibly exogenous instruments.
19
We searched four major databases: PubMed, CAB Global Health, SCOPUS, and POPLINE. See the
accompanying electronic appendix (at the time of writing, available at
https://people.stanford.edu/ngmiller/) for details. Our review is limited to microdata studies of family
planning programs in middle- and low-income countries; for examples of cross-country studies, many of
which use an index of family planning ‘effort’ at the national level, see Schultz (1994), Tsui (2001), Jain
and Ross (2012) and Kohler (2012). Specific inclusion criteria were: (1) a focus on middle- and lowincome countries, (2) a quantitative evaluation of one or more family planning programs using microdata,
and (3) analysis of at least one fertility, health, or socioeconomic outcome (rather than just contraceptive
use or knowledge, for example). For non-experimental (observational) studies, we restricted our review to
those using commonly-accepted methodologies for addressing the role of confounding factors and
endogenous program placement/intensity. These include (but are not limited to) conventional panel data
techniques, difference-in-difference estimation, and instrumental variables estimation using plausibly
exogenous instruments (and admittedly subjective criterion).

9

Randomized Controlled Trials
Arguably the most prominent study of family planning conducted to date is the famous
Matlab family planning experiment. Beginning in 1977, the experiment randomly
assigned 141 areas in Matlab, Bangladesh to either the study’s ‘treatment’ arm (70) or a
control arm (71). In treatment areas, female reproductive health workers visited the
homes of married women of childbearing age every two weeks to educate women about
reproductive health, provide nutrition counseling, and offer modern contraceptives free of
charge. Maternal and child health services were integrated into the experimental
treatment in 1982 (Muhuri, 1995), and safe motherhood services followed (Chowdhury et
al., 2009). 20
The Matlab experiment has produced a large volume of academic papers. Early
papers report a 25% reduction in the general fertility rate (GFR) over the first two years
of the experiment (Phillips et al., 1982), and these reductions lasted throughout the 1980s
(Foster and Roy, 1997, Koenig et al., 1992). Longer term follow-up suggests that these
fertility effects persisted for at least 20 years, reducing the number of children ever born
by 1-1.5 children and extending birth intervals by 8-13 months (Joshi and Schultz, 2007).
Estimates of implied lifetime fertility reductions range from 13% (Sinha, 2005) to 23%
(Joshi and Schultz, 2013).
The Matlab experiment has also generated debate. First, critics note that the
intensity and expense of the program would be unrealistic on a large scale. In its first 10
years, program costs were approximately $180 per birth averted (120% of Bangladesh’s
20

These maternal and child health services included, tetanus immunizations for pregnant women, and in the
1980s, Vitamin A supplements, other childhood vaccinations, nutritional interventions, and diarrhea
treatment. The safe motherhood program distributed safe home delivery kits and iron supplements to
pregnant women, increased the supply of community midwives, provided free transportation to emergency
obstetric facilities for women with birth complications, and promoted institutional delivery generally.

10

GDP per capita in 1987) (Simmons et al., 1991) – nearly 10 times more than mean family
planning spending in developing countries at the time (Pritchett, 1994a). Second,
bundling child health services into the family planning treatment effectively reduced the
‘price’ of child survival – and could have therefore exerted independent influence on
fertility (Becker, 1991, Caldwell, 1976, Sah, 1991). Third, Schultz (2009) suggests
possible deviations from true randomization in the experiment’s implementation.
There are few other randomized controlled trials of family planning services. The
Navrongo experiment in Ghana studied 37 communities randomized across four
treatment arms (Binka et al., 1995, Phillips et al., 2006). Although balance across arms
was not achieved, treatment arms combining family planning service training and
community outreach were associated with a 15% reduction in the total fertility rate
among married women (Debpuur et al., 2002). Effects on parity progression persisted for
15 years (and have largely been attributed to the promotion of contraceptive use through
community organizations) but have declined over time (Phillips et al., 2006, Phillips et
al., 2012). Two other experiments integrated family planning services into existing
programs: a microcredit program in Ethiopia (Desai and Tarozzi, 2011) and an HIV
treatment program in Kenya (Kosgei et al., 2011). Both experiments find null results in
the first few years following implementation.
Observational studies
Two influential observational studies analyze contemporaneous effects of
Indonesian National Family Planning Coordinating Board’s programs during the late
1970s and 1980s. Gertler and Molyneaux (1994) combine birth history data with
community-level information about family planning program activity to study program

11

effects on community-level birth hazards between 1982 and 1987. Accounting for
changes in the demand for children and community fixed effects, the authors show that
taken together, family planning program inputs explain only 4-8% of Indonesia’s decline
in fertility (a 2% reduction in the quarterly birth hazard) during the study period (Gertler
and Molyneaux, 1994). 21 Relatedly, using both survey and population census data and
explicitly modeling village-level family planning program placement, (Pitt et al., 1993)
fail to find that the program had any significant effect on fertility between 1976 and 1986.
Also estimating short-run program effects, two additional studies use strategies
that exploit program variation due to idiosyncratic public finance rules governing local
government resource allocation. Specifically, Molyneaux and Gertler (2000) find that in
conjunction, family planning subsidies, clinics, and village distribution centers were
associated with 17% lower quarterly birth hazards in Indonesia between 1985 and 1994.
Studying family planning in Ethiopia, Portner, Beegle, and Christiaensen (2011) find
that among uneducated women, the presence of a family planning program in a woman’s
1990 district of residence was associated with roughly one fewer child ever born in the
1994 Ethiopian population census (a reduction of about 20% in this sub-group).
Other studies examine the cumulative effects of family planning programs over
longer periods of time. To study the long-run effects of PROFAMILIA, Colombia’s
predominant family planning provider from 1965 until the 1980s, Miller (2010) combines
1985 and 1993 population census data with information about its staggered geographic
expansion across the country to estimate changes in fertility outcomes associated with
age-specific program exposure. Controlling for cohort and birth area fixed effects as well
21

Gertler and Molyneaux (1994) show that factors associated with economic development drove reductions
in fertility primarily through increased demand for modern contraceptives, noting the role of family
planning programs in allowing couples to achieve demand-driven reductions in their desired fertility.

12

as area-specific time trends, he finds that the presence of family planning services
explains about 6-7% of Colombia’s fertility decline over this period (postponing first
births and reducing completed fertility by approximately 0.25-0.33 children). 22
Three studies by Angeles, Guilkey, and Mroz also use spatial and temporal
variation in program exposure to estimate long-run effects on cumulative fertility. In
Tanzania and Peru, the authors use random effects models to estimate the relationship
between community-level program placement and individual birth hazards over two
decades. They find 25-35% reductions in children ever born in Peru (Angeles et al.,
2005a) and 10-20% reductions in Tanzania, reporting that half of these effects is linked to
program exposure during adolescence (Angeles et al., 1998). In Indonesia, the authors
model both indirect and direct pathways through which family planning might influence a
woman’s lifetime fertility. Jointly estimating equations for educational attainment,
marriage, and fertility, they find that the long term presence of family planning programs
is associated with a 20% reduction in completed fertility (or about one child) (Angeles et
al., 2005b).
Another set of studies examines the role of family planning in Iran’s striking
fertility decline during the 1980s and 1990s (as Iran’s total fertility rate declined from
over 7 births per woman to about 2 (Hashemi and Salehi-Isfahani, 2013). Family
planning was banned at the time of the Islamic Revolution, but in 1989, Iran abruptly
legalized modern contraceptives and launched family planning programs through its
large, pre-existing cadre of community health workers (Behvarz). Salehi-Isfahani (2010)
combine data from the Iranian Ministry of Health with population census records from
22

These effect sizes are similar to the reductions of 0.1-0.33 children ever born reported by Angeles and
coauthors, who study of family planning programs in 11 African, Asian, and Latin American countries
(Angeles et al., 2001).

13

1986 and 1996; using a difference-in-difference approach to study variation in the timing
and location of community health worker activity, they find a 4% decline in the child to
woman ratio associated with program activity, explaining 8-20% of the decline during the
study period. Analyzing age-specific program exposure among cohorts of women in the
2006 Iranian census, Modrek and Ghobadi (2011) find an 18% reduction in children ever
born among women first exposed to family planning between ages 20 and 34 as well as a
28% reduction among women first exposed between ages 15 and 19. Using a similar
approach, Hashemi and Salehi-Isfahani (2013) report that the presence of a program was
associated with a 5-7% increase in birth spacing.
Additionally, a recent group of studies examines the short-run consequences of
unanticipated ‘shocks’ to family planning programs. We note that the interpretation of
these papers’ estimates is complex because longer-term fertility behavior (which may
offset the consequences of short-lived shocks) is not observed. In Eastern Europe, where
abortion was historically the predominant form of fertility regulation, many countries
limited or banned abortion during the 1980s and 1990s. 23 Examining the abrupt end of
Romania’s ban on abortion and family planning in 1989, Pop-Eleches (2010) uses survey
data on births among reproductive age women two years before and after the end of the
ban to employ a single difference approach (akin to a regression discontinuity design).
The author finds that lifting the ban was associated with a 30% decline in fertility – and
conducting simulations using his estimates, he suggests that the cumulative effect of the
abortion ban was an increase of approximately 0.5 children (a 25% increase) among
women who spent all of their reproductive years under the ban (Pop-Eleches, 2010).

23

Levine and Staiger (2004) conduct a cross-country study of these abortion policy changes, finding that on
average, restrictive policies led to a 17% higher birth rate (compared to a liberal policy).

14

Studying disruptions in the supply of free condoms to Filipino provinces due to
supply chain irregularities, Salas (2013) finds that a 6% reduction in contraceptive supply
is associated with a 15% increase in short-run birth hazard. Similarly, analyzing
fluctuations in contraceptive supply in Ghana due to the instatement and repeal of the
United States’ ‘Mexico City Policy,’ Jones (2013) finds that the policy led to a 10%
increase in pregnancies (or a 0.2 percentage point increase in the monthly pregnancy
hazard) among rural women and women with little education. 24
Finally, several studies examine the consequences of population policy in China.
Although there is substantial heterogeneity across all family planning programs included
in this review, we emphasize that these studies are distinct in estimating program effects
associated with compulsory (rather than voluntary) programs. 25 One recent unpublished
paper uses retrospective fertility history records from China’s “2-per-thousand” fertility
survey to study the staggered introduction of China’s early family planning campaign
(Wan Xi Shao, or “Later, Longer, Fewer”) across provinces during the 1970s (Babiarz et
al., 2016). In an event study framework, the authors find large reductions in third and
higher parity births associated with the campaign; for example, birth hazards at third and
fourth parity declined by 35% and 76%, respectively. Given the smaller (and declining)
share of births occurring at higher parities, however, these estimates explain 22-32% of
China’s Total Fertility Rate decline during the 1970s.
Studying the famous One-Child policy (enacted around 1980) that followed the
Wan Xi Shao campaign, Li et al. (2005) uses variation in the legal birth limits across
24

Although complete data is not available for all study years, Jones also reports that the policy was
associated with an immediate decline of roughly 40% in family planning funding and a 13% reduction in
contraceptive supply.
25
Accounts of abuse under China’s compulsory fertility policy, while anecdotal, report cases of forced or
coerced abortions and sterilizations, threats of violence and excessive fines.

15

ethnic groups to estimate the changes in the probability of having a second birth
associated with the policy. With data from the 1% sample of the 1990 Chinese Population
Census, the authors find an 11% reduction in the probability of a second birth - a decline
of about 13% relative to 1982. 26
4. Family Planning Programs and Health and Socio-Economic Outcomes among Women
and Children
Beyond their impact on fertility, family planning programs may also have
important health and socioeconomic benefits for mothers and their children (Canning and
Schultz, 2012). Intuitively, these benefits could stem from changes in the number,
timing, and spacing of births or from changes in sibship size and composition – but
isolating the specific mechanisms or pathways through which they are produced is often
not possible. Studying these benefits is also difficult because some do not emerge for
many years, requiring long study periods. 27
Benefits among Mothers
Given high maternal mortality rates in many low- and middle-income countries,
reductions in the number of births may have an important effect on maternal mortality
rates simply by reducing the number of times women are at risk of maternity-related
death (Rahman and Menken, 2012). However, if family planning programs also
selectively reduce the relative incidence of riskier pregnancies (such as higher parity

26

Age-specific effects among 30-34 year olds are as high as 22% in the general population and over 30% in
urban areas (a 25% decline relative to 1982) (Li et al. 2005).
27
A large literature in development economics studies the relationship between these dimensions of fertility
and the well-being of women and children (see Schultz, 2007a and Schultz, 2007b). We restrict our review
to direct analyses of family planning programs. See the accompanying electronic appendix (at the time of
writing this review, available at https://people.stanford.edu/ngmiller/) for details.

16

births), they may also reduce the maternal mortality ratio (Cleland et al., 2012, Jain,
2011, Winikoff and Sullivan, 1987). 28
Few studies analyze the direct relationship between family planning programs and
maternal mortality. One exception is an early study of the Matlab experiment reporting
that the maternal mortality rate in treatment areas declined to about half of the rate in
control areas between 1976 and 1985 (Koenig et al., 1988). This effect was attributed to
relative reductions in fertility and a corresponding decline in lifetime exposure to
maternal mortality risk. However, there was no change in the maternal mortality ratio
(and hence no change in average mortality risk conditional on pregnancy).
Among surviving women, long-term studies of the Matlab experiment find
anthropometric gains associated with the treatment. 29 Canning and Schultz (2012) report
that in 1996, reproductive-age women in treatment areas had a 1 kg/m2 higher Body Mass
Index (BMI) than women in control areas. Adjusting for characteristics of women and
their households, Joshi and Schultz (2013) find that this BMI advantage among women in
treatment villages is only present at older ages. However, they also find that women in
treatment areas are roughly 2kg heavier on average and are less likely to be underweight
(defined as BMI<18 kg/m2). 30 (Al, 2012) In interpreting these findings, we emphasize

28

The maternal mortality rate measures the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 women of reproductiveage; the maternal mortality ratio measures the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. The
medical literature suggests that nulliparous and grand multiparous births (first births and births of parity
higher than four) may be riskier (Bai et al. 2002, Ezegwui et al., 2013, for example). The evidence on
elevated risk associated with ‘unwanted’ births, births to younger mothers, and short interval births is more
tenuous (see Tsui et al. (2010), DaVanzo, Razzaque et al. (2005), and Conde-Agudelo and Belizan (2000)
for example).
29
Selective mortality may bias anthropometric estimates downwards if marginal survivors are weaker (or
have lower anthropometric indicators) than the average woman.
30
These BMI and weight differences could potentially imply differences in future survival; studying
Matlab, Menken, Duffy et al. (2003) report that a one point increase in BMI is associated with a 17%
decline in mortality hazard.

17

that improvements in women’s health could be due to bundling of women’s health
services into the family planning ‘treatment’ beginning in 1982.
By allowing women greater control over the number, timing, and spacing of
births, family planning programs may also influence their educational attainment, labor
force participation, and lifetime earnings (Greene and Merrick, 2005). 31 Studying
Colombia, Miller (2010) reports that the presence of a local family planning program
early in women’s reproductive years is associated with a 1% increase in educational
attainment (0.05 years of schooling) and a 4-7% increase in the likelihood formal sector
employment (1-2 percentage points). 32 Using simulations, Angeles and coauthors
(2005b) report larger effects on educational attainment in Indonesia, suggesting that
lifetime exposure to family planning programs is associated with gains of 25-27% (or an
additional 1.3 years of schooling).
Benefits among Children
Family planning programs could also influence children’s health and socioeconomic outcomes through a variety of mechanisms (through changes in birth spacing
and sibship size or through gains in women’s educational attainment, for example).
Although a large literature links various dimensions of fertility decline to improved child
welfare, including increases in parental investments per child (and child ‘quality’)
(DaVanzo et al., 2005, Li et al., 2008, Molyneaux and Gertler, 2000, Rosenzweig and
Wolpin, 1980, Rutstein, 2005), few studies focus directly on family planning programs.
31

Although not well-developed theoretically or empirically, some authors suggest that family planning
programs could potentially influence women’s bargaining power within households and the status of
women generally. For example, one study finds that home visits by family planning service providers may
enhance women’s social standing (Phillips and Hossain, 2003).
32
Although beyond the scope of this review, studies of the United States mid-century find a relationship
between the availability of modern contraceptives and both women’s educational attainment and earnings
(Goldin and Katz, 2002, Bailey, 2006, Bailey et al., 2012).

18

Studying child survival, two experiments find that family planning programs are
associated with substantial reductions in child mortality under the age of five (decreases
between 30% and 50%) (Joshi and Schultz, 2007, Joshi and Schultz, 2013, Phillips et al.,
2006). However, we emphasize that these programs bundled family planning services
together with other health services – and in particular, ones targeting infant and child
health, making it difficult to isolate the contribution of family planning services per se. 33
Focusing more directly on family planning services alone, Miller (2010) and Portner,
Beegle, and Christiaensen (2011) report no significant program effects on infant and

child mortality.

Several other studies examine anthropometric measures of child health. 34 Joshi
and Schultz (2007) report that girls in Matlab’s treatment villages have BMI z-scores that
are 0.4 standard deviations larger on average than those of their control village
counterparts. Studying children in the Philippines, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1986) use
longitudinal data to estimate within-child changes in anthropometrics associated with the
share of a child’s life for which family planning services were available (accounting for
both regional and family characteristics potentially correlated with birth spacing). They
find that lifetime exposure to family planning is associated with a 7% gain in child height
and a 12% gain in child weight.
Beyond child health, family planning may benefit children in other ways
throughout their lifetime, too – by increasing parents’ investments in their education, for
example (Becker, 1991). Evidence on the direct relationship between family planning
33

Some research suggests that much of the reduction in child mortality in both Bangladesh and Ghana may
have been due to child health and vaccinations programs (Koenig et al., 1990, Phillips et al., 2006).
34
As with maternal anthropometrics, mortality effects of family planning may bias anthropometric
estimates downwards if marginal survivors are weaker (or have lower anthropometric indicators) than the
average child.

19

programs and children’s educational attainment is again thin, however, and limited to
long-term studies of the Matlab experiment. Foster and Roy (1997) report that the
Matlab treatment increased both girls’ and boys’ years of completed schooling (by 6-15%
and 5-12%, respectively), an effect they link to reductions in sibship size. Joshi and
Schultz (2007) find that relative to their peers in control villages, gains in educational
attainment of 0.5 standard deviations persisted among boys (but not girls) in treatment
villages.
Finally, a study of Romania’s 1966 ban of abortion and family planning services
compares cohorts born just after the ban (which include additional ‘unwanted’ children)
with cohorts born just before it (Pop-Eleches, 2006). Controlling for family
characteristics, children born after the ban were less likely to complete either high school
or college (by 1.7% and 1.4%, respectively) and were instead 2.1% more likely to
complete a lower-return vocational degree. The paper attributes these changes in
educational outcomes not only to the ‘wantedness’ of children, but also to crowding in
schools among post-ban birth cohorts (the role of sibship size is not explicitly studied)
(Pop-Eleches, 2006).

5. Conclusion
This chapter reviews empirical studies of family planning programs in developing
countries, focusing on fertility as well as on the health and socio-economic welfare of
women and children. Because the family planning literature is vast, we used an informal
approach akin to the ‘systematic review’ methodology in the biomedical sciences in an
effort both to be comprehensive and to explicitly define our focus.

20

Pooling across studies, we propose several generalizations about family planning
program effects. First, we find that program effects on fertility vary substantially,
ranging between 5% and 35% fewer children ever born and 5-7% longer birth intervals
(see Table 1 for a summary). Estimates from the famous Matlab experiment generally
fall in the upper-end of this range – but we note that the experimental intervention was
likely too intensive to be replicated at scale, limiting the generalizability of these results
(and also presumably reflecting reductions attributable to other health services bundled
into the experimental treatment). Findings from compulsory programs in China also fall
into the upper-end of this range and may reflect an upper-bound on what can be achieved
through real-world programs at scale. Long-term studies of voluntary real-world
programs yield more modest effect sizes, implying that in practice, family planning
programs may explain only about 4-20% of fertility decline in real-world settings (with
three studies finding no effects). Although not all major family planning programs have
been studied with adequate rigor, we believe that based on existing evidence, it is
difficult to argue that family planning programs alone explain a large share of the fertility
decline in developing countries over the past half-century. Demand-side factors may
instead play a more important role (Gertler and Molyneaux, 1994, Pritchett, 1994a)
Second, we find evidence that family planning programs may have quantitatively
modest – but practically meaningful – effects on the socio-economic welfare of
individuals and families. We believe that existing evidence on the relationship between
family planning programs and maternal and child health outcomes is insufficient to draw
firm conclusions. However, long-term studies of socio-economic outcomes suggest that
family planning programs may raise educational attainment among women (by 1%-30%)

21

and among children (by 5-18%). Although socio-economic effects in the lower end of
these ranges appear small, we note that they are not dissimilar in magnitude to gains
associated with programs explicitly aiming to boost educational attainment.
Finally, we conclude by highlighting the considerable heterogeneity in the
magnitude of program effects in the family planning literature. Although explaining
variation in effect sizes is beyond the scope of this review, more research on the
importance of programmatic attributes, contextual factors, and local institutions is
needed. Explaining this variation is important for the design of better family planning
programs and policies.

22

23

ANGELES, GUSTAVO, DIETRICH, JASON, GUILKEY, DAVID K., MANCINI, DOMINIC,
MROZ, THOMAS, TSUI, AMY & ZHANG, FENG YU 2001. A meta-analysis of the
impact of family planning programs on fertility preferences, contraceptive
method choice and fertility. . Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center.

ANGELES, GUSTAVO, GUILKEY, DAVID K. & MROZ, THOMAS A. 1998. Purposive
program placement and the estimation of family planning program effects in
Tanzania. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 93, 884-899.
ANGELES, GUSTAVO, GUILKEY, DAVID K. & MROZ, THOMAS A. 2005a. The
determinants of fertility in rural Peru: Program effects in the early years of
the national family planning program. Journal of Population Economics, 18,
367-389.

ANGELES, GUSTAVO, GUILKEY, DAVID K. & MROZ, THOMAS A. 2005b. The effects of
education and family planning programs on fertility in Indonesia. Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 54, 165-201.

ANGELES, LUIS 2010. Demographic transitions: Analyzing the effects of mortality on
fertlity. Journal of Population Economics, 23, 99-120.
ANGRIST, JOSHUA D. & KRUEGER, ALAN B. 1991. Does Compulsory School
Attendance Affect Schooling and Earnings. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106, 979-1014.

ASHRAF, NAVA, FIELD, ERICA & LEE, JEAN 2014. Household bargaining and excess
fertility: an experimental study in Zambia. American Economic Review, 104,
2210-37.
BAI, JUN, WONG, FELIX W. S., BAUMAN, ADRIAN & MOHSIN, MOHAMMED 2002.
Parity and Pregnancy Outcomes. American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 186, 274-278.

BAILEY, MARTHA J. 2006. More power to the pill: The impact of contraceptive
freedom on women's life cycle labor supply. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
121, 289-320.

24

BAILEY, MARTHA J., HERSHBEIN, BRAD & MILLER, AMALIA R. 2012. The Opt-In
Revolution? Contraception and the Gender Gap in Wages. American Economic
Journal-Applied Economics, 4, 225-254.

BECKER, GARY S. 1960. An economic analysis of fertility. In: NBER (ed.)
Demographic and economic change in developed countries. New York:
Columbia University Press.

BECKER, GARY S. 1991. A treatise on the family, Cambridge, Harvard University
Press

BINKA, FRED N., NAZZAR, ALEX & PHILLIPS, JAMES F. 1995. The Navrongo
Community-Health and Family-Planning Project. Studies in Family Planning,
26, 121-139.
BIRDSALL, NANCY, KELLEY, ALLEN C. & SINDING, STEVEN W. (eds.) 2001.
Population Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty in
the Developing World, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

BLOOM, DAVID E. & CANNING, DAVID 2009. Population, poverty reduction, and the
Cairo agenda. In: REICHENBACH, L. & ROSEMAN, M. J. (eds.) Reproductive
Health and Human Rights: The Way Forward. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press
BLOOM, DAVID E., CANNING, DAVID & SEVILLA, JAYPEE 2003. The demographic
dividend: A new perspective on the economic consequences of population
change, Santa Monica, CA, RAND.

BLOOM, DAVID E. & WILLIAMSON, JEFFREY G. 1998. Demographic transition and
economic miracles in emerging Asia. World Bank Economic Review, 12, 419455.

BONGAARTS, JOHN 1994. The Impact of Population Policies - Comment. Population
and Development Review, 20, 616-620.

BONGAARTS, JOHN, CLELAND, JOHN, TOWNSEND, JOHN W., BERTRAND, JANE T. &
DAS GUPTA, MONICA 2012. Family Planning Programs for the 21st Century,
New York, Population Council
25

BONGAARTS, JOHN, MAULDIN, W. PARKER & PHILLIPS, JAMES F. 1990. The
Demographic Impact of Family Planning Programs. Studies in Family
Planning, 21, 299-310.

BOSERUP, ESTER 1965. The conditions of agricultural growth: The ecoomics of
agrarian change under population pressure, London, Allen & Unwin.

BRADLEY, SARAH E. K. & CASTERLINE, JOHN B 2014. Understanding Unmet Need:
History, Theory and Measurment. Studies in Family Planning, 45, 123-150.

BRADLEY, SARAH E. K., CROFT, TREVOR N. , FISHEL, JOY D. & WESTOFF, CHARLES
F. 2012. Revising Unmet Need for Family Planning. Calverton, MD: Measure
DHS
BREIEROVA, LUCIA & DUFLO, ESTHER 2004. The impact of education on fertility
and child mortality: Do fathers really matter less than mothers? . NBER
Working Paper 10513. Cambridge: National bureau of Economic Research.

BROWN, JOHN C. & GUINNANE, TIMOTHY 2003. Two statistical problems in the
Princeton project on the European fertility transition. . Yale University:
Economic Growth Center.
CALDWELL, JOHN C. 1976. Toward a Restatement of Demographic Transition
Theory. Population and Development Review, 2, 321-366.
CANNING, DAVID & SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2012. The economic consequences of
reproductive health and family planning. Lancet, 380, 165-171.

CASTERLINE, JOHN B. & SINDING, STEVEN W. 2000. Unmet need for family planning
in developing countries and implications for population policy. Population
and Development Review, 26, 691-+.
CHOWDHURY, MAHBUB ELAHI, AHMED, ANISUDDIN, KALIM, NAHID & KOBLINSKY,
MARGE 2009. Causes of Maternal Mortality Decline in Matlab, Bangladesh.
Journal of Health Population and Nutrition, 27, 108-123.
CLELAND, JOHN 2001. The Effects of Improved Survival on Fertility: A
Reassessment. Population and Development Review, 27, Supp.
26

CLELAND, JOHN, BERNSTEIN, STAN, EZEH, ALEX, FAUNDES, ANIBAL, GLASIER,
ANNA & INNIS, JOLENE 2006. Family planning: the unfinished agenda.
Lancet, 368, 1810-1827.

CLELAND, JOHN, CONDE-AGUDELO, AGUSTIN, PETERSON, HERBERT, ROSS, JOHN
& TSUI, AMY 2012. Contraception and health. Lancet, 380, 149-156.

CLELAND, JOHN & WILSON, CHRISTOPHER 1987. Demand theories of the fertility
transition: an iconoclastic view. Population Studies: A Journal of Demography,
41, 5-30.
COALE, ANSLEY J. & HOOVER, EDGAR M 1959. Population growth and economic
development in low-income countries. American Economic Review, 49, 436438.

COALE, ANSLEY J. & WATKINS, SUSAN COTTS (eds.) 1986. The decline of fertility in
Europe: The revised proceedings of a conference on the Princeton European
Fertility Project, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

COMSTOCK, ANTHONY 1873. An Act for the Suppression of Trade in, and Circulation
of, Obscene Literature and Articles of Immoral Use. ch. 258, § 2, 17 Stat. 599.
42nd United States Congress, 3rd Session.
CONDE-AGUDELO, AGUSTIN & BELIZAN, JOSE M. 2000. Maternal morbidity and
mortality associated with interpregnancy interval: cross sectional study.
British Medical Journal, 321, 1255-1259.

DAVANZO, JULIE, RAZZAQUE, ABDUR, RAHMAN, MAKHLISUR, HALE, LAUREN,
AHMED, KAPIL, KAHN, MEHRAB A., MUSTAFA, GOLAM & GAUSIA, KANIZ
2005. The effects of birth spacing on infant and child mortality, pregnancy
outcomes and maternal morbidity and mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh.
RAND Working Paper. Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.

DAVIS, KINGSLEY 1967. Population policy: will current programs succeed? . Science,
158, 730-739.
DEBPUUR, CORNELIUS, PHILLIPS, JAMES E., JACKSON, ELIZABETH F., NAZZAR,
ALEX, NGOM, PIERRE & BINKA, FRED N. 2002. The impact of the Navrongo
27

project on contraceptive knowledge and use, reproductive preferences, and
fertility. Studies in Family Planning, 33, 141-164.

DESAI, JAIKISHAN & TAROZZI, ALESSANDRO 2011. Microcredit, Family Planning
Programs, and Contraceptive Behavior: Evidence From a Field Experiment in
Ethiopia. Demography, 48, 749-782.
EASTERLIN, RICHARD 1968. Population, labor force, and long swings in economic
growth: The American experience, NBER Books.

EASTERLIN, RICHARD 1975. An Economic Framework for Fertility Analysis. Studies
in Family Planning, 6, 54-63.
EZEGWUI, HYGINUS, ONOH, ROBINSON C., IKEAKO, LAWRENCE, ONYEBUCHI,
AZUBIKE K., UMEORA, OUJ, EZEONU, PAUL O. & IBEKWE, PERPETUS 2013.
Investigating maternal mortality in a public teaching hospital, abakaliki,
ebonyi state, Nigeria. Ann Med Health Sci Res, 3, 75-80.

FINKLE, JOHN L. & CRANE, BARBARA B. 1985. Ideology and Politics at Mexico-City the United-States at the 1984 International-Conference on Population.
Population and Development Review, 11, 1-28.

FOSTER, ANDREW & ROY, NIKHIL 1997. The dynamics of education and fertility:
Evidence from a family planning experiment.

GALOR, ODED & WEIL, DAVID N. 2000. Population, technology, and growth: From
Malthusian stagnation to the demographic transition and beyond. American
Economic Review, 90, 806-828.

GERTLER, PAUL J. & MOLYNEAUX, JOHN W. 1994. How Economic-Development and
Family-Planning Programs Combined to Reduce Indonesian Fertility.
Demography, 31, 33-63.
GERTLER, PAUL, SHAH, MANISHA & BERTOZZI, STEFANO M. 2005. Risky business:
The market for unprotected commercial sex. Journal of Political Economy,
113, 518-550.

28

GLASIER, ANNA, GULMEZOGLU, A. METIN, SCHMID, GEORGE P., MORENO, CLAUDIA
G. & VAN LOOK, PAUL FA. 2006. Sexual and reproductive health: a matter of
life and death. Lancet, 368, 1595-1607.
GOLDIN, CLAUDIA & KATZ, LAWRENCE F. 2002. The power of the pill: Oral
contraceptives and women's career and marriage decisions. Journal of
Political Economy, 110, 730-770.

GREENE, MARGARET E. & MERRICK, THOMAS 2005. Poverty reduction: does
reproductive health matter? . Health, nutrition and population discussion
paper. Washington DC: The World Bank.

GUNTHER, ISABEL & HARTTGEN, KENNETH 2013. Desired Fertility and Children
Born across Time and Space.

HASHEMI, ALI & SALEHI-ISFAHANI, DJAVAD 2013. From Health Service Delivery to
Family Planning: The Changing Impact of Health Clinics on Fertility in Rural
Iran. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 61, 281-309.
HESKETH, THERESE & ZHU, WEI XING 1997. Health in China - The one child family
policy: The good, the bad, and the ugly. BMJ, 314, 1685-1687.
JAIN, ANRUDH K. 2011. Measuring the Effect of Fertility Decline on the Maternal
Mortality Ratio. Studies in Family Planning, 42, 247-260.

JAIN, ANRUDH K. & ROSS, JOHN A. 2012. Fertility differences among developing
countries: are they still related to family planning program efforts and social
settings? Int Perspect Sex Reprod Health, 38, 15-22.
JAYACHANDRAN, SEEMA & LLERAS-MUNEY, ADRIANA 2009. Life Expectancy and
Human Capital Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 349-397.

JONES, KELLY M. 2013. Contraceptive supply and fertility outcomes: Evidence from
Ghana. Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

JOSHI, SHAREEN & SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2007. Family planning as an investment in
development: evaluation of a program's consequences in Matlab, Bangladesh.
Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper.
29

JOSHI, SHAREEN & SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2013. Family Planning and Women's and
Children's Health: Long-Term Consequences of an Outreach Program in
Matlab, Bangladesh. Demography, 50, 149-180.

KALEMLI-OZCAN, SEBNEM 2002. Does the mortality decline promote economic
growth? Journal of Economic Growth, 7, 411-439.

KELLEY, ALLEN C. 2003. The Population Debate in Historical Perspective:
Revisionism Revised. In: BIRDSALL, N., KELLEY, A. C. & SINDING, S. W. (eds.)
Population Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty in
the Developing World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

KNOWLES, JAMES C., AKIN, JOHN S. & GUILKEY, DAVID K. 1994. The Impact of
Population Policies: Comment. Population and Development Review, 20, 611615.
KOENIG, MICHAEL A, FAUVEAU, VINCENT, CHOWDHURY, AI, CHAKRABORTY,
JYOTSNAMOY & KHAN, MEHRAB ALI 1988. Maternal mortality in Matlab,
Bangladesh: 1976-85. Studies in Family Planning, 19, 69-80.

KOENIG, MICHAEL A, KHAN, MUBARAK A., WOJTYNIAK, BOGDAN, CLEMENS, JOHN
D., CHAKRABORTY, JYOTSNAMOY, FAUVEAU, VINCENT, PHILLIPS, JAMES E.,
AKBAR, JALALUDDIN & BARUA, U. S. 1990. Impact of Measles Vaccintaion on
Childhood Mortality in Rural Bangladesh. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 68, 441-447.
KOENIG, MICHAEL A., ROB, UBAIDUR, KHAN, MEHRAB A., CHAKRABORTY,
JYOTSNAMOY & FAUVEAU, VINCENT 1992. Contraceptive Use in Matlab,
Bangladesh in 1990 - Levels, Trends, and Explanations. Studies in Family
Planning, 23, 352-364.

KOHLER, HANS-PETER 2012. Copenhagen Consensus 2012: Challenge Paper on
"Population Growth". Population Studies Center Working Paper Series, PSC 1203 Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Scholarly Commons.
KOSGEI, ROSE J., LUBANO, KIZITO M., SHEN, CHANGYU Y., WOOLS-KALOUSTIAN,
KARA K., MUSICK, BEVERLY S., SIIKA, AABRAHAM M., MABEYA, HILLARY,
CARTER, E. JANE, MWANGI, ANN & KIARIE, JAMES 2011. Impact of
Integrated Family Planning and HIV Care Services on Contraceptive Use and
30

Pregnancy Outcomes: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Jaids-Journal of Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 58, E121-E126.

LAM, DAVID 2011. How the world survived the population bomb: Lessons from 50
years of extraordinary demographic history. Demography, 48, 1231-1262.

LAVY, VICTOR & ZABLOTSKY, ALEXANDER 2011. Mother's schooling and fertility
under low female labor force participation: Evidence from a natural
experiment. NBER Working Paper NO. 16856. Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

LEVINE, PHILLIP B. & STAIGER, DOUGLAS 2004. Abortion policy and fertility
outcomes: The Eastern European experience. Journal of Law & Economics, 47,
223-243.
LI, HONGBIN, ZHANG, JUNSEN & ZHU, YI 2008. The Quantity-Quality Trade-Off of
children in a Developing Country: Identificaiton Using Chinese Twins.
Demography, 45, 223-243.

LI, HONGBIN, ZHANG, JUNSEN & ZHU, YI 2005. The effect of the One-Child policy on
fertility in China: Identification based on the differences-in-differences. Hong
Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong, Department of Economics Discussion
Paper Number 19.
LUNDBERG, SHELLY & POLLAK, ROBERT A. 1996. Bargaining and distribution in
marriage. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, 139-158.

MACUNOVICH, DIANE 1998. Fertility and the Easterlin Hypothesis: An Assessment
of the Literature. Journal of Population Economics, 11, 53-111.

MASON, KAREN O. 1997. Explaining fertility transitions. Demography, 34, 443-454.

MENKEN, JANE, DUFFY, LINDA & KUHN, RANDALL 2003. Childbearing and women's
survival: New evidence from rural Bangladesh. Population and Development
Review, 29, 405-+.
MILLER, GRANT 2010. Y Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family
Planning in Colombia*. Economic Journal, 120, 709-736.
31

MODREK, SEPIDEH & GHOBADI, NEGAR 2011. The Expansion of Health Houses and
Fertility Outcomes in Rural Iran. Studies in Family Planning, 42, 137-146.

MOLYNEAUX, JOHN W. & GERTLER, PAUL J. 2000. The impact of targeted family
planning programs in Indonesia. Population and Development Review, 26, 6185.
MUHURI, PRADIP K 1995. Health programs, maternal education, and differential
child mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh. Population and Development Review,
813-834.

NAS 1986. Working Group on Population Growth and Economic Development.
Population growth and economic development: policy questions. Washington
DC: National Academies Press.
PALLONI, ALBERTO & RAFALIMANANA, HANTAMALA 1999. The effects of infant
mortality on fertility revisited: New evidence from Latin America.
Demography, 36, 41-58.

PHILLIPS, JAMES F, STINSON, WAYNE S, BHATIA, SHUSHUM, RAHMAN, MAKHLISUR
& CHAKRABORTY, JYOTSNAMOY 1982. The Demographic Impact of the
Family Planning--Health Services Project in Matlab, Bangladesh. Studies in
Family Planning, 131-140.
PHILLIPS, JAMES F., BAWAH, AYAGA A. & BINKA, FRED N. 2006. Accelerating
reproductive and child health programme impact with community-based
services: the Navrongo experiment in Ghana. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 84, 949-955.

PHILLIPS, JAMES F. & HOSSAIN, MIAN B. 2003. The impact of household delivery of
family planning services on women's status in Bangladesh. International
Family Planning Perspectives, 29, 138-145.

PHILLIPS, JAMES F., JACKSON, ELIZABETH F., BAWAH, AYAGA A., MACLEOD, BRUCE,
ADONGO, PHILIP, BAYNES, COLIN & WILLIAMS, JOHN 2012. The Long-Term
Fertility Impact of the Navrongo Project in Northern Ghana. Studies in Family
Planning, 43, 175-190.
32

PITT, MARK M., ROSENZWEIG, MARK R. & GIBBONS, DONNA M. 1993. The
Determinants and Consequences of the Placement of Government Programs
in Indonesia. World Bank Economic Review, 7, 319-348.
POP-ELECHES, CRISTIAN 2006. The impact of an abortion ban on socioeconomic
outcomes of children: Evidence from Romania. Journal of Political Economy,
114, 744-773.
POP-ELECHES, CRISTIAN 2010. The Supply of Birth Control Methods, Education,
and Fertility Evidence from Romania. Journal of Human Resources, 45, 971997.

PORTNER, CLAUS C., BEEGLE, KATHLEEN & CHRISTIAENSEN, LUC 2011. Family
planning and fertility: estimating program effects using cross-sectional data.
Policy Research Working Paper - World Bank.
PRITCHETT, LANT H. 1994a. Desired Fertility and the Impact of Population Policies.
Population and Development Review, 20, 1-55.
PRITCHETT, LANT H. 1994b. The Impact of Population Policies: Reply. Population
and Development Review, 20, 621-630.
PRITCHETT, LANT H. 1996. No Need for Unmet Need Hopkins Population Center
Seminar Series. Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health.

RAHMAN, M. OMAR & MENKEN, JANE 2012. Reproductive Health. In: MERSON, M.
H., BLACK, R. E. & MILLES, A. J. (eds.) Global health: diseases, programs,
systems and policies. Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning.

RASUL, IMRAN 2008. Household bargaining over fertility: Theory and evidence from
Malaysia. Journal of Development Economics, 86, 215-241.
ROBEY, BRYANT, RUTSTEIN, SHEA O. & MORRIS, LEO 1993. The Fertility Decline in
Developing-Countries. Scientific American, 269, 60-67.
ROGERS, EVERETT M., VAUGHAN, PETER W., SWALEHE, RAMADHAN M. A., RAO,
NAGESH, SVENKERUD, PEER & SOOD, SURUCHI 1999. Effects of an
entertainment-education radio soap opera on family planning behavior in
Tanzania. Studies in Family Planning, 30, 193-211.
33

ROSENZWEIG, MARK R. & WOLPIN, KENNETH I. 1980. Testing the Quantity-Quality
Fertility Model - Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment. Econometrica, 48,
227-240.
ROSENZWEIG, MARK R. & WOLPIN, KENNETH I. 1986. Evaluating the Effects of
Optimally Distributed Public Programs - Child Health and Family-Planning
Interventions. American Economic Review, 76, 470-482.

RUTSTEIN, SHEA O. 2005. Effects of preceding birth intervals on neonatal, infant
and under-five years mortality and nutritional status in developing
countries: evidence from the demographic and health surveys. International
Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics, 89, S7-S24.
SAH, RAAJ K. 1991. The Effects of Child-Mortality Changes on Fertility Choice and
Parental Welfare. Journal of Political Economy, 99, 582-606.

SALAS, J.M. IAN 2013. Consequences of withdrawal: Free condoms and birth rates in
the Philippines University of California, Irvine.
SALEHI-ISFAHANI, DJAVAD, ABBASI-SHAVAZI, M. JALAL & HOSSEINI-CHAVOSHI,
MEIMANAT 2010. Family Planning and Fertility Decline in Rural Iran: The
Impact of Rural Health Clinics. Health Economics, 19, 159-180.

SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 1985. Changing World Prices, Womens Wages, and the Fertility
Transition - Sweden, 1860-1910. Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1126-1154.
SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 1992. Assessing family planning cost-effectiveness. In: PHILLIPS,
J. E. & ROSS, J. A. (eds.) Family planning programmes and fertility. New York:
Oxford University Press.
SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 1994. Human-Capital, Family-Planning, and Their Effects on
Population-Growth. American Economic Review, 84, 255-260.

SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2007a. Beyond fertility reduction, can family planning programs
promote development? Evidence from a long-term social experiemnt in
Bangladesh - 1977-1996. Development, 1.

SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2007b. Population policies, fertility, women's human capital and
child quality. Handbook of Development Economics, 4, 3249-3303.
34

SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2009. How Does Family Planning Promote Development?
Evidence from a Social Experiment in Matlab, Bangladesh—1977–1996. Yale
University, Economic Growth Center, New Haven, Conn.
SCHULTZ, T. PAUL 2010. Education Investments and Returns In: RODRIK, D. &
ROSENZWEIG, M. (eds.) Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 5.
Oxford: Elsevier.

SIMMONS, GEORGE B., BALK, DEBORAH & FAIZ, KHODEZATUL K. 1991. CostEffectiveness Analysis of Family Planning Programs in Rural Bangladesh:
Evidence from Matlab. Studies in Family Planning, 22, 83-101.
SIMON, JULIAN L. 1981. The ultimate resource, Princeton, Princeton University
Press.
SINDING, STEVEN 2007. The global family planning revolution: Overview and
perspective. In: ROBINSON, W. C. & ROSS, J. A. (eds.) The global family
planning revolution: Three decades of population policeis and programs
Washington DC: The World Bank.

SINHA, NISTHA 2005. Fertility, child work, and schooling consequences of family
planning programs: Evidence from an experiment in rural Bangladesh.
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 54, 97-128.

TSUI, AMY O. 2001. Population policies, family planning programs, and fertility: The
record. Population and Development Review, 27, 184-204.

TSUI, AMY O., MCDONALD-MOSLEY, RAEGAN & BURKE, ANNE E. 2010. Family
Planning and the Burden of Unintended Pregnancies. Epidemiologic Reviews,
32, 152-174.
VOIGTLANDER, NICO & VOTH, HANS-JOACHIM 2013. How the West "Invented"
fertility restriction. American Economic Review, 103, 2227-64.

WESTOFF, CHARLES F. 1988. Is the KAP-Gap real? . Population and Development
Review, 14, 225-232.

WESTOFF, CHARLES F. 2013. The Recent Fertility Transition in Rwanda. Population
and Development Review, 38, 169-178.
35

WINIKOFF, BEVERLY & SULLIVAN, MAUREEN 1987. Assessing the Role of Family
Planning in Reducing Maternal Mortality. Studies in Family Planning, 18, 128143.
WRIGHT, JAMES (ed.) 2015. International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral
Sciences (Second Edition), New York: Elsevier.

Appendix 1: Search Methodology
To identify the universe of relevant studies, we developed explicit search criteria
for three key databases: PubMed, CAB Global Health, SCOPUS, and POPLINE. Search
criteria are detailed below. This initial search returned 9,501 results. We narrowed our
initial results to studies that (1) focused on middle- and low-income countries, (2) that
undertook a micro-level quantitative evaluation of one or more family planning
programs, and (3) that studied at least one fertility, health or socioeconomic outcome
(rather than just contraceptive prevalence, for example). For non-experimental
(observational) studies, we restricted our review to those using commonly-accepted
methodologies for addressing the role of confounding factors and endogenous program
placement/intensity. These include (but are not limited to) conventional panel data
techniques, difference-in-difference estimation, and instrumental variables strategies
using plausibly exogenous instruments.
As we proceeded with our review, we also used a ‘snowball’ method to identify
additional studies not returned by our original search but that otherwise met our inclusion
criteria. We emphasize that our review should not be considered a formal systematic
review. Our specific search criteria for each database are as follows:
SCOPUS
(TITLE-ABS-KEY("family planning" AND "effect" AND "fertility") AND TITLE-ABSKEY(effects)) AND SUBJAREA(mult OR agri OR bioc OR immu OR neur OR phar OR
mult OR medi OR nurs OR vete OR dent OR heal OR mult OR arts OR busi OR deci OR
econ OR psyc OR soci) AND (LIMIT-TO(DOCTYPE, "ar")) AND (LIMITTO(LANGUAGE, "English")) AND (EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "BIOC") OR
EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "PSYC") OR EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "AGRI") OR
EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "ENVI") OR EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "NURS") OR
EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "PHAR") OR EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "EART")) AND
(EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "MULT") OR EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "ARTS") OR
EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "VETE") OR EXCLUDE(SUBJAREA, "MATH")) .
CAB: Global health
(TI=(("family planning" OR contraception OR "planned pregnanc*" OR "reproductive
health program*" OR "birth control" OR abortion OR "abortion ban”)) AND TI=(("birth
intervals" OR "birth spacing" OR "maternal health" OR "maternal mortality" OR "child
health" OR "infant mortality" OR "neonatal mortality" OR educat* OR "labor market"
36

OR education* OR "Population Control" OR "birth rate" OR "fertility rate" OR "excess
fertility" OR "contraceptive use" OR "demand for children" OR "fertility decline" OR
"birth interval" OR impact* OR outcome* OR change* OR analys*)))
(BD=developing countries AND DE=family planning) Language=(English) Research
Areas=( PSYCHOLOGY OR WOMEN S STUDIES OR BUSINESS ECONOMICS OR
DEMOGRAPHY OR SOCIOLOGY OR PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION OR
GOVERNMENT LAW OR SOCIAL SCIENCES OTHER TOPICS OR EDUCATION
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH OR PUBLIC ENVIRONMENTAL OCCUPATIONAL
HEALTH OR COMMUNICATION ) Document Types=( JOURNAL ARTICLE OR
JOURNAL ISSUE OR MISCELLANEOUS OR BOOK CHAPTER OR THESIS OR
BOOK OR BULLETIN OR ANNUAL REPORT )
PUBMED
("Contraception"[mesh] OR "Family Planning Services"[mesh] OR "reproductive health
services"[mesh:noexp] OR "Family planning"[ti] OR contraception[ti] OR "reproductive
health programs"[tiab] OR "reproductive health program"[tiab]) AND ("Models,
theoretical" OR "Statistics as topic" OR "Utilization"[sh] OR "Predictive Value of
Tests"[mesh] AND "Cross-Sectional Studies"[mesh] OR "Epidemiologic Studies"[mesh]
OR "Motivation"[mesh] OR "Demography"[mesh] OR "Health Services Research" OR
"Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't"[Publication Type] OR "Research Support, U.S.
Government"[Publication Type] OR "Outcome and Process Assessment (Health
Care)"[Mesh:noexp] OR "Outcome Assessment (Health Care)"[Mesh:noexp] OR
Evaluat*[ti] OR Impact*[ti] OR Effect*[ti] OR Outcome*[ti] OR Analys*[ti] OR
Evidenc*[ti]) AND ("Birth Rate"[mesh] OR “educational status” [mesh] OR
“socioeconomic factors” [mesh:noexp] OR "Contraception behavior"[mesh] OR
"Population Control"[mesh] OR "birth rate"[ti] OR "fertility rate"[ti] OR "excess
fertility"[tiab] OR "contraceptive use"[ti] OR "demand for children"[tiab] OR "fertility
decline"[tiab] OR "birth interval"[ti] OR "birth intervals"[ti] OR "birth spacing"[ti] OR
"maternal health"[ti] OR "maternal mortality"[ti] OR "child health"[ti] OR "infant
mortality"[ti] OR "neonatal mortality"[ti] OR educat*[ti] OR "labor market"[tiab]) NOT
("europe"[mesh] OR "australia" [mesh] OR "united states"[mesh] OR "canada"[mesh])
NOT (letter [pt] OR editorial [pt]) NOT ("animals" [mesh] NOT "humans" [mesh]) NOT
("qualitative research" [mesh])
POPLINE
For POPLINE, we made use of hierarchical indexing, searching publications indexed
under subheadings Family Planning Program Evaluation, Evaluation, Program
Effectiveness, Fertility, Program Evaluations, Fertility Changes, Socioeconomic Status,
Maternal Health, Child Health, Birth Spacing, Parity and Mortality, each indexed more
broadly under: Family Planning Programs > Program Monitoring, Evaluations,
Indicators > Developing Countries

37

