                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOW DOES GOVERNMENT BORROWING AFFECT CORPORATE FINANCING
                         AND INVESTMENT?

                                           John Graham
                                          Mark T. Leary
                                         Michael R. Roberts

                                        Working Paper 20581
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20581


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




This paper previously circulated under the title, “Financial Crowding Out.” We thank Andy Abel,
Ravi Bansal, Effi Benmelech, Joao Gomes, Robin Greenwood, Boyan Jovanovich, Stefan Nagel, Josh
Rauh, Ken Singleton, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, Jules Van Binsbergen, Amir Yaron; seminar participants
at Arizona State University, Duke University, London Business School, London School of Economics,
Miami University, Notre Dame, MIT, Ohio State University, Oklahoma University, Stanford University,
University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, University of Colorado, University of Illinois,
University of Minnesota, University of Pennsylvania, University of Utah, Vanderbilt University, Yale
University; and conference participants at the 2010 SITE and 2014 Safe Assets and the Macroeconomy
Conference for helpful comments on this study and a predecessor paper. Nick della Copa, Ian Appel,
and Jessica Jeffers provided excellent research assistance. Roberts gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by John Graham, Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does Government Borrowing Affect Corporate Financing and Investment?
John Graham, Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 20581
October 2014
JEL No. E22,E44,G20,G31,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a novel dataset of accounting and market information that spans most publicly traded nonfinancial
firms over the last century, we show that U.S. federal government debt issuance significantly affects
corporate financial policies and balance sheets through its impact on investors’ portfolio allocations
and the relative pricing of different assets. Government debt is strongly negatively correlated with
corporate debt and investment, but strongly positively correlated with corporate liquidity. These relations
are more pronounced in larger, less risky firms whose debt is a closer substitute for Treasuries. Indeed,
we find a strong negative relation between the BAA-AAA yield spread and government debt, highlighting
the greater sensitivity of more highly rated credit to variation in the supply of Treasuries. The channel
through which this effect operates is investors’ portfolio decisions: domestic intermediaries actively
substitute between lending to the federal government and the nonfinancial corporate sector. The relations
between government debt and corporate policies, as well as the substitution between government and
corporate debt by intermediaries, are stronger after 1970 when foreign demand increased competition
for Treasury securities. In concert, our results suggest that large, financially healthy corporations act
as liquidity providers by supplying relatively safe securities to investors when alternatives are in short
supply, and that this financial strategy influences firms’ capital structures and investment policies.


John Graham                                          Michael R. Roberts
Duke University                                      The Wharton School
Fuqua School of Business                             University of Pennsylvania
100 Fuqua Drive                                      3620 Locust Walk, #2319
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                             and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu                                 mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu

Mark T. Leary
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
leary@wustl.edu
          How does government borrowing affect the corporate sector? A large literature focuses
on the prediction that an increase in government debt reduces investment by increasing the level
of interest rates.1 However, when wealth effects are present in investors’ portfolio decisions and
asset markets are differentiated beyond money and capital, there are several implications for the
corporate sector that have gone largely unexplored. In particular, fluctuations in the supply of
government debt can alter the relative returns on assets in a manner that depends on the relative
substitutability of different assets in investors’ portfolios (Friedman (1978)). The prices of
securities that are closer substitutes for government debt (e.g., corporate debt) react more
strongly to variation in the supply of government debt than the price of securities that are poorer
substitutes (e.g., corporate equity). This price variation can in turn alter firms’ incentives to
invest in different types of assets and issue different types of securities.
          Recent evidence suggests such price effects are present in at least some segments of the
capital markets. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) find that government borrowing
affects Treasury-corporate yield spreads by altering the premium investors are willing to pay to
hold safe and liquid assets. Baker, Greenwood, and Wurgler (2003) highlight predictability in
corporate bond returns that Greenwood, Hansen, and Stein (2010) attribute to macro liquidity
provision by firms in response to fluctuations in the supply of Treasuries across the yield curve.
These findings complement earlier work by Friedman (1986) predicting that government debt
issuances will increase the cost of corporate debt relative to equity. What is unclear at this point
is whether variation in the supply of government debt, and the attendant price effects, ultimately
impacts corporate policies.
          The goal of this study is to shed light on this issue by investigating the relation between
government borrowing and corporate capital structure, liquidity, and investment policies. We do
so using a unique micro dataset containing accounting and market information for U.S.
nonfinancial publicly traded firms over the last century. Our data enable us to exploit both time-
series and cross-sectional variation, the latter of which we show is critical for uncovering and
understanding the link between government debt policy and corporate behavior.
          We begin by documenting a significant and robust negative relation between government
debt and corporate debt for nonfinancial firms in what we refer to as the unregulated sector, i.e.,



1
    See surveys by Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999) and Hubbard (2011).


                                                       1
firms other than railroads, telecommunications, and utilities.2 A one standard deviation increase
in government leverage (the ratio of government debt to total assets of the corporate sector) is
associated with a one third standard deviation decrease in corporate leverage (the ratio of
corporate debt to total assets). We find a similar significant, negative relation between the flow
of government debt and the flow of corporate debt, with the results concentrated in long-term, as
opposed to short-term, debt.
        These findings are robust. The relation between corporate and government debt is
economically and statistically significant controlling for firm characteristics and macroeconomic
factors. Further, the relation is present in both levels and first differences, and between
alternative measures of corporate debt (e.g., total debt, debt net of liquid assets) and government
debt (e.g., debt held by the public, gross debt). Subsample analysis reveals that the negative
relation between government and corporate debt policies is present throughout the last 100 years
and is not attributable to the large government deficit of World War II or fiscal policy during
recessions.
        We find little evidence that firms substitute to alternative sources of funding, consistent
with a large body of theoretical and empirical evidence highlighting segmented financial markets
and corporate hedging demands.3 We find a statistically insignificant relation between
government debt and corporate equity policies; however, we find a significantly positive and
robust association between government debt and firms’ holdings of cash and other short-term
liquid assets, such as Treasuries. Thus, firms reduce their use of debt and increase their holdings
of liquid assets in response to increases in government borrowing.
        These findings are consistent with corporations increasing purchases and reducing sales
of safe and liquid securities – relative to equity – in response to increases in government debt and
the reduction in the price of these securities (Friedman (1986) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2012)). However, this analysis leaves open the possibility that variation in

2
  Our focus on unregulated firms is driven primarily by two considerations. First, the institutional environment and
economic mechanisms responsible for financial and investment policy are fundamentally different across regulated
and unregulated entities – a point emphasized throughout the capital structure literature (e.g., see Frank and Goyal
(2008) for a review). Second, unregulated corporate assets represent the majority of nonfinancial corporate assets
over the last 100 years and over 75% since 1950.
3
  See studies by Rubinstein (1973), Auerbach and King (1983), Bolton and Freixas (2000), Baker, Greenwood, and
Wurgler (2003), Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), Faulkender and Petersen (2005), Leary (2009), and Lemmon and
Roberts (2010) for theoretical and empirical evidence of financial market segmentation. See studies by Acharya,
Almeida, and Campello (2005) and Faulkender and Wang (2006) for evidence of hedging motives and the
distinction between cash and debt.


                                                         2
government debt policy is instead capturing latent or mismeasured corporate investment
opportunities. An alternative interpretation of our findings is that the government issues debt in
bad economic times during which investment opportunities are poor and, consequently, the
demand for credit is low. The observable control variables narrow the scope for this alternative
but do not eliminate it. In an effort to address this ambiguity and shed further light on precisely
how government debt policy is influencing corporate behavior, we test for heterogeneity in the
government debt-corporate policy relations, and investigate the mechanism and channel through
which government debt affects corporate policies.
       We find that the debt and leverage policies of larger, more credit-worthy firms are more
sensitive to variation in government debt than are the policies of smaller, less creditworthy firms
whose debt is a more distant substitute for Treasuries. Consistent with government debt
influencing corporate policy, these findings are also more difficult to reconcile with the
alternative of mismeasured investment opportunities because larger, more creditworthy firms
exhibit financial and investment policies that are less pro-cyclical (Korajczyk and Levy (2003),
Kashyap, Lamont and Stein (1994)). A useful by-product of this analysis is that it enables us to
gauge the potential biases in our aggregate results from omitted variables by considering the
differential effects of competing hypotheses. Our cross-sectional results reinforce our findings in
the aggregate.
       Building on the cross-sectional heterogeneity, we provide additional evidence of the price
mechanism behind our results. Specifically, we find a robust and statistically significantly
negative relation between the BAA-AAA corporate bond spread and the government debt-to-
GDP (and debt-to-asset) ratio. A one-percentage point increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio is
associated with a 0.40% decrease in spread. This result not only reinforces the greater sensitivity
of corporate policies to government debt among more credit-worthy firms, it also casts further
doubt on the alternative hypothesis that our findings are driven by an omitted variable. If periods
of high government indebtedness were proxies for bad economic times and poor investment
opportunities, we would expect credit spreads to widen, not contract (Gilchrist and Zakrajsek
(2010)).
       To understand the channels through which government debt policy and corporate
behavior are related, we examine the response of investors’ portfolios to fluctuations in the
supply of Treasuries. Domestic financial intermediaries – commercial banks, insurance



                                                3
companies, and state and local pension funds – are responsible for a significant portion of
corporate lending. For each of these intermediaries, we find a strong negative association
between government debt issuance and the fraction of assets allocated to corporate lending (e.g.,
loans and bonds): intermediaries’ corporate loan-to-asset ratios fall between four and twelve
basis points for each percentage point increase in government debt-to-assets. This finding is in
contrast to the positive, but statistically weak, association between government debt and the
fractions of bank and insurance company assets invested in agency bonds. Thus, financial
intermediaries respond to increased government borrowing by increasing their holdings of
government debt, marginally increasing their holdings of agency debt, and reducing their
holdings of corporate debt.
        Foreign investors, since 1970, have become a more important supplier of capital to both
the federal government and domestic corporations. We find a significant negative coefficient in
our leverage regressions on the interaction between government debt and foreign holdings of
Treasuries relative to corporate bonds, implying that increases in foreign holdings of Treasuries
amplify the negative association between corporate debt and government debt. We also find that
the magnitude of the relations between government debt and corporate policies are generally
larger after 1969 than before. Specifically, the magnitude of the relation between government
debt and corporate debt more than doubles from the pre-1970 to the post-1969 eras. Likewise,
the sensitivity of corporate net debt issuances to government net debt issuances increases in the
latter era, though the estimate is statistically noisy.
        These results suggest that that the supply of safe assets from nonfinancial corporations
has become increasingly important over time for fulfilling excess demand due to variation in the
supply of Treasuries. This interpretation fits well with the results in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2013) and Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2013), both of whom argue that there is
excess demand by intermediaries for safe assets and this demand has been increasing over time.
Thus, rather than relaxing a lending constraint on domestic intermediaries, the increase in foreign
holdings of U.S. Treasuries appears to have lead to increased competition for safe assets making
alternative sources of these assets more appealing.
        Finally, turning to corporate investment, our findings mimic those for corporate debt
policy. We find a significant negative association between government net debt issuances and
corporate capital expenditures that is economically and statistically significant. A one standard



                                                    4
deviation increase in the ratio of government debt to total assets of the corporate sector is
associated with a one fifth standard deviation decrease in the ratio of capital expenditures to total
assets. Like leverage and debt policy, the investment relation is robust to a host of controls,
including government expenditures and macroeconomic factors, as well as firm characteristics
such as the market-to-book ratio, cash flow, and lagged investment.
         The investment results are also concentrated among larger, more financially healthy
firms. We also find that the negative relation between government borrowing and investment
increases in magnitude post-1969. In other words, when government borrowing increases the
price of liquid assets relative to illiquid assets falls. This price decline reduces firms’ opportunity
cost of holding liquid assets and increases their cost of debt capital. Firms respond by reducing
their purchases of illiquid assets (investment) and sales of liquid assets (debt), and increasing
their holdings of liquid assets (e.g., Treasuries). Thus, another message of our study is that large,
safe nonfinancial corporations act as liquidity providers in credit markets – as suggested by
Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010) – and that this liquidity provision affects not only the
composition of corporate liabilities but also real economic outcomes.
         The motivation for our study dates back to early work by Blinder and Solow (1973),
Tobin and Buiter (1976) and Friedman (1978) who first investigated the portfolio crowding out
emphasized by Friedman (1972). More recently, our study is related to work by Greenwood,
Hanson, and Stein (2010) and Badoer and James (2013), both of whom focus on the implications
of the maturity structure of government borrowing for the maturity structure of corporate
liabilities.
         Though not the focus of their study, Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2013) document a
negative correlation between corporate debt and government debt. Our study goes beyond their
findings by investigating the meaning of this relation, linking it to corporate liquidity and
investment, and providing evidence on the mechanism (prices) and the channel (domestic
intermediaries and foreign investors) behind the quantity relations. Complementing our work is
recent evidence in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2014) showing that the supply of short
term Treasuries is negatively correlated with the supply of short-term debt issued by the financial
sector. Thus, while the financial sector helps fill excess demand for safe short-term securities, the
nonfinancial corporate sector helps fill excess demand for safe long-term securities.




                                                  5
       More broadly, our study is related to a large macroeconomic literature investigating
government crowding out via borrowing (e.g., Elmendorf and Mankiw (1998) and Hubbard
(2011)). Our results are clearly suggestive of a crowding out effect, though data limitations – our
emphasis on the unregulated sector of the economy – limit our conclusions about aggregate
investment.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I introduces the data and
presents summary statistics. Section II discusses the theoretical motivation for why government
debt might affect the corporate sector. We also outline our empirical framework and highlight
the identification challenges. Section III presents results relating government debt to aggregate
corporate financial structure and liquid asset holdings. Section IV investigates how the
relationship between government debt and corporate policies varies in the cross-section of firms.
Section V presents evidence on the price mechanism by relating government debt to cross-
sectional differences in the debt cost of capital faced by corporations. Section VI examines the
portfolio behavior of investors holding government and corporate debt – the channel linking the
two sectors. Section VII examines the implications for corporate investment and Section VIII
concludes.


                             I.      Data and Summary Statistics


       The sample of firms includes all firms listed in the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) monthly stock files. This sample includes all firms listed on the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE) since 1925, all firms listed on the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) since
1962, and all firms listed on the NASDAQ since 1972. For these firms, stock market data comes
from CRSP. Balance sheet and income statement information are obtained from two sources:
Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Compustat database and data hand-collected from Moody’s
Industrial and Railroad manuals by Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2014). We exclude financial
firms from all of our analysis. The end result is an unbalanced firm-year panel beginning in 1920
and ending in 2012.
       We distinguish between two sectors of the economy that we loosely refer to as regulated
(utilities, telecommunications, and railroads) and unregulated (all other nonfinancial industries)
because of different institutional environments. We recognize that regulatory status is dynamic,



                                                6
heterogeneous, and extends beyond our classification (e.g., airlines). Thus, we emphasize that
these are merely labels to identify a division in our data that acknowledges the different
mechanisms determining financial policy across these sectors, and that are consistent with
previous research on corporate financial policy (e.g., Graham and Leary (2011)). We focus our
attention on the unregulated sector for reasons mentioned in footnote 2. We also note that the
unregulated sector comprises over 50% of the economy’s assets over the entire sample period,
and over 75% since 1950, as shown in Figure 1.
           We supplement these data with a number of macroeconomic time-series. Together, we
form two samples based on the corporate and macroeconomic data. The first is an annual time-
series containing aggregate corporate measures and macroeconomic factors. The aggregate
corporate measures are constructed by summing across firms each year. For ratios, we sum
separately the numerator and denominator before taking the ratio. The second sample is a firm-
year panel. Details regarding variable construction and data sources are presented in Appendix
A.
           Table I presents summary statistics for the primary variables used in our analysis. Panel
A presents aggregate time-series statistics, Panel B panel data statistics. In the panel, we
winsorize each ratio at the upper and lower one percentiles to address possible data-coding errors
and mitigate the influence of outliers. Consistent with most capital structure studies, we scale
variables by the book value of assets. This also ensures a meaningful interpretation of our
corporate measures that are based on a subset of the corporate sector – unregulated firms
discussed above. We examine alternative scale factors, such as GDP, in our analysis below.
           Corporate debt is defined as all interest bearing debt. Government debt is defined as
federal debt held by the public, which excludes intergovernmental holdings (e.g., by the social
security administration) but includes holdings by the monetary authority. We examine alternative
definitions, e.g., gross debt and debt net of the Federal Reserve’s holdings, below. We focus on
federal debt because it represents the majority of total government debt and is responsible for
most of the latter’s variation over time.4


                       II.     Theoretical Motivation and Identification Strategy



4
    See Figure 1 in Appendix A of Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2013).


                                                         7
          Economic theory provides several reasons for government borrowing to affect corporate
policies.5 A traditional view (Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999)) of budget deficits is that they
increase aggregate demand but bring about a rise in interest rates and corresponding reduction in
investment. However, as illustrated by Friedman (1978), when wealth effects are present in
investors’ portfolio decisions, government borrowing will alter the relative returns of assets in a
manner that depends on the substitutability of the assets.
          Intuitively, investors absorb an increase in the supply of Treasuries by holding a larger
fraction of their wealth in Treasuries. By necessity, they must hold less of other assets. If
investors are unwilling to freely substitute between different securities (i.e., capital markets are
not perfect), a change in the structure of market expected returns is required to restore
equilibrium.      In particular, the yields on close substitutes to the security issued by the
government are expected to rise in tandem with Treasury yields. For other financing instruments,
such as risky debt or equity, the effect depends on the relative substitutabilities of different
securities in investors’ portfolios.
          Friedman (1986) uses asset demands derived from a portfolio optimization problem to
estimate the impact of a change in Treasury supply on debt and equity yields. While the
magnitudes of the estimates are sensitive to assumptions about investor preferences and the
covariance structure of asset returns, they all suggest an increase in the cost of debt relative to the
cost of equity. Thus, debt financing should respond inversely to government borrowing, all else
equal.6
          Other theories appeal to various market frictions that result in debt and equity securities
being imperfect substitutes in investors’ portfolios. For example, McDonald (1983) builds on
the ideas in Miller (1977) to examine the impact of government debt issuance when investors
differ in their tax status and there are limits to arbitrage. High tax investors have a preference to
hold equity due to the differential personal tax treatment. An increase in the supply of taxable
bonds causes an increase in the yield on corporate bonds to compensate high tax rate investors.

5
  The Riccardian view of budget deficits (Barro (1974)) is one of indifference and, as such, provides little motivation
for our study unless one believes that corporate financial policy is value neutral. In other words, a link between
government borrowing and corporate financial policy can exist under Riccardian equivalence, assuming corporate
financial policy is not affecting real economic outcomes, such as investment. Given the mass of evidence suggesting
otherwise (e.g., Stein (2003)), we focus our discussion on theories linking government borrowing to corporate
policies via market imperfections.
6
  Greenwood, Hansen, and Stein (2010) similarly argue that the relative price of corporate debt of different
maturities is sensitive to the maturity of debt issued by the government.


                                                          8
This rise in the after-tax cost of debt relative to equity leads to a reduction in corporate
borrowing in response to the increase in government borrowing.7
           Taggart (1985) undertakes a similar investigation but assumes that investors differ in
either their risk aversion or optimism and face transaction costs that prevent them from freely
replicating the return streams of one security with combinations of others. As in McDonald
(1983), increases in the supply of government debt supply must be absorbed by investors who
are less willing to hold it, forcing an increase in corporate debt yields and a resulting decline in
corporate debt issuance.
           While these theories all predict an inverse relation between government and corporate
borrowing, the model in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) (hereafter KVJ) has
implications for the holdings of liquid assets by corporations. KVJ show that yields on Treasury
securities contain a “convenience” component comprised of high liquidity and safety that cannot
be replicated by investors. Further, KVJ show that increases in the Treasury supply reduce this
liquidity premium, or opportunity cost of holding liquid assets. The literature on corporate cash
holdings argues that this liquidity premium, or opportunity cost, is one of the primary costs of
holding liquid assets. Thus, firms should be willing to hold more treasuries, and other close
substitutes, when the government borrows more and the opportunity cost of holding liquid assets
falls.
           Finally, Friedman (1978) points out that the portfolio rebalancing induced by an
increased supply of Treasuries can also have subtle implications for corporate investment. A key
determinant of corporate investment is the required rate of return on corporate securities. If
corporate securities are not close substitutes for Treasuries, excess supply in the government
bond market can be cleared either by an increase in Treasury yields or a decrease in yields on
alternatives such as riskier corporate debt and equity. The lower the substitutability between
Treasuries and these corporate alternatives, the more likely the corporate cost of capital will fall
in response to an increase in the supply of Treasuries. In short, the impact on corporate funding
costs may be smaller or even in the opposite direction than the effect on yields of the securities
issued by the government.
           On the other hand, in the presence of market frictions, the capital structure effects
discussed previously may negatively impact investment, reinforcing the traditional crowding out

7
    See Benninga and Talmor (1988) for a similar treatment in a general equilibrium context.


                                                           9
mechanism. Ultimately, the effect on corporate investment decisions is theoretically ambiguous.
However, because the securities of safer firms are closer substitutes for Treasuries than those of
riskier firms, we expect safer firms’ investment policies to be most sensitive to changes in
government debt issuance.
       To summarize, existing theories produce the following testable implications on which we
focus. First, government and corporate debt are inversely related. Second, government debt and
corporate liquidity are positively related. Third, as emphasized by Friedman (1986), yields on
securities that are closer substitutes to Treasuries are expected to increase relative to yields on
more distant substitutes following an increase in government debt issuance. More concretely, the
spread between yields on risky and safe borrowers will decrease following a rise in Treasury
issuance. Further, the financial policies of safer borrowers will be more sensitive to government
deficit financing than those of riskier borrowers. Finally, while the impact of government
borrowing on investment is theoretically ambiguous, the investment policies of safer borrowers
should be more sensitive to deficit financing than those of riskier borrowers.


II.A Empirical Strategy and Identification Challenges


       In light of the preceding discussion, our empirical approach is to estimate linear asset
demand equations. To fix ideas, consider our model of corporate debt:
                                       QtC        QG
                                           = α + β t + ΓXt + ε t ,                           (1)
                                       At          At

where QtC is the quantity of corporate debt, QtG is the quantity of government debt, At is the book

value of total assets, Xt is a vector of control variables, and ε t is a possibly serially correlated
error term. To address this possibility, we estimate Newey-West standard errors with two lags, a
practice that we repeat for all aggregate time-series analysis. To address concerns over trends
during our sample period (Granger and Newbold (1974)), we incorporate a linear trend in the
level specification and separately estimate equation (1) after first differencing the dependent and
independent variables.
       We address confounding forces with a set of observable, contemporaneous controls
motivated by the theoretical discussion above and existing empirical evidence. Quantities are
normalized by the book value of assets to address scale differences and maintain consistency


                                                 10
with our leverage measures. We address the issue of government demand by including a measure
of federal expenditures. This ensures that any identifying variation is driven by the government’s
choice of financing – debt versus taxes. We include the market-to-book asset ratio and real GDP
growth to capture corporate investment opportunities. The yield spread between a BAA-rated
corporate bond and the ten-year Treasury bond captures variation in the risk premia on corporate
debt.8 The return on a three-month Treasury bill reflects the level of interest rates and the
financing and investment environment. Inflation is included because corporate debt is measured
in nominal terms. We also include the return on assets, EBIT / Assets, and a measure of asset
intangibility – two important empirical determinants in the capital structure literature (Rajan and
Zingales (1995) and Frank and Goyal (2008)).
        While correlating government policy with corporate policies via equation (1) is
straightforward given our data, interpreting any correlations is difficult. The ideal experiment
would randomly shock the supply of Treasuries, holding fixed the supply of corporate debt, the
investment opportunities of the corporate sector, and government investment. Lacking such a
shock, any correlation between government debt and corporate behavior may still be consistent
with several alternatives. For example, a negative relation between government debt and
corporate debt (and investment) could reflect the econometrician’s inability to adequately hold
fixed corporate investment opportunities. In this interpretation, the government issues debt in bad
times when investment opportunities are poor and firms’ demand for credit is low because their
desire to invest is low. Alternatively, optimal capital structure may fluctuate over the business
                                                                                           G
cycle in a way that is correlated with government borrowing. In other words, variation in Qt
may capture variation in latent or mismeasured investment opportunities or other determinants of
financial policies.
        We take several approaches to address this concern. The first is to control for
confounding variation by way of observables, X. Recognizing the limitations of this approach,
we also exploit heterogeneity in the estimated effect. In particular, we allow the parameter on the
government debt variable, β , to vary over time and cross-sectionally with observables in an
attempt to rule out alternative explanations. Third, we investigate the price mechanism that


8
  There is concern that in addition to capturing macroeconomic conditions, the credit spread may capture part of the
price channel through which variation in the Treasury supply is transmitted onto corporate policies. Our approach to
including it is therefore a conservative one whose robustness is addressed below.


                                                        11
transmits government debt policy onto corporate policies. Finally, we investigate the channel
through which the quantity relation operates, namely, investors’ portfolio decisions. While none
of these empirical strategies provide a clear source of exogenous variation in QtG , in concert they
can provide evidence that significantly limits the scope for alternative interpretations.


      III.     The Relation Between Government Debt and Corporate Financial Policies


III.A Corporate Leverage


        Panel A of Figure 2 illustrates the relation between corporate and government leverage
ratios. During the last century, government debt experienced several notable transitions
beginning with a dramatic expansion to fund World War II. From its peak of 109% of GDP in
1946, government debt as a share of income fell steadily until 1972 when it leveled off at
approximately 25% of GDP. The 1980s saw a renewed increase in public sector leverage that
persisted until the mid-1990s. In 2008, public debt-to-GDP began another steep increase in
response to the most recent recession and financial crisis.
        Turning to corporate leverage, a negative relation with government leverage is apparent,
over the first half of our sample period. As government leverage increased sharply from 1917 to
1945, corporate leverage experienced a less severe but nonetheless significant decline from 13%
to 6.5% over this same period. From 1945 to 1970, as government debt fell, corporate leverage
increased more than threefold to 27%. After little change during the 1970s, corporate debt
increased sharply in the mid-1980s in conjunction with the leveraged buyout boom (Kaplan and
Stromberg (2009)) before trending downward over the next thirty years.9 As shown in Graham,
Leary, and Roberts (2013), the other measures of leverage examined in Table I exhibit similar
patterns.
        Panel A of Table II presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression results for several
specifications of equation (1). The estimates reveal the following inferences. First, government
leverage and corporate leverage are strongly negatively related. This relation is robust to the
inclusion of both macroeconomic and firm characteristic control variables. This relation is found

9
 Our accounting data include limited information on privately held firms that rely on publicly traded debt, or that
went public in the subsequent year as both require filings with the SEC.


                                                        12
in both levels and first differences, though there is an attenuation in moving to the difference
specifications.
       Several other estimates are worth mentioning. Real GDP growth exhibits a clear negative
correlation with corporate leverage, consistent with previous research emphasizing counter-
cyclical leverage among nonfinancial firms (e.g., Korajczyk and Levy (2003)). The yield spread
is insignificant in the levels specification, but significantly positive in the difference specification
implying that as the rate of change in the yield spread increases the rate of change in leverage
ratios tends to increase. Interestingly, government expenditure is uncorrelated with corporate
leverage, once firm characteristics and other macroeconomic indicators are held constant.
Finally, we see a strong negative association between profitability and leverage, consistent with
prior evidence (e.g., Frank and Goyal (2009)) and the corporate preference to use internal equity
for financing.
        To gauge the economic significance of these estimates, we scale them by the ratio of the
standard deviation of the independent variable to that for the dependent variable. The estimate in
Column (6) of Table II implies that a one standard deviation increase in government leverage is
associated with a one third standard deviation decrease in corporate leverage. This represents the
largest marginal effect, with profitability and real GDP growth second and third, respectively.
       Panel B of Table II presents the results of a host of additional robustness tests. The
baseline model for this analysis is the same as that presented in column (6) of Panel A – a
regression of corporate leverage on government leverage, firm characteristics, and
macroeconomic factors estimated in first difference form. We modify this baseline specification
in a variety of ways, as indicated by each row. The number in each row corresponds to the
coefficient estimate on government leverage, below which is the corresponding t-statistic in
parentheses.
       We explore the effect of alternative measures of corporate leverage, our dependent
variable, on the sensitivity to government leverage in the first three rows. The first row defines
corporate leverage as the ratio of “net debt” to assets, where net debt is defined as debt minus
liquid assets (i.e., cash and short-term investments). The marginal effect of government leverage
on this leverage measure is significantly larger than that found in Panel A. As we discuss in the
next section, this is because of the positive correlation between corporations’ liquid assets and
government leverage. The second and third rows replace the numerator of our leverage measure



                                                  13
with long-term debt and short-term debt, respectively. We see similar negative associations for
both measures in the first difference specifications. The magnitude is somewhat smaller than in
Panel A reflecting the weak correlation between long- and short-term debt policies.10
        The fourth row shows that the relation between corporate and government leverage
persists after including a host of additional control variables that are plausibly correlated with
either investment opportunities or the supply of corporate debt. These variables include: a debt
tax incentive defined as the difference in the corporate and personal income tax rates divided by
one minus the personal income tax rate (e.g., Taggart (1985)), the real price of oil, the
unemployment rate, the growth in the money supply, the growth in real assets of corporations,
one-period ahead real GDP growth, a recession indicator variable, and the yield spread on the
ten-year Treasury Bond and three month Treasury Bill.
        In untabulated analysis, we investigate the effect of alternative measures of federal debt.
In particular, we examine gross federal debt and federal debt held by the public net of any
holdings by the monetary authority. Coefficient estimates on these alternative measures are
similar in magnitude (and sign) to those found with our primary measure of government
borrowing.
        The result in the fifth row shows that scaling corporate and government debt measures by
GDP, instead of assets, has a small effect on the sensitivity between the two.
        We examine the relation during different subperiods in rows six through nine. With less
than 90 observations, statistical power is limited. Nonetheless, (lack of) variation in the
magnitude of the coefficient on government leverage can still be informative. Excluding the
years during and just after World War II (1942-1955) leads to a significant increase in the
magnitude of the estimate. This result shows that results are not an artifact of the extremely high
government debt levels surrounding the War. When we split the sample, both halves reveal a
statistically significant relation. However, the estimate from the second half of our sample period
is more than three times the magnitude of the estimate from the first half. We further explore this
difference below. Row (9) shows that the sensitivity is not just occurring during recession years,
defined as years containing two or more quarters identified by the NBER as contractionary.



10
  We note that balance sheet measures of short-term debt include both debt securities with maturities of less than
one year and debt securities with maturities in excess of one year but that are maturing within a year.


                                                       14
       The last two rows examine alternative samples aimed at addressing concerns about
sample turnover. The average annual entry rate is 7.9% and is driven by initial public offerings,
reverse buyouts, and broadening sample coverage. The average annual exit rate is 5.6% and is
driven by bankruptcies, delistings, mergers, acquisitions, and buyouts. Row (10) defines the
sample as the 500 largest firms each year. The turnover in this group is less than 2% per annum.
Row (11) just examines NYSE-listed firms facing a similarly low turnover. The results are
almost identical to that found in column (6) in Panel A, suggesting that sample composition
effects are not behind our results.


III.B Corporate Financial Flows


       We now investigate the relation between the flow of government debt and the sources of
funds for firms with the following regression:
                                  Qt j − Qt−1j      Q G − Qt−1
                                      C   C                 G
                                               =α +β t         + ΓXt + ε t ,                   (2)
                                      At−1             At−1
         Cj
where Qt      is the quantity of corporate security j – total debt, long-term debt, short-term debt,
and equity. The control variables are the same as those found in the leverage specification,
equation (1). All (economic) stock and price control variables are lagged one period. Flow
control variables are contemporaneous with the dependent variable.
       Table III presents the estimation results. As a fraction of assets, corporate net debt
issuances are negatively associated with government net debt issuance, but the coefficient
estimate is statistically insignificant. Columns (2) and (3) shed light on this result. We see that
the total debt issuances variable conflates two distinct forces: long-term debt issuances and short-
term debt issuances. Column (2) shows a slightly larger (in magnitude) and statistically
significant coefficient estimate in the long-term debt regression. By contrast, column (3) shows
an economically small and insignificantly positive coefficient for short-term debt. Thus, the
financing substitution effect appears to be concentrated in long-term debt, consistent with the
findings in James and Badoer (2013).
       By contrast, the estimate for net equity issuances is positive (column (4)) and statistically
insignificant, but of similar magnitude to that in the long-term debt specification. The results also
reveal that equity market conditions, as measured by stock market returns and the market-to-


                                                 15
book ratio, are the most important determinants of net equity issuances. In sum, government
borrowing appears to affect corporate financing and capital structure largely through the long-
term debt decisions of firms.


III.C Liquid Assets


       Because the literature studying corporate liquidity has closely followed the capital
structure literature (e.g., Opler et al. (2001)), our model specification for corporate liquidity
follows closely the debt specification in equation (1). The dependent variable is the ratio of
corporate cash and short-term investments to total assets. Because of the precautionary motive
for holding liquid assets, we also include a measure of earnings volatility as a control variable.
       Panel B of Figure 2 illustrates the relation between corporate liquidity and government
leverage ratios. At a low frequency, the similarity in the evolution of government leverage and
corporate liquidity is stark. Interestingly, recent levels of liquidity often described as “high”
(Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009)), are in fact modest by historical standards. Corporate liquidity
was nearly 25% as a fraction of total assets at the end of World War II, before beginning a steep
and protracted decline until 1970.
       In Table IV, we examine the effect of government borrowing on corporate liquidity
policy. Specifically, we regress the ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets on the
ratio of government debt-to-assets and control variables discussed earlier. Columns (1) through
(3) present estimates based on a levels specification, columns (4) through (6) present estimates
based on a first-difference specification.
       We note a statistically and economically large positive association between corporate
liquidity policy and government borrowing. Using the point estimate from column (6), a one
standard deviation increase in the stock government debt is associated with a one standard
deviation increase in the stock of liquid assets held by corporations. As a percentage of assets,
the marginal effect of government leverage on corporate liquidity is similar in magnitude to that
on corporate leverage.
       To summarize, increases in government borrowing are associated with a reduction in
long-term debt issuances by firms and an increase in firms’ liquid asset holdings, which lead to




                                                 16
lower corporate leverage. While suggestive, the remainder of our study seeks to better
understand these relations and the mechanisms behind them.


                             IV.       Financing Effects in the Cross-Section


        In this section we buttress the evidence above by exploiting cross-sectional variation
provided by our panel data. In particular, we ask: which firms’ financial policies are more (less)
sensitive to variation in government debt? In classifying firms, we focus on financial health or
credit-worthiness because the debt of more credit-worthy firms is a closer substitute than that of
less credit-worthy firms (Friedman (1986)). Thus, the relation between corporate policies and
government debt should be stronger for more credit-worthy firms.
        We use three proxies to capture a firm’s credit-worthiness: firm size, the Hadlock-Pierce
(HP) index of financial constraints, and an estimated probability of default based on the model of
Merton (1974) (see Bharath and Shumway (2008)). Our choice of these proxies is motivated by a
large literature in finance identifying these metrics as robust measures of financial health and
credit-worthiness.11 The choice is also motivated by data limitations; credit ratings are available
only for a small subset of firms and only since the 1980s. Each year, we classify firms into four
groups based on quartiles for each proxy. To maximize power, we restrict the sample to the
lower and upper quartiles. For example, small firms are defined as those firms falling in the
lowest quartile of the distribution of assets, while large firms are those firms falling in the
highest quartile.
        We then run the following fully interacted panel regression:
                  yit = α + β1gt × I ( lowit ) + β 2 gt × I ( highit ) + Γ1 Xit × I ( lowit )
                                                                                                ,          (3)
                     + Γ 2 Xit × I ( highit ) + µi × I ( lowit ) + µi × I ( highit ) + ε it

where 𝑦!" is the corporate outcome variable (leverage or long-term debt issuance), 𝑔! is the
government debt variable (either net debt issuance scaled by lagged assets or the level of debt
scaled by contemporaneous assets), and 𝐼(𝑙𝑜𝑤!" ) and 𝐼(ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ!" ) are indicators equal to one if the
proxy for firm i in year t is in the low or high strata. The standard errors are clustered by year

11
   For example, Shivdasani and Zenner (2005) show that firm size is the most important determinant of credit
ratings; Hadlock and Pierce (2010) demonstrate their index based on firm size and age captures financial constraints
well; Bharath and Shumway (2008) show that their naïve estimator predicts default as well, if not better than, other
measures.


                                                           17
because the critical identifying variation behind the parameters of interest, 𝛽! and 𝛽! , is in the
time series. The control variables – not reported – are identical to those found in in column (6) of
Panel A, Table II (leverage) and column (2) of Table III (financing flows).
       Equation (5) is akin to running a firm fixed effect regression separately on each
subsample defined by the lower and upper quartiles of the credit-risk proxy distribution.
However, equation (5) provides for a simple t-test of the difference between 𝛽! and 𝛽! .
       The estimation results are presented in Table V, with t-statistics in parentheses and firm-
year observation counts (Obs). Columns (1) and (2) present the results using firm size to identify
the strata. The first set of results shows that the coefficient estimate in the regression of corporate
leverage on government leverage (and control variables) equals -0.062 when estimated on the
subsample of small firms, and -0.117 when estimated on the subsample of large firms. In other
words, the leverage of large firms is nearly twice as sensitive to government leverage than that of
small firms. Column (3) shows that this difference, -0.056, is statistically different from zero at
the 1% level. Moving down columns (1) through (3), we see that large firms’ long-term debt
policies also are more sensitive to government net debt issuances than those of small firms.
       When we look at alternative proxies for financial health, we find similar results. While
some of the differences are statistically noisy, less financially constrained firms and firms with a
lower likelihood of default have financial policies that are uniformly more sensitive to
government borrowing than those of their more constrained and riskier counterparts. Overall, our
cross-sectional results confirm the implications of Friedman (1986) by showing that firms whose
debt is a closer substitute for Treasuries respond more to variation in the supply of Treasuries.
       An important by-product of these findings is their ability to further mitigate identification
concerns. Previous work by Korajczyk and Levy (2003) suggests that financial constraints have
an asymmetric effect on firms’ financial policies over the business cycle. In particular, they find
that financing constraints are more binding in bad times, implying that more constrained firms
should experience sharper declines in credit and investment in economic downturns than their
unconstrained counterparts. If variation in government debt is capturing variation in the broader
economic environment and influencing our estimate, then we would expect to see more
financially constrained firms’ policies more responsive to government debt than the policies of
less financially constrained firms.




                                                  18
       Likewise, this analysis can help alleviate concerns about contemporaneous shifts in the
supply curve of corporate debt due to variation in its determinants, such as expected default
costs, agency costs or information asymmetry. Specifically, financially constrained firms are
characterized as such precisely because they face greater frictions. We would expect these
frictions, and the constraints they engender, to be exacerbated in bad times. For example,
expected default costs are higher in bad times when secondary asset markets are depressed and
less liquid, and the resulting likelihood of default is greater. However, if variation in government
debt is just capturing variation in these frictions, this would suggest the financial policies of
constrained firms should be more sensitive to government borrowing than those of unconstrained
firms, opposite of our findings.
       Finally, this analysis helps us gauge the potential biases from omitted variables by
considering the differential effects of competing hypotheses. Under the hypothesis that
government borrowing is crowding out close substitutes in investors’ portfolios, so-called
portfolio crowding out (Friedman (1978)), we should see little if any relation between
government borrowing and the policies of smaller, less creditworthy firms. Under the traditional
transactions crowding-out hypothesis there is no reason to expect a differential response by firms
to the governments’ fiscal policy because an increase in the level of interest rates will increase
the cost of capital uniformly for firms. Finally, if government borrowing is simply proxying for
latent investment opportunities, the effect on corporate debt policy is likely to be larger for
smaller, less credit-worthy firms because financing frictions will amplify the effect of a
deterioration in economic conditions. Together, these hypotheses suggest that the estimated
differences across strata provide a plausible lower bound on the true relation.
       Intuitively, the differential parameter estimates across strata correspond to a treatment-
control comparison in which large, credit-worthy firms act as the treatment group and small, less
credit-worthy firms act as the control. Of course, assignment to these groups is non-random;
however, the discussion above suggests that selection effects will work to attenuate the estimated
differences. Taking the average differential across the proxies produces estimates equal to -0.049
for leverage and -0.058 for long-term debt issuances. Compared to their aggregate counterparts –
-0.039 (column (6) of Table II) and -0.047 (column (2) of Table III) –the estimates are of
roughly similar magnitudes.




                                                19
                                V.      The Mechanism: Prices


       For government debt to affect corporate financial policy and investment, the effect would
likely occur via the cost of capital. While other mechanisms exist to clear credit markets, such as
quantity rationing (e.g., Stiglitz and Weiss (1983)), these alternatives are less relevant for our
findings, which are concentrated among larger, more financially secure firms. In other words,
high credit quality firms are less likely to be quantity-rationed from credit markets. Rather, they
are responding to price changes induced by variation in the supply of Treasuries.
       We investigate this hypothesis by estimating
                                                   ⎛ QG ⎞
                              ytL − ytH = α + β ln ⎜ t ⎟ + ΓXt + ε t ,                     (4)
                                                   ⎝ At ⎠

where 𝑦!! and 𝑦!! represent the yield on low and high credit-quality corporate debt, respectively.
We use the BAA-AAA corporate bond yield spread to proxy for this difference. Our control
variables incorporate proxies for default risk (equity volatility, corporate profitability, and an
estimated default probability) and the state of the economy (the slope of the yield curve and real
GDP growth). This model follows closely that of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012).
       Theory and our cross-sectional results predict that this spread is negatively correlated to
government borrowing since the prices of more credit-worthy debt should respond more to
variation in the supply of Treasuries than the prices of less credit-worthy debt. The results in
Table VI confirm this prediction by showing a highly statistically significant and robust negative
association between the BAA-AAA spread and government leverage.
       In addition to complementing the preceding quantity results, these findings cast further
doubt on the alternative hypothesis that government debt is proxying for economic conditions in
our empirical specifications. If this were true, one would expect a positive relation between
government leverage and a BAA-AAA credit spread, which tends to widen in bad times (e.g.,
Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2010)), i.e., periods with high government debt.


                                VI.     The Channel: Investors


VI.A Domestic Investors




                                                 20
       To understand the channel through which government debt influences corporate policy,
we turn to an investigation of investors, and in particular investors holding a significant fraction
of corporate debt and Treasuries.
       Figure 3 presents the distribution of corporate bond holdings across investor types, as
reported in the U.S. Flow of Funds. Domestic financial institutions have historically held a large
majority of corporate bonds. Insurance companies have been the largest investors, life insurers in
particular. State and local pensions also hold a significant fraction of corporate bonds. Since
1970, this distribution has experienced two significant changes. The first began in the 1970s with
the increase in foreign holdings. The second began in the 1980s with the increase in mutual fund
holdings and, since the early ‘90s, “other,” which is comprised primarily of securities brokers
and dealers and funding corporations associated with financial stabilization.
       Figure 3 highlights that a linkage between government debt and the policies of the non-
financial corporate sector would likely be found in the portfolios of financial intermediaries. It
also suggests that there may be variation in these relations over time, as the ownership structure
has changed substantially since 1970.
       Figure 4 examines the asset allocations of these intermediaries over time from the Flow
of Funds. To ease the presentation, we focus on the allocation across credit market instruments.
Panels A, B, and C present the results for commercial banks, insurance companies, and state and
local pension funds, respectively. Several results stand out. First, Treasuries as a share of
intermediaries’ portfolios declined dramatically between 1945 and 1970 as the government
gradually retired outstanding bonds used to finance World War II. Second, there appears to be a
negative association between Treasury and corporate debt holdings, though the strength is
visually unclear.
       We examine the portfolio allocation behavior of these institutions by estimating the
following regression:
                                        Ati        QG
                                            = α + β t + ΓXt + ε t ,                         (5)
                                        FAt         At
       i
where At is the quantity of asset i on the balance sheet of the intermediary, and FAt is the total
quantity of financial assets held by the intermediary. All other variables are defined as before, as
is possible serial correlation of the errors. We employ the same control variables as in our
leverage specification (Column (6) of Table II) and estimate equation (5) in first differences.


                                                 21
         Table VII presents the results. To ease the presentation, we report only the estimated
coefficient on the government debt variable and corresponding t-statistic in parentheses. Each
panel presents estimation results for a different dependent variable, namely, a different credit
market instrument on the asset side of the intermediary’s balance sheet. For example, the top
                             i
panel presents results when At is corporate debt. For commercial banks, corporate debt consists
of C&I loans and corporate bonds, for insurance companies this asset consists of corporate bonds
and private placements, and for state and local pensions this asset consists of corporate bonds
and commercial paper. Odd numbered columns present the estimates from a univariate
regression, even numbered from a multivariate regression containing the controls mentioned
above.
         For all intermediaries, increases in government borrowing are met with decreases in
corporate lending, though the multivariate pension fund result is statistically weak. In contrast,
the second panel shows the opposite effect on intermediary Treasury holdings, which increase
with increases in the supply of Treasuries. Thus, intermediaries substitute between lending to
corporations and lending to the federal government.
         The third panel shows that this substitution is not mechanical. The holdings of agency
bonds, at least among banks and insurers, are positively associated with government debt but
none of the estimates are statistically significant. Thus, intermediaries absorb increases in the
supply of Treasuries by reducing lending to the corporate sector.


VI.B Foreign Investors

         Figure 5 shows that foreign ownership of US debt changed dramatically during the 20th
century. In particular, foreign ownership of US Treasuries increased sharply in 1971 when the
US decided to move off the gold standard and let the dollar float. Foreign ownership hovered
around 17% for the next 24 years, then sharp rises in foreign savings propelled foreign holdings
of US Treasuries to over 50% by 2008. The figure also shows a contemporaneous rise in foreign
holdings of corporate debt, though at a more moderate rate.
         The question we ask in this section is what, if any, effect did this credit market
integration have on the behavior of domestic intermediaries and, ultimately, on the relation
between government debt and corporate behavior? There are several potential answers. For



                                               22
example, increased demand by foreign investors may ease lending constraints on domestic
intermediaries who no longer have to absorb Treasury supply variations. This easing would free
up the capital of domestic intermediaries to lend to the corporate sector. If true, then the growth
of foreign holdings of Treasuries should attenuate any relation between government borrowing
and the corporate sector.
       Alternatively, increasing demand by foreign investors may reflect increasing competition
for safe assets (Gorton et al., 2012), which intermediaries prefer to hold because of their
advantage as a source of collateral or because of their role in easing regulatory constraints (e.g.,
risk-based capital requirements). In this case, as discussed by Bernanke et al. (2011), the increase
in foreign demand for safe assets will induce intermediaries to “demand more of assets
considered substitutable with Treasuries and Agencies, putting downward pressure on interest
rates on these private assets as well.” (p. 7). That is, foreign competition to hold Treasuries
creates excess demand for safe assets, which is filled in part with safe corporate debt. In this
case, an increase in Treasury issuance reduces excess demand for safe assets among these
intermediaries, reducing their demand for corporate bonds. Under this alternative, then,
increasing foreign demand for Treasuries can heighten the sensitivity of corporate lending to
Treasury supply. Any foreign demand for corporate debt will mute this effect.
       To investigate these hypotheses, we add two variables to the leverage specification in
equation (1). The first is the foreign holdings wedge defined as the difference between foreign
holdings of Treasuries and foreign holdings of corporate bonds. The second is the interaction of
the first variable and the government leverage variable. The estimation results are presented in
Table VIII. All variables are in first difference form. As before, the results show a significant
negative relation between government and corporate debt, though one that is slightly smaller
than that found in Columns (4) and (6) of Table II. The interaction term is negative and
statistically significant suggesting that foreign ownership increased competition for safe assets –
consistent with the findings of Bernanke et al. (2011) – and magnified the substitution away from
corporates to Treasuries.
       Using the coefficient estimates from column (2), we see that the marginal effect of the
change in government debt is (-.034 + -0.004 x Foreign Holdings). To gauge the economic
magnitude of the interaction, we consider varying the foreign holdings wedge from 1% - the
average value of the foreign holdings wedge before 1970 – to 14% - the average after 1969. This



                                                23
variation corresponds to an increase in the magnitude of the marginal effect of government debt
on corporate debt from -0.038 to -0.09.
       The foreign holdings wedge peaked in 2008 at 30%, implying a marginal effect of
government debt on corporate debt of over -0.15. Foreign ownership of Treasuries in excess of
corporate bonds significantly amplifies the magnitude of the relation between government and
corporate debt policies. Thus, our findings suggest that growing foreign demand for US
treasuries did not relax a binding lending constraint for domestic intermediaries. Rather, our
results are consistent with the increased competition view of Bernanke et al. (2011), in which
domestic intermediaries fill part of their demand for safe assets with safe corporate debt only
when Treasury supply is insufficient.
       Additional supporting evidence can be found in time variation in the sensitivity of
corporate policies to government debt. As seen earlier in rows (7) and (8) in Panel B of Table II,
corporate leverage is three times more sensitive to government leverage in the second half of our
sample than in the first. Indeed, the coefficient estimate from the second half of this split-sample
regression, -0.099, is quite close in magnitude to the estimated marginal effect from the
interaction regression discussed above.


                                           VII.   Investment


       Our model of corporate investment follows closely that of Philippon (2009):
                                I tC        ⎛ Q G − Qt−1
                                                     G
                                                         ⎞
                                       =α +β⎜ t            + ΓXt + ε t                      (6)
                               At−1         ⎝ At−1 ⎟⎠

where 𝐼!! is corporate investment, defined as the change in net property, plant, and equipment,
and all other variables are as previously defined. The control variables include a proxy for
investment opportunities, the market-to-book ratio. We also include the ratio of net income to
total assets to capture cash flow effects correlated with financing frictions (Fazarri, Hubbard, and
Petersen (1988)), market power (Cooper and Ejarque (2003), or fundamentals (Gomes (2001)).
As a robustness test, we include lagged investment as an additional control variable suggested by
Eberly, Rebello, and Vincent (2012). We include macroeconomic factors to address concerns
about mismeasured investment opportunities and a shifting supply of corporate debt.
Specifically, we include the return on three-month Treasury bills, the BAA - ten-year Treasury


                                                   24
yield spread, inflation, and federal government expenditures. All flow variables are
contemporaneous with investment. Stock variables and interest rates are lagged one period.12
        Panel A of Table IX presents the estimation results for corporate investment – equation
(6) above. Columns (1) through (4) show that corporate investment is significantly negatively
correlated with the flow of government debt. Moving across the columns, we see a slight
increase in the coefficient estimate after adding in macroeconomic controls, though this
difference is economically small. Adding in conventional firm characteristics – the market-to-
book ratio and net income-to-asset ratio – leads to a noticeable attenuation in the coefficient
estimate but still an economically and statistically large relation. The estimate from column (3)
implies that a one standard deviation increase in the flow of government debt is associated with a
0.32 standard deviation decrease in corporate investment. Unlike the financial policy variables,
this is not the most economically significant marginal effect.
        The fourth column incorporates lagged investment (Eberly, Rebello, and Vincent (2012)),
which leads to a fairly sharp decline in the magnitude of the government debt coefficient
estimate – from -0.094 to -0.048. However, the estimate is still highly statistically significant and
of similar magnitude to that found in the net long-term debt issuance regressions in Table III.
        In untabulated results, we estimate the investment specification in column (3) over
different subsamples and find that the sensitivity of corporate investment to government
borrowing is -0.089 pre-1969, and -0.126 post-1968. The difference is statistically insignificant
but mimics the differential sensitivities found for leverage and net debt issuances. Corporate
policies, including investment, are more sensitive to government borrowing in the second half of
our sample.
        Panel B of Table IX presents cross-sectional results similar to those found in Table V.
We estimate equation (5) where the dependent variable is net investment divided by total assets.
The control variables are those found in column (3) of Panel A. We report only the coefficient on
government net debt issuances. The results show that larger firms and firms with a lower
probability of default have investment policies that are more sensitive to government borrowing
than smaller and riskier firms. The difference in sensitivities across financial constraint strata is
economically small. The average difference across the three proxies is 0.027 – a more modest


12
  In unreported analysis we also include a linear trend as a control variable. Our results below are qualitatively
similar.


                                                       25
estimate than that found in in the aggregate regressions. While still an economically significant
result, we recognize that the impact of government borrowing on the cross section of corporate
behavior is concentrated more heavily among debt and liquidity policies.


                                        VIII. Conclusion


       We show that government debt plays an important role in shaping corporate behavior.
Increases in the supply of Treasuries alter relative asset prices such that corporations reduce their
debt issuances and investment, and increase their purchases of liquid assets. These relations are
concentrated among large, financially healthy firms whose debt is arguably a closer substitute for
Treasury securities. Further, these relations are also stronger after 1970, when increasing foreign
competition for Treasuries led domestic intermediaries to turn to safe corporate debt to fill part
of their demand for safe assets in response to Treasury supply fluctuations. Our results suggest
that corporations engage in liquidity provision that alters both the liability and asset structures of
their balance sheets in response to the provision of liquidity by the federal government.




                                                 26
References

Acharya, Viral, Heitor Almeida and Murillo Campello, 2005, Is cash negative debt? A hedging
perspective on corporate financial policies, NBER Working Paper.

Auerbach, Alan and Robert King, 1983, Taxation, portfolio choice, and debt-equity ratios: A
general equilibrium model, Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 587-609.

Baker, Malcolm, 2009, Capital market-driven corporate finance, in Annual Review of Financial
Economics, ed. Andrew Lo and Robert Merton.

Baker, Malcolm, Robin Greenwood, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, The maturity of debt issues and
predictable variation in bond returns, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 261-291.

Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter? Stock
prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 969-
1005.

Barro, Robert, 1974, Are government bonds net wealth? Journal of Political Economy 82, 1095-
1117.

Benninga, Simon and Eli Talmor, 1988, The interaction of corporate and government financing
in general equilibrium, Journal of Business 61, 233-258.

Bernanke, Ben, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin, 2011, International
Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007, International
Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Blinder, Alan S. and Robert M. Solow, Does fiscal policy matter? Journal of Public Economics
2, 319-337.

Bolton, Patrick and Xavier Freixas, 2000, Equity, Bonds, and Bank Debt: Capital Structure and
Financial Market Equilibrium under Asymmetric Information, Journal of Political Economy 108,
324-351.

Cooper, Russell and Joao Ejarque, 2003, Financial frictions and investment: Requiem in Q,
Review of Economic Dynamics 6, 710-728.

Eberly, Jan, Sergio Rebello and Nicholas Vincent, 2012, What explains the lagged investment
effect? Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 370-380.

Elmendorf, Douglas and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1998, Government debt, NBER Working paper
6470.

Fama, Eugene and Ken French, 2005, Financing decisions: Who issues stock? Journal of
Financial Economics 76, 549-582.



                                             27
Faulkender, Michael and Mitchell Petersen, 2005, Does the source of capital affect capital
structure? Review of Financial Studies 19, 45-79.

Faulkender, Michael and Rong Wang, 2006, Corporate financial policy and the value of cash,
Journal of Finance 61, 1957-1990.

Fazzarri, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and
corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-195.

Frank, Murray and Vidhan Goyal, 2008, Trade-off and pecking order theories of capital
structure, in Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, ed. Espen Eckbo,
Elsevier.

Frank, Murray and Vidhan Goyal, 2009, Capital structure decisions: Which factors are reliably
important? Financial Management 38, 1-37.

Friedman, Benjamin, 1978, Crowding out or crowding in? Economic consequences of financing
government deficits. Brookings papers on Economic Activity: 593-641.

Friedman, Milton, 1972, Comments on the critics, Journal of Political Economy 80, 906-950.

Gomes, Joao, 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 91, 1263-1285.

Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen and Andrew Metrick, 2013, The safe asset share, American
Economic Review 102, 101-106.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Winton, 2003, Financial intermediation, in the Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, eds. George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, Elsevier.

Graham, John R. and Mark T. Leary, 2011, A review of empirical capital structure research and
directions for the future, in Annual Review of Financial Economics, ed. Andrew Lo and Robert
Merton.

Graham, John R., Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts, 2013, A century of capital structure:
The leveraging of corporate America, forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.

Granger, Clive and Paul Newbold, 1974, Spurious regression, Journal of Econometrics 2, 111-
120.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson and Jeremy Stein, 2010, A gap-filling theory of corporate
debt maturity choice, Journal of Finance 65, 993-1028.

Greenwood, Robin and Dimitry Vayanos, 2013, Bond supply and excess bond returns, Review of
Financial Studies 27, 663-713.




                                             28
Hadlock, Charles and Joshua Pierce, 2010, New Evidence on Measuring Financial Constraints:
Moving Beyond the KZ Index, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909 – 1940.

Hubbard, Glenn, 2011, Consequences of government deficits and debt, Working Paper.

James, Christopher and Dominique Badoer, 2013, The determinants of long-term corporate debt
issuances, Working Paper.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, 1976, A theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
costs, and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Kaplan, Steven and Per Stromberg, 2009, Leveraged buyouts and private equity, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 2009, 1-27.

Kashyap, Anil, Owen Lamont and Jeremy Stein, 1994, Credit conditions and the cyclical
behavior of inventories, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 565 – 592.

Korajczyk, Robert and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: macroeconomic conditions
and financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 75 – 109.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The aggregate demand for
Treasury debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2013, Short-term debt and the financial
crisis: What we can learn from US Treasury supply, Working Paper.

Leary, Mark, 2009, Bank Loan Supply, Lender Choice, and Corporate Capital Structure. Journal
of Finance, 64, 1143-1185.

Lemmon, Michael and Michael R. Roberts, 2010, The response of corporate financing and
investment to changes in the supply of credit, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45,
555-587.

Lemmon, Michael, Michael R. Roberts and Jaime Zender, 2008, Back to the beginning:
Persistence and the cross-section of corporate capital structures, Journal of Finance 63, 1575-
1608.

McDonald, Robert, 1983, Government debt and private leverage: An extension of the Miller
theorem, Journal of Public Economics 22, 303-325.

Merton, Robert, 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates,
Journal of Finance 29, 449-470.

Miller, Merton, 1977, Debt and Taxes, Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.




                                               29
Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance and the
theory of investment, American Economic Review 48, 261-297.

Newey, Whitney and Ken West, 1987, A simple, positive-definite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Philippon, Thomas, 2009, The bond market’s q, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1011-
1056.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure: Some
evidence from international data. Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.

Robichek, Alexander and Stewart Myers, 1966, Problems in the theory of optimal capital
structure, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 1, 1-35.

Rubinstein, Mark, 1973, Corporate financial policy in segmented securities markets, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 8, 749-761.

Shivdasani, Anil and Marc Zenner, 2005, How to choose a capital structure: Navigating the debt-
equity decision, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 17, 26 – 35.

Taggart, Robert A., 1985, Secular patterns in corporate finance, in Corporate Capital Structures
in the United States, ed. Benjamin Friedman, University of Chicago Press.

Tobin, James and William Buiter, 1976, Long-run effects of fiscal and monetary policy on
aggregate demand, in Monetarism, ed. Jerome L. Stein, American Elsevier.




                                              30
Appendix A: Variable Definitions, Construction, and Sources

The tables of this appendix provide details on the definitions and construction of variables used
in the study. Data sources are also provided.




                                               31
32
33
                                                                                                  Figure 1
                                                                               Regulated vs. Unregulated Assets

The figure presents the annual time series of the fraction of total assets owned by unregulated firms
defined as those firms not in the utility, railroad, or transportation industries.

                                                                100
             Assets of Unregulated Firms / Assets of All Firms (%)
             50        60       70         80        90




                                                                      1920   1930   1940   1950    1960 1970   1980   1990   2000   2010
                                                                                                      Year
                                                                                     Figure 2
                                                             Government Debt and Corporate Policies

The figure presents annual time series of government leverage and corporate leverage (Panel A) and
corporate liquidity (Panel B). Corporate leverage is the ratio of all interest bearing debt to total assets.
Corporate liquidity is the ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets. Government leverage
is the ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP.

                                                                            Panel A: Corporate Leverage




                                                                                                                                120
                              35




                                                                                                  Corporate Debt / Assets
                                                                                                  Government Debt / GDP




                                                                                                                                                          100
                                          30




                                                                                                                                Government Debt / GDP (%)
              Corporate Debt / Assets (%)




                                                                                                                                                   80
                                25




                                                                                                                                           60
                       20




                                                                                                                                   40
              15




                                                                                                                                20
                              10




                                                                                                                                0
                                                1920         1930    1940   1950    1960 1970    1980    1990    2000   2010
                                                                                       Year


                                                                            Panel B: Corporate Liquidity
                                                                                                                                     120
                                    25




                                                                                                Corporate Liquidity / Assets
                                                                                                Government Debt / GDP
                                                                                                                                                               100
                   Corporate Liquidity / Assets (%)




                                                                                                                                     Government Debt / GDP (%)
                                               20




                                                                                                                                                        80
                                 15




                                                                                                                                        40      60
                    10




                                                                                                                                     20
                                    5




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                      1920    1930   1940    1950   1960 1970     1980    1990   2000    2010
                                                                                       Year
                                               Figure 3
                        Distribution of Corporate Bond Holdings

The figure presents the distribution of corporate and foreign bond holdings from the Flow of Funds.
The categories are defined as follows. 1) Households: Households and nonprofit organizations; 2) Gov-
ernment: State and local governments, excluding employee retirement funds plus Federal government;
3) Foreigners: Rest of the world. 4) Banks: U.S.-chartered depository institutions plus Foreign banking
offices in the U.S. plus Banks in U.S.-affiliated areas plus Credit unions 5) Insurance: Property-casualty
insurance companies plus life insurance companies 6) Pension: Private pension funds plus state and
local government employee retirement funds plus federal government retirement funds 7) Funds: Money
market mutual funds plus mutual funds plus closed-end funds plus exchange-traded funds 8) Other:
Government-sponsored enterprises plus finance companies plus real estate investment trusts plus secu-
rity brokers and dealers plus holding companies plus funding corporations.


            100%	  
             90%	                                                               Other	  

             80%	                                                               Funds	  
             70%	                                                               Pension	  
             60%	  
                                                                                 Insurance	  
             50%	  
                                                                                 Banks	  
             40%	  
                                                                                 Foreigners	  
             30%	  
             20%	                                                               Government	  
             10%	                                                               Households	  
               0%	  
                        1945	  
                        1949	  
                        1953	  
                        1957	  
                        1961	  
                        1965	  
                        1969	  
                        1973	  
                        1977	  
                        1981	  
                        1985	  
                        1989	  
                        1993	  
                        1997	  
                        2001	  
                        2005	  
                        2009	  
                                               Figure 4
Financial Intermediary Asset Allocation Among Credit Market Instruments

The figure presents the annual portfolio allocations across credit instruments for US Commercial Banks
(Panel A), Life and Property & Casualty Insurance Companies (Panel B), and State and Local Pension
Funds (Panel C).


                                       Panel A: Commercial Banks


           100%	  
            90%	  
            80%	  
                                                                          Other	  
            70%	  
            60%	                                                         Consumer	  Credit	  
            50%	                                                         Mortgages	  
            40%	                                                         Loans	  
            30%	  
                                                                          Agency	  &	  Muni	  
            20%	  
                                                                          Treasuries	  
            10%	  
              0%	  
                       1945	  
                       1949	  
                       1953	  
                       1957	  
                       1961	  
                       1965	  
                       1969	  
                       1973	  
                       1977	  
                       1981	  
                       1985	  
                       1989	  
                       1993	  
                       1997	  
                       2001	  
                       2005	  
                       2009	  




                        Panel B: Life and Property & Casualty Insurance Companies


           100%	  
             90%	  
             80%	  
             70%	                                                          Loans	  
             60%	  
                                                                            Mortgages	  
             50%	  
                                                                            Bonds	  &	  CP	  
             40%	  
             30%	                                                          Agency	  &	  Muni	  

             20%	                                                          Treasuries	  
             10%	  
               0%	  
                        1945	  
                        1949	  
                        1953	  
                        1957	  
                        1961	  
                        1965	  
                        1969	  
                        1973	  
                        1977	  
                        1981	  
                        1985	  
                        1989	  
                        1993	  
                        1997	  
                        2001	  
                        2005	  
                        2009	  
             Panel C: State and Local Pension Funds


100%	  
 90%	  
 80%	  
 70%	  
 60%	                                                Mortgages	  

 50%	                                                Bonds	  &	  CP	  
 40%	                                                Agency	  &	  Muni	  
 30%	  
                                                      Treasuries	  
 20%	  
 10%	  
   0%	  
            1945	  
            1949	  
            1953	  
            1957	  
            1961	  
            1965	  
            1969	  
            1973	  
            1977	  
            1981	  
            1985	  
            1989	  
            1993	  
            1997	  
            2001	  
            2005	  
            2009	  
                                                                         Figure 5
            Foreign Holdings of US Government and Corporate Debt

The figure presents the distribution of foreign and domestic holdings of US Treasury debt and US
corporate bonds. The solid line presents the percentage of US Treasury debt held by foreigners as a
fraction of total outstanding Treasury debt. The dashed line presents the percentage of US corporate
bonds held by foreigners as a fraction of total outstanding US corporate bonds.
                              60




                                                         Foreign Holdings of US Treasury Debt
                                                         Foreign Holdings of US Corproate Bonds
                                            50
              Foreign Holdings of US Debt (%)
             10     20      300      40




                                                 1945   1955      1965      1975       1985       1995   2005
                                                                               Year
                                                Table I
                                       Summary Statistics
Panel A presents summary statistics for the aggregate time series. Panel B presents summary statistics
for the firm-level panel data. All variables are presented as percentages, except the market-to-book
asset ratio. AR(1) is the ordinary least squares estimate of the slope parameter from a first order
autoregression. All ratios in the firm-level panel are Winsorized at the upper and lower 1%. All variables
are formally defined in Appendix A.


                                    Panel A: Aggregate Time Series

                                                    Obs    Mean      SD      Min      Max     AR(1)
     Corporate Financial & Investment Policy
        Debt / Assets                                93    19.36    6.82      8.41   30.31     0.99
        (Debt - Cash) / Assets                       93    8.08     9.80    -16.06   21.47     0.98
        Corp Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)        93     1.76    1.69     -1.61    5.60     0.60
        Corp Net Equity Issuances / Assets(t-1)      87    1.43     1.69     -0.93    8.94     0.66
        Investment / Assets                          93    2.91     2.27     -3.48    6.97     0.70
     Firm Characteristics
        EBIT / Assets                                93    10.14    3.05     1.86    18.34     0.81
        Net Income / Assets                          93     5.76    2.04     0.00    10.87     0.76
        Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                   88    1.27     0.25     0.57     1.90     0.79
        Cash / Assets                                93    11.28    3.87     5.97    24.47     0.94
        Intangible Assets / Assets                   93    16.11    9.85     5.99    36.53     1.02
     Macroeconomic Variables
        T-Bill Return                                93     3.61    2.96     0.02    14.30     0.90
        BAA - T-Bond Spread                          93     2.13    1.04     0.39     6.16     0.68
        Inflation                                    92     2.69     4.22   -11.46   16.66     0.59
        Equity Market Return                         87    11.58    20.31   -44.36   57.50     0.01
        Log Real Growth of GDP                       92     3.31     5.16   -13.93   16.99     0.37
     Government Variables
        Gov Debt / Assets                            85    45.63    34.51    13.38   184.80    0.96
        Gov Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)         85     3.42    8.57    -12.34   50.45     0.76
        Gov Exp / Assets                             83    20.71    10.40     2.61    56.39    0.92
                                   Panel B: Panel Data

                                              Obs        Mean     SD        Min       Max
Corporate Financial & Investment Policy
   Corp Total Debt / Assets                  222,940     21.73   20.09      0.00       88.35
   (Debt - Liquid Assets) / Assets           222,779     5.40    33.00     -86.09      81.93
   Corp Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)     200,667      3.57   15.81     -31.42      89.20
   Corp Net Equity Issuances / Assets(t-1)   194,044     9.95    35.46     -16.59     252.49
   Investment / Assets                       199,991     1.11    60.53    -291.90     339.36
Firm Characteristics
   EBIT / Assets                             220,042     3.14     21.85    -112.62    36.68
   Net Income / Assets                       222,476    -1.87     23.04    -133.21    25.02
   Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                213,323     1.76     1.61       0.36     10.74
   Liquid Assets / Assets                    222,791    16.37     19.39      0.04     88.28
   Intangible Assets / Assets                218,850   -196.05   588.67   -3,858.87   93.18
                                                  Table II
                                         Corporate Leverage
Panel A presents OLS estimates and t-statistics in parentheses from time series regressions of aggregate
corporate leverage on macroeconomic factors and firm characteristics. Columns (1) through (3) present
results using the level of all variables, columns (4) through (6) using first differences. Panel B presents the
coefficient estimate on the government leverage variable from a series of different OLS estimations. Each
specification includes as controls, all of the macroeconomic variables and firm characteristics presented
in columns (3) and (6) of Panel A. Rows (1) through (3) change the definition of the dependent variable.
Row (4) adds a debt tax incentive variable to the controls; Row (5) adds the following control variables:
debt tax incentive, real price of oil, unemployment rate, growth rate of M1, growth rate of real assets,
one period lag and future real GDP growth, an indicator identifying NBER recessions, and the T-Bond
- T-Bill spread. Rows (6) through (9) exclude different periods from the estimation sample. Rows
(10) through (11) use different samples of firms. All control variables are contemporaneous with the
dependent variable and formally defined in Appendix A. Newey-West standard errors assuming two
non-zero lags are used to compute all t-statistics (in parentheses). Statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels are indicated by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.

                        Panel A: Dependent Variable = Corporate Debt / Assets

                                                   Levels                         First Differences
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
 Gov Debt / Assets                   -0.046***    -0.082***     -0.053*    -0.025**     -0.036**    -0.039**
                                      ( -5.900)    ( -3.147)   ( -1.902)   ( -2.389)    ( -2.375)   ( -2.179)
 Macroeconomic Variables
  T-Bill Return                                      0.358       0.260                    -0.031     -0.010
                                                   ( 1.423)    ( 1.071)                 ( -0.380)   ( -0.108)
    BAA - T-Bond Spread                              -0.117     -0.274                   0.286**     0.303*
                                                   ( -0.247)   ( -0.518)                ( 1.978)    ( 1.841)
    Inflation                                        -0.032      0.055                    -0.016      0.020
                                                   ( -0.424)   ( 0.725)                 ( -0.580)   ( 0.578)
    Equity Market Return                             -0.003     -0.017                    0.004      -0.001
                                                   ( -0.280)   ( -1.392)                ( 0.999)    ( -0.138)
    Log Real Growth of GDP                        -0.206***     -0.112                 -0.087***    -0.061**
                                                   ( -3.252)   ( -1.541)                ( -3.150)   ( -2.241)
    Gov Exp / Assets                                0.184**      0.086                     0.003      0.004
                                                   ( 2.190)    ( 0.976)                 ( 0.100)    ( 0.113)
 Firm Characteristics
   EBIT / Assets                                               -0.539**                             -0.195**
                                                               ( -2.500)                            ( -1.996)
    Intangible Assets / Assets                                   -0.235                              -0.071
                                                               ( -1.631)                            ( -0.416)
    Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                                   0.260                                0.676
                                                               ( 0.145)                             ( 0.701)
 Trend                                  Yes          Yes          Yes         No           No          No
                2
 Adjusted R                            0.802        0.884        0.898       0.035        0.214       0.226
 Observations                            85           82           82          84           81          81
Panel B: Robustness Tests (Estimates of Government Leverage Coefficient)

                                                         (1)
         Alternative Measures of Corporate Leverage
           (1) (Debt - Cash) / Assets                 -0.082***
                                                       ( -3.064)
           (2) Corp LT Debt / Assets                    -0.024*
                                                       ( -1.870)
           (3) Corp ST Debt / Assets                  -0.020***
                                                       ( -3.163)
         Changes to the X-Variables
           (4) Additional Control Variables           -0.057***
                                                       ( -3.473)
         Scale and by GDP
           (5) Corp Total Debt / GDP                  -0.030**
                                                      ( -2.565)
         Subperiods
           (6) Excluding Years 1942-1955              -0.089***
                                                       ( -3.087)
           (7) Pre-1969                                 -0.031*
                                                       ( -1.804)
           (8) Post-1968                              -0.099***
                                                       ( -2.827)
           (9) No Recession Years                      -0.046**
                                                       ( -2.080)
         Alternative Samples
           (10) 500 Largest Firms                     -0.038**
                                                      ( -2.088)
           (11) NYSE Firms                            -0.040**
                                                      ( -2.150)
                                               Table III
                                   Corporate Financing Flows
The table presents OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics in parentheses. The dependent variable in
each regression is the net financing flow scaled by the start of period total assets and is indicated at
the top of each column. For example, the dependent variable in the first column is net debt issuances
during period t scaled by start of period total assets. All flow and first difference control variables are
contemporaneous with the dependent variable; stock variables and interest rates are lagged one period.
All variables are formally defined in Appendix A. Newey-West standard errors assuming two non-zero
lags are used to compute all t-statistics (in parentheses). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels are indicated by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.

                                              Financing Flow Scaled by Start of Period Total Assets
                                               Total    Long-Term Short-Term
                                                Debt       Debt          Debt           Equity
                                                 (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)
    Gov Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)        -0.042     -0.047**         0.009           0.044
                                              ( -1.492)    ( -2.001)      ( 0.996)        ( 0.876)
    Macroeconomic Variables
     T-Bill Return                            0.209***     0.119***       0.082***          0.060
                                              ( 3.763)     ( 3.376)       ( 3.510)        ( 0.953)
      BAA - T-Bond Spread                       -0.279       0.046        -0.279**          0.255
                                              ( -1.101)    ( 0.263)       ( -2.520)       ( 1.370)
      Inflation                                0.074**       0.041         0.032**          0.011
                                              ( 2.397)     ( 1.626)       ( 2.036)        ( 0.311)
      Equity Market Return                      -0.001       0.008       -0.009***        0.017***
                                              ( -0.223)    ( 1.458)       ( -2.683)       ( 3.139)
      Log Real Growth of GDP                    -0.015      -0.045*         0.020          -0.028
                                              ( -0.531)    ( -1.848)      ( 1.521)        ( -0.796)
      Gov Exp / Assets                           0.022       0.037         -0.019*          -0.067
                                              ( 0.675)     ( 1.310)       ( -1.645)       ( -1.028)
    Firm Characteristics
      EBIT / Assets                             0.023        0.039         0.007            -0.008
                                              ( 0.296)     ( 0.625)      ( 0.230)         ( -0.072)
      Intangible Assets / Assets                0.026        0.018          0.004          -0.072*
                                              ( 0.929)     ( 0.847)      ( 0.395)         ( -1.784)
      Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                1.060        1.464         -0.208         5.371***
                                              ( 0.857)     ( 1.619)      ( -0.519)        ( 3.663)
    Adjusted R2                                0.465        0.456          0.412            0.323
      Obs                                        83           83             83               83
                                              Table IV
                 Corporate Liquid Assets and Government Leverage
The table presents OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics in parentheses for regressions of corporate
cash and short term investments scaled by assets on macroeconomic factors and firm characteristics.
Columns (1) through (3) present results using the level of all variables, columns (4) through (6) using
first differences. Newey-West standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all t-
statistics (in parentheses). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated by “*”,
“**”, and “***”, respectively.

                                                Levels                       First Differences
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
 Gov Debt / Assets                 0.088***    0.103***    0.056**     0.064***   0.039***    0.045***
                                   ( 9.128)    ( 5.471)    ( 2.426)    ( 6.001)   ( 3.437)    ( 3.565)
 Macroeconomic Variables
  T-Bill Return                                -0.302**    -0.256**                 -0.060       -0.066
                                               ( -2.325)   ( -2.042)              ( -1.019)    ( -1.066)
    BAA - T-Bond Spread                          0.447       -0.127               -0.192**    -0.262***
                                               ( 1.645)    ( -0.540)              ( -1.995)    ( -2.675)
    Inflation                                    -0.066    -0.146**                 -0.044      -0.073*
                                               ( -1.101)   ( -2.374)              ( -1.184)    ( -1.678)
    Equity Market Return                         0.005      0.015*                   0.003       0.009*
                                               ( 0.723)    ( 1.720)               ( 0.987)     ( 1.774)
    Log Real Growth of GDP                     0.198***      0.090                 0.069**      0.066**
                                               ( 3.386)    ( 1.458)               ( 2.133)     ( 2.570)
    Gov Exp / Assets                             -0.043     0.107*                0.119***     0.114***
                                               ( -0.720)   ( 1.828)               ( 3.962)     ( 3.827)
 Firm Characteristics
   EBIT / Assets                                           0.517***                              0.159
                                                           ( 4.900)                           ( 1.638)
    Intangible Assets / Assets                             0.242***                              0.105
                                                           ( 3.902)                           ( 0.954)
    Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                              -2.242*                             -1.256
                                                           ( -1.958)                          ( -1.485)
    Earnings Volatility                                      0.265                              -0.284
                                                           ( 1.037)                           ( -0.581)
 Trend                                Yes         Yes        Yes         No          No          No
 Obs                                  85          82         82          84          81          81
                                                                         Table V
                                                          Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity
The table presents OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics in parentheses. The dependent variables are indicated above their corresponding results -
leverage, net long-term debt issuances, and liquid assets. For each dependent variable, we restrict the estimation sample to the upper and lower quartiles
of the credit-risk/financial constraint distribution proxy. We use three proxies: firm size, the Hadlock-Pierce (HP) index of financial constraints, and an
estimated probability of default (Default Pr.). We then estimates a panel regression where the cross-sectional unit is defined by the interaction of the
firm and credit-risk indicator (upper or lower quartile). The effect is similar to running two separate firm fixed effect regressions, one using the sample
of firms in the lower quartile of the proxy distribution and the other using the sample of firms in the upper quartile of the proxy distribution. Running a
single regression enables us to test the difference in coefficients across strata, as presented in the columns marked “Dif.” The leverage specifications are
identical to that found in column (3) of Table II. The net debt issuance specifications are identical to that found in column (2) of Table III. The liquid
asset specifications are identical to that found in column (3) of Table IV. To ease the presentation we present only the coefficient on the government debt
variable, indicated in the leftmost column. Standard errors clustered at the year level are used to compute all t-statistics (in parentheses). Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.

                                                          Firm Size                               HP Index                             Default Pr.
                                               Small         Big          Dif        Unconst       Const         Dif        Low            High        Dif
                                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)             (8)        (9)
                                                                                       Corp Total Debt / Assets
   Gov Debt / Assets                         -0.062***    -0.117***    -0.056***     -0.120***    -0.041***    0.079***   -0.111***     -0.098***      0.013
                                              ( -4.604)    ( -8.210)    ( -3.395)     ( -7.879)    ( -3.029)   ( 4.419)    ( -8.072)     ( -7.486)   ( 0.907)
   Obs                                                                   89,831                                 89,792                                95,466
                                                                                Corp Net LT Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)
   Gov Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)        -0.001     -0.074***    -0.073**      -0.062**        0.006     0.068***   -0.060***        -0.027      0.033
                                             ( -0.056)     ( -2.843)   ( -2.506)     ( -2.512)     ( 0.331)    ( 2.626)    ( -2.784)     ( -1.516)   ( 1.350)
   Obs                                                                  91,126                                  91,073                                97,611
                                              Table VI
                        Credit Spreads and Government Leverage

The table presents OLS estimates and t-statistics in parentheses from time series regressions. The
dependent variable is the BAA-AAA yield spread on corporate bonds and the data annual observations
from 1926 to 2010 or 2012 depending on whether government leverage is normalized by Assets or GDP,
respectively. All right side variables are contemporaneous with the dependent variable and are formally
defined in Appendix A. Newey-West standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute
all t-statistics (in parentheses). Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated by
“*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.

                                   (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
  Ln(Gov Debt / GDP)           -0.640***                 -0.482***                 -0.396***
                                ( -2.993)                 ( -3.702)                 ( -2.644)
  Ln(Gov Debt / Assets)                     -0.498***                 -0.287***                  -0.217*
                                             ( -2.905)                 ( -3.259)                ( -1.935)
  T-Bond - T-Bill Spread                                 0.132***       0.091*      0.129**       0.101*
                                                         ( 3.076)      ( 1.897)    ( 2.347)     ( 1.690)
  Equity Volatility                                      4.865***      4.970***    4.682***     4.871***
                                                         ( 9.353)      ( 8.880)    ( 8.705)     ( 9.088)
  Log Real Growth of GDP                                   -0.009        -0.003      -0.001       0.001
                                                         ( -0.556)     ( -0.229)   ( -0.070)    ( 0.072)
  EBIT / Assets                                                                      0.015        0.019
                                                                                   ( 0.513)     ( 0.606)
  Default Probability                                                                2.556        2.246
                                                                                   ( 1.419)     ( 1.174)
  Adjusted R2                    0.096        0.153        0.628        0.622        0.650       0.633
  Obs                             93            85           87           85           87          85
                                                Table VII
             Intermediary Asset Composition and Government Leverage
The table presents OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics in parentheses. Each panel presents results
from six different regressions. The dependent variable is indicated by the panel title and is measured
relative to the total financial assets of the financial institution, denoted at the top of the columns.
For example, the first panel, denoted Corporate Loans, Bonds, & Commercial Paper, presents the
estimates from regressions of the ratio of loans, corporate bonds, and commercial paper asset holdings
to total financial assets on the ratio of federal debt held by the public to total assets of the unregulated
sector. Columns (1) and (2) present the results for US chartered depository institutions. Columns (3)
and (4) present the results for US insurance companies. Columns (5) and (6) present the results for
state and local pensions. Odd numbered columns correspond to univariate regressions, even numbered
columns correspond to multivariate regressions with the following controls: three month T-bill rate,
BAA-Treasury bond spread, inflation, equity market return, real GDP growth, corporate EBIT / assets,
corporate intangible assets / assets, and corporate market-to-book ratio. All right hand side variables are
contemporaneous with the dependent variable. All variables are in first differnces. Newey-West standard
errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all t-statistics (in parentheses). Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.

                                         Change in (Corporate Lending / Assets)
                                     Banks              Insurance         Public Pensions
                                 (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
                                           Corporate Loans, Bonds & Commercial Paper
       Gov Debt / Assets      -0.054***     -0.055***     -0.041*     -0.039*     -0.127*      -0.088
                               ( -3.437)     ( -3.276)   ( -1.871)   ( -1.932)   ( -1.776)   ( -1.469)
       Obs                       72            72           75            75        65          65
                                                             Treasuries
       Gov Debt / Assets      0.180***      0.195***     0.183***    0.200***      0.065       0.082
                              ( 4.045)      ( 3.724)     ( 9.758)    ( 10.344)   ( 1.267)    ( 1.622)
       Obs                       76            76           75            75        65          65
                                                           Agency Bonds
       Gov Debt / Assets         0.017        0.007        0.019       0.020       -0.016      -0.001
                               ( 1.437)      ( 0.613)    ( 1.552)    ( 1.501)    ( -0.870)   ( -0.032)
       Obs                       65            65           65            65        65          65
                                             Table VIII
                                         Foreign Holdings
The table presents OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics in parentheses. The dependent variable is
corporate leverage, defined as the ratio of all interest-bearing debt to the book value of total assets.
Foreign Holdings Wedge is the difference between foreign holdings of treasuries and foreign holdings of
corporate debt. All right hand side variables are contemporaneous with the dependent variable and the
regression is estimated in first difference form. All variables are formally defined in Appendix A. Newey-
West standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all t-statistics (in parentheses).
Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.

                                                                  ∆ Corporate Leverage
                                                                    (1)         (2)
                Gov Debt / Assets                                 -0.026***    -0.034**
                                                                   ( -2.833)   ( -2.119)
                Gov Debt / Assets x Foreign Holdings Wedge         -0.006**     -0.004*
                                                                   ( -2.513)   ( -1.720)
                Foreign Holdings Wedge                               0.144       0.091
                                                                   ( 1.450)    ( 0.986)
                Macroeconomic Variables
                 T-Bill Return                                                   -0.021
                                                                               ( -0.232)
                   BAA - T-Bond Spread                                            0.205
                                                                               ( 1.134)
                   Inflation                                                      0.017
                                                                               ( 0.541)
                   Equity Market Return                                           0.001
                                                                               ( 0.092)
                   Log Real Growth of GDP                                       -0.056*
                                                                               ( -1.938)
                   Gov Exp / Assets                                              -0.014
                                                                               ( -0.343)
                Firm Characteristics
                  EBIT / Assets                                                 -0.181*
                                                                               ( -1.937)
                   Intangible Assets / Assets                                    -0.098
                                                                               ( -0.520)
                   Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                                    0.221
                                                                               ( 0.218)
                Obs                                                   84          81
                                              Table IX
                                     Corporate Investment
The table presents OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics in parentheses. Panel A presents annual
time series regressions The dependent variable is corporate investment in period t divided by total assets
in period t-1. All flow variables are contemporaneous with the dependent variable; stock variables and
interest rates are lagged one period. Panel B presents firm level fixed effect regressions. The dependent
variable is corporate investment divided by start of period total assets. We restrict the estimation
sample to the upper and lower quartiles of the credit risk/financial constraint distribution proxy. We
use three proxies: firm size, the Hadlock-Pierce (HP) index of financial constraints, and an estimated
probability of default (Default Pr.). We then estimates a panel regression where the cross-sectional
unit is defined by the interaction of the firm and credit-risk indicator (upper or lower quartile). The
investment specifications are identical to that found in column (3) of Table IV. To ease the presentation
we present only the coefficient on the government debt variable, indicated in the leftmost column. Newey-
West standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all t-statistics (in parentheses).
Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated by “*”, “**”, and “***”, respectively.


                               Panel A: Annual Time Series Regressions

                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
         Gov Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)     -0.113***    -0.123***    -0.094***    -0.048**
                                                   ( -5.753)    ( -4.557)    ( -4.362)   ( -2.527)
         Macroeconomic Variables
          T-Bill Return                                          0.166**    0.308***      0.124**
                                                                ( 2.400)    ( 5.639)     ( 2.329)
           BAA - T-Bond Spread                                 -0.790***      0.009        -0.053
                                                                ( -2.880)   ( 0.029)     ( -0.247)
           Inflation                                            0.163***      0.089      0.157***
                                                                ( 3.331)    ( 1.599)     ( 3.046)
           Gov Exp / Assets                                       0.037       0.039         0.004
                                                                ( 1.419)    ( 1.546)     ( 0.198)
         Firm Characteristics
           Net Income / Assets                                              0.524***     0.363***
                                                                            ( 5.739)     ( 4.581)
           Market-to-Book Asset Ratio                                        1.957**     1.592**
                                                                            ( 2.011)     ( 2.443)
           Lag Investment / Assets                                                       0.406***
                                                                                         ( 5.831)
         Obs                                          85          83           83           83
                                                    Panel B: Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity

                                                    Firm Size                             HP Index                              Default Pr.
                                         Small         Big         Dif       Unconst       Const         Dif         Low            High        Dif
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)             (8)        (9)
                                                                                Corp Investment / Assets
Gov Net Debt Issuances / Assets(t-1)   -0.115***    -0.154***     -0.039*    -0.146***    -0.150***      -0.004    -0.170***     -0.124***    0.047**
                                        ( -6.076)    ( -6.239)   ( -1.649)    ( -6.598)    ( -5.859)   ( -0.162)    ( -7.108)     ( -5.833)   ( 2.206)
Obs                                                               93,438                                92,999                                100,085
