NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT TAXES
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 20580
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20580

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

I appreciate the financial support of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State and the Hoover Institution, conversations with Trevor Gallen, and comments from Jeff Brown
and seminar participants at the Chicago Fed, Hoover, Texas A&M, the University of Chicago, and
the September 2014 NBER conference on Tax Policy and the Economy. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The New Full-time Employment Taxes
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 20580
October 2014
JEL No. H24,I13,J22
ABSTRACT
The Affordable Care Act introduces or expands taxes on incomes and full-time employment, beginning
in 2014. The purpose of this paper is to characterize the new full-time employment taxes from the
perspective of a household budget constraint, measure their magnitude, and assess their likely consequences
for employee work schedules. When the ACA is fully implemented, full-time employment taxes will
be prevalent and often as large as what workers can earn in five hours of work per week, 52 weeks
per year. The economic significance of the ACA’s full-time employment taxes varies by demographic
group: they are non-monotonic in age, increasing with family size, and negatively correlated with
schooling.

Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

A full-time employment tax is a tax or penalty owed by, or subsidy withheld from, a
person as a consequence of his full-time employment status. For the first time in 2014, millions
of people face such taxes on their full-time work. More workers will face full-time employment
taxes in 2015 when assessable employers owe penalties on the basis of the number of full-time
employees on their payroll. Both of these taxes are provisions of the Affordable Care Act of
2010 (hereafter, ACA), on top of the longstanding taxes on incomes and payroll. This paper
assesses the magnitude, direction, and economic characteristics of the full-time employment tax
wedges created by the ACA.
By definition, part-time employed and non-employed persons are exempt from a full-time
employment tax. I follow the usual steps of public finance analysis and first look at the tax
wedge – the gap between supply and demand prices created by a tax or subsidy – before
attempting to draw conclusions about the tax’s behavioral effects and ultimate incidence. For
simplicity, I assume that employees are legally liable for all marginal taxes and penalties and are
legally entitled to all marginal subsidies, even when the actual liability falls on the employer. As
long as prices can fully adjust to reflect supply and demand, and ignoring enforcement issues,
my legal liability assumption is just a normalization and does not imply that employees
ultimately bear the burden of taxes. However, proper tax measurement requires an assessment of
the treatment of the ACA’s full-time employment taxes by other parts of the tax system, e.g.,
whether a full-time employment tax is deductible from employer business income taxes. The
last step in the analysis is to begin to consider the equilibrium consequences of the new tax
wedges.
The prevalence and size of the new full-time employment tax (hereafter, FTET) wedges
are economically important. Almost half of the working population is directly affected by at least
one of the new FTETs. The ACA’s FTET wedges vary substantially across groups: they are
most significant for young and uneducated workers and least significant for the elderly. From an
aggregate point of view, the employer penalty by itself is historically significant but nonetheless
the wedges that they create are matched, if not exceeded, by the ACA’s implicit FTET. My

results account for the facts that a variety of longstanding tax and subsidy rules also affect work
incentives (in both directions) and that many people will not participate in programs for which
they are eligible.1
Although this paper does not even attempt to discuss all of the parts of the ACA that
relate to the labor market or to taxation, its Section I begins with an overview of the ACA’s main
components related to insurance coverage. Section II explains how two of those components
contain taxes on full-time employment and represents the taxes in terms of household budget
constraints. Section III discusses determinants of the magnitude of those taxes. Section IV has
the main results on the distribution of the ACA’s FTET across workers. Section V discusses
some of the behavioral effects of FTETs, and Section VI concludes.

I.

ACA Components Related to Insurance Coverage

A. Health Insurance Marketplaces
In order to help the uninsured get health insurance coverage, the ACA created what it
calls “health insurance exchanges,” where individuals can shop for health insurance coverage for
themselves and family members and in many cases get federal assistance with the health
insurance expenses. An exchange is not a physical location; rather, this refers to the collection of
health insurance policies offered to each state’s residents by private insurance companies subject
to state and federal regulations regarding standardization of policy benefits, provisions, and
pricing. Many, but not all, individuals shop on the exchanges by visiting an internet site that
gathers customer information and quotes prices.
The exchange plans are categorized by “metal,” which indicates the typical fraction of
medical expenditures that are covered by the plan, as opposed to being paid out of pocket by the
patient. A bronze plan pays 60 percent, with the other 40 percent paid, on average, out of pocket.
Silver, gold, and platinum plans pay 70 percent, 80 percent, and 90 percent respectively (United
States Department of Health and Human Services 2014c). Silver plans are the most popular
(United States Department of Health and Human Services, 2014b) and also serve as pricing
benchmarks.
1

The income and payroll tax exclusions of premiums paid for employer-sponsored health insurance are
among the many longstanding policies affecting the incentives to work.

2

Anyone lawfully present and living in the United States, but not incarcerated, can
purchase health insurance on the exchanges (United States Department of Health and Human
Services, 2014a), as long as they pay full price with after-tax dollars. However, most persons
getting insurance through the exchanges are receiving financial assistance (United States
Department of Health and Human Services, 2014b), which is restricted to specific populations.
As we shall see, the financial assistance rules create some of the ACA’s taxes.
1. Premium Tax Credits
High insurance premiums are one of the major reasons people were uninsured prior to the
ACA (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2013), which is why the ACA includes premium
assistance tax credits to help families pay for their exchange coverage.

Exchange plan

participants are eligible for premium tax credits only if they (1) are not eligible for affordable
coverage, and not enrolled in any coverage, through their employer or an immediate family
member’s employer; (2) have purchased coverage on the exchanges; (3) have family calendar
year income between 100 and 400 percent of the poverty line; and (4) satisfy other criteria.2 The
amount of the premium tax credit is the excess, if any, between the full premium for the second
cheapest silver plan and an ACA-specified percentage of their calendar year income.
2. Cost‐sharing Subsidies
As noted above, the expected out-of-pocket costs on a silver plan are significant. This is
part of the design of the law: health plan participants who are paying out of pocket have an
incentive to seek out less costly care. However, families expected to be below 250 percent of the
poverty line are, in effect, permitted to get a gold or platinum plan for the price of a silver plan.3
Hereafter, I collectively refer to premium tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies as “exchange
subsidies.”

2

The other criteria include: not eligible for government-sponsored coverage; citizen of, or lawfully in, the
United States; and either unmarried or filing a federal tax return jointly with spouse.
3
Gold and platinum plans are somewhat different (often with greater out-of-pocket costs) than silver costsharing-reduction plans for persons below 250 percent of the poverty line.

3

B. The Employer Mandate
Because of criterion (1)—that exchange subsidies are available only to persons who are
not eligible for affordable employer coverage—the ACA requires that large employers either
provide affordable, qualified coverage or pay a penalty. The law defines a large employer to be
one that had at least fifty full-time-equivalent (FTE) employees in the calendar year previous to
the year in which it failed to provide coverage. Part-time employees count toward full-timeequivalents in proportion to their hours worked.

C. The Individual Mandate
The ACA requires individuals to get coverage, pay a penalty, or receive a hardship
exemption. The penalty is administered as part of the federal personal income tax return, and its
2016 amount is the maximum of a $695 per uninsured household member (uninsured children
count half and the total uninsured is capped at three), indexed to inflation, or 2.5 percent of
household income.4

D. Medicaid Expansions
Medicaid is a longstanding health insurance program for the poor, and it is essentially
free for its participants. Income eligibility limits are set by states; in 2012 they averaged 84
percent of the poverty line for working parents and somewhat less for jobless parents.5 Many
states also impose asset limits (that is, families with more than a few thousand dollars in assets
cannot participate even if they have no income), especially for adult participants. Beginning in
2014, the ACA expands Medicaid participation by raising (in participating states) the income
threshold for adult eligibility to 133 percent of the poverty line and reducing barriers to
participation.
The new income thresholds for Medicaid create a complicated system of subsidies for
families near but above the poverty line because exchange subsidies are supposed to be withheld
4

The individual mandate penalty is less in 2014 and 2015. The total penalty for a year (even if coverage
was lacking for just part of the year) is capped at the national average bronze premium; see section
5000A(c)(1)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended by the ACA.
5
The cross-state average weights thresholds from Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation (2012) by 2010
state population. The average threshold for children age one to five was 141 percent FPL.

4

from persons who are eligible for their state’s Medicaid program even though they may have a
calendar year income above the poverty line and thereby satisfying the income criteria for
exchange coverage. To make matters more complicated, the exchange subsidies and Medicaid
use different income concepts (Mulligan 2014).
Unless noted otherwise, the analysis in this paper assumes that Medicaid eligibility does
not prevent receipt of exchange subsidies. This simplifies the analysis and, for several reasons,
may be a pretty good approximation to actual practice. First of all, the vast majority of people in
families satisfying the income-eligibility criteria for exchange subsidies are not Medicaideligible. Second, many of the states are not raising their Medicaid income threshold. Third, due
to the different income concepts and enrollment rules used by the two programs, it will often be
administratively difficult to withhold exchange subsidies from a family that is Medicaid eligible
but satisfies the other eligibility criteria for exchange subsidies. My assumption about the
overlap between Medicaid and exchange subsidies would be less accurate for the purposes of
studying specific groups with a large fraction of its members having incomes between 100 and
133 percent of the poverty line.

II.

Distorting the Workweek

A. ACA Provisions Containing Scheduling Incentives
Because of their rules for eligibility and exemptions, two of the above components of the
ACA introduce incentives to change the workweek. The most acknowledged is the penalty on
large employers that do not offer health insurance to their full-time employees. Because the
amount of the penalty is proportional to the number of full-time employees (over thirty full-time
employees) on the payroll, the penalty creates an incentive to substitute part-time positions for
full-time positions.
Less acknowledged is the ACA provision that employees and their families cannot
receive subsidized coverage – in the forms of cost-sharing assistance and tax credits to offset
insurance premiums – on the ACA’s health insurance exchanges unless their employer fails to
offer them affordable coverage. Except in the increasingly rare cases where part-time positions
are eligible for employer health coverage too, an employee (and family) at a firm offering
5

affordable coverage would be eligible for exchange subsidies only if he worked part-time, or not
at all, which amounts to an implicit tax on full-time employment.6 The amount of the implicit
tax on full-time employment is equal to the employee’s valuation of the exchange subsidy he
forgoes as a consequence of working full-time. This implicit tax has many of the economic
characteristics of the employer penalty; they are both full-time employment taxes.7 Full-time
employment taxes are the subject of this paper.

B. The Family Budget Constraint: Employer not Offering Coverage
Before attempting to measure the magnitude of these incentives, it helps to see how the
provisions might enter a household budget constraint. Take a worker that is employed an
average of 52n weeks per year; n is the fraction of his adult lifetime that he is employed. His
family’s adjustable gross income (hereafter, AGI) is o + [wh-q-p(h)]n , where q  0 is a quasifixed cost of employment, o is other components of AGI (such as asset income or spousal
earnings) and p(h) is the employer penalty. q is a cost that employers pay, aside from a penalty,
for each worker it has. It includes scheduling costs, payroll costs, hiring and training costs, and
perhaps management and coordination costs. Labor economists refer to q as a “quasi-fixed” cost
because it does not vary with the number of hours that are worked, but it does vary with the
number of workers on the payroll (Oi 1962). The quasi-fixed cost is one reason why an
employer cannot simply replace one forty-hour worker with four ten-hour workers and get the
same results. The employer running ten-hour weekly schedules will find that he has additional
administrative costs, more workers in need of training, etc.

6

See also Gamage (2012) and Mulligan (2013a). The incentives can be more complicated for dual-earner
couples; see below my discussion of spousal coverage. On the (infrequency) of health insurance offerings
to part-time employees see (ADP Research Institute 2013, before the ACA) and note that the rare
employer that was offering coverage to part-time employees is encouraged by the ACA to stop doing so
(Wayne 2014).
7
For any household head or spouse that has a family member (or himself) receiving exchange subsidies
some time during the calendar year, the ACA also increases the marginal tax rate on their earnings and
unemployment benefits because the exchange subsidies are phased out as a function of the sum of head
and spouse income. Like any additional marginal income tax, this tax can reduce hours worked to the
extent that employee work schedules have traditionally been lengthened in order to economize on
employers’ quasi-fixed costs of employment (see below). This additional marginal income tax is not
discussed in this paper, except to the extent that it interacts with the ACA’s full-time employment taxes.

6

Both the employer penalty p(h) and the quasi-fixed cost q are paid by the employer.
Because the first step in this paper is to characterize and measure the wedge between marginal
revenue product and employee value of time – before making conclusions about the behavioral
consequences of the wedges – I assume for the moment that the employer simply passes all
marginal employment costs on to employees. This assumption helps economize on notation and,
for the reasons mentioned in the introduction, does not affect conclusions about the size of the
ACA’s tax wedges.8 As a result, a worker’s compensation is the product of his marginal hourly
wage w and his work hours h minus these two costs.9
The ACA requires that large employers either provide affordable, qualified coverage or
pay a penalty.10 The penalty is a function of the length h of the weekly work schedule: namely, a
step function:
(1)
where I() is the indicator function. P is the hours limit for “part-time” employment (that is, the
hours limit for positions exempt from the penalty at assessable employers), which I take to be 29
hours per week.11 The constant p is the amount of the employer penalty measured in hours per

8

A somewhat different analysis is needed to the extent that legislated minimum wages or other frictions
get in the way of the wage adjustments that make employer and employee taxes equivalent in the long
run, as they might for the types of workers who currently earn near the minimum wage. By ignoring rigid
wages, this paper’s equilibrium analysis probably underestimates the amount by which the ACA reduces
the employment of low-skill workers because the ACA’s employment impact can be understood as
having two components: the impact that would occur if wages fully adjusted to labor demand and supply,
plus the impact of having a rigid wage rather than one that fully adjusts. Both components are negative—
in the direction of less employment—but only the former component is examined in this paper. See also
Baicker and Levy (2008) who estimate the low-skill employment effects of a hypothetical health
insurance mandate (an analogue to the latter component).
9
The labor market would not function efficiently in the presence of quasi-fixed costs if employers just
posted an hourly wage and let employees choose hours. Market efficiency is enhanced by employers’
charging employment fees (my approach: the fees are q + p(h)) or offering employees a combination of
hours and earnings packages (Rosen 1978).
10
Section 4980H(c)(2)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended by the ACA, defines a large
employer to be one that had at least fifty full-time-equivalent (FTE) employees in the calendar year
previous to the year in which it failed to provide coverage. Part-time employees count toward full-timeequivalents in proportion to their hours worked.
11
The ACA sets the limit at 29 hours per week for hourly employees (i.e., 30-hour workers are considered
full time), with some caveats noted below.

7

week and Z is a parameter converting hours per week into units of the consumption good (more
on Z below).
The household pays a tax at constant rate L on its labor income, especially employee
payroll taxes and employee personal income taxes. For someone working for an employer that
does not offer health insurance coverage, the family budget constraint is:
1



(2)

where c is household consumption including health expenses. g refers to untaxed government
subsidies, if any.12  is the benefit-reduction or phase-out rate for those subsidies, to the extent
that they are means tested on the basis of AGI.
Families make choices about {c,n,h}, which are constrained by equation (2). The family
budget constraint has three distinct portions. One portion is the most relevant for people who
desire to be working full-time even in the face of the penalty (more details on preferences in
Section IV).

For them, the employer penalty is just another quasi-fixed cost and thereby

encouraging them to substitute hours h for employment n. In effect, this person experiences the
employer penalty as a tax on employment regardless of how many hours he works. For low
values of P, this portion of the budget constraint is large and is the portion most commonly
experienced in the population.
Another portion is relevant for people who desire to be working part time even without
the penalty. They are not affected by the penalty and the household would have no incentive to
adjust their behavior based on the size of the penalty p. For high values of the threshold P, this
portion of the budget constraint is large and is the portion most commonly experienced in the
population.
The third portion is the boundary or “notch” between the first two portions and is relevant
for persons working full-time without the penalty but near the margin P. The penalty induces
them to work part-time instead, and probably at a higher employment rate.
Because the overall budget constraint features these three possibilities, the employer
penalty might either reduce or increase average hours worked per employee. In effect, the
12

The quasi-fixed cost q includes forgone unemployment benefits (if any), which are taxable. g also
reflects differences between marginal and average tax rates.

8

employer penalty is a tax on full-time employment because it is avoided by both part-time
employment and non-employment.
The penalty for failing to provide any coverage is levied monthly at a rate of $167 per
full-time employee (annualized that’s $2,000), indexed for health cost inflation after 2014.
Unlike employee wages and benefits, the penalty is not deductible for business income tax
purposes.13
Part-time employees, defined to be anyone working fewer than thirty hours per week, are
exempt from this penalty, as are the first thirty full-time employees. Employers with zero
employees receiving subsidized coverage on the exchanges are also exempt. These exemptions
complicate the measurement of the marginal cost of an employee and therefore the amount
passed through to full-time employees. Take, for example, an employer not offering coverage
and having 100 full-time employees on her payroll in the current and previous years.14 None of
her employees receives subsidized coverage on the exchanges. If she hires one more employee
in the current year, and that employee receives an exchange subsidy, that one hire costs her
$142,000 in annual penalties, plus health cost inflation applied to that amount. Or consider
another employer not offering coverage and having 49 employees (all full time) on his payroll in
the current year and expecting to employ 100 full-time workers next year. If he hires an
additional employee this year, that changes his designation from “small employer” to “large
employer” for the purposes of determining his employer penalty next year and the one hire
thereby costs him $140,000 in penalties next year, plus health cost inflation applied to that
amount.
The employer penalty puts new administrative burdens on exempt employers because
they must prove they are exempt. Penalized employers also have to prove they calculated their
penalty correctly, including proper classification of part-time employees and new hires. The
administrative burdens on employers are large enough that the Obama administration twice
delayed the implementation of the employer penalty, and with its second delay it noted the
disproportionate burden put on smaller employers (United States Department of Treasury 2014).

13

Sections 4980H(c)(7), as amended by the ACA, and 275(a)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
specify that taxes imposed by Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code—among which is the ACA’s
employer penalty—are nondeductible for the purposes of calculating a business’ federal income tax.
14
In this example and the subsequent example, “current year” refers to any calendar year 2016 or later.

9

Obviously there are other examples in which an employer not offering coverage has zero
marginal penalty cost of hiring because the employer remains exempt, and administrative costs
remain constant, even with an additional full-time employee. Three important marginal cost
conclusions can be drawn from the penalty exemptions. First, among people working for
employers not offering coverage, the employee-weighted average marginal penalty cost of hiring
full-time workers far exceeds the average penalty payments per full-time employee.

The

difference between marginal and average cost arises because people who work for an employer
on the margin of exemption have a positive marginal cost but a zero average cost, and because of
the thirty-employee exemption. Second, economic theory alone does not tell us whether the
average marginal penalty cost of hiring a full-time worker is more or less than $2,000 per year
(adjusted for health cost inflation) and I do not have the data needed to make that determination.
Third, the marginal penalty cost varies widely across employers even though the statutory
penalty amount is common. The calculations in this paper assume that the marginal penalty cost
is $2,000 (adjusted for health cost inflation) per full-time employee per year for any employer
not offering coverage, and for the reasons noted above should be interpreted as underestimates of
the amount of heterogeneity of the full-time employment taxes created by the ACA.
The dollar amount pZ shown in the budget constraint (2) is the amount that the employer
has to reduce wages in order to pay a $2,000 penalty (plus health cost inflation). For an
employer that pays business income tax at rate b (state and federal combined) and employer
payroll tax at rate s, pZ is, before the health cost inflation adjustment, equal to:

1

2000
1

(3)

which is greater than $2,000 for employers with positive net income.

C. The Family Budget Constraint: Employer Offering Coverage to Full‐time
Employees
Most people work for employers that offer health insurance to their full-time employees.
Nevertheless, the ACA may apply an implicit full-time employment tax to them because of the
10

rules for the ACA’s exchange subsidies. Among other things, the subsidies are a function of
family size and composition. Let 0.7M denote a family’s premium for the second-cheapest silver
plan on the basis of its size and composition (before subsidies), M denote the associated expected
medical expenditures (in the actuarial sense, including loadings), and 0.3M denote average outof-pocket expenses for participants in the silver plan, with all three quantities expressed as a ratio
to the federal poverty line (hereafter, FPL).15 The annualized exchange subsidies are, as a ratio to
FPL:
,

max 0,0.7

0.3

(4)

Y denotes the combined AGI (“family income”) of the household head and spouse, expressed as
a ratio to FPL. AGI is the amount that head and spouse show on their federal personal tax return
as their wage and asset income for the calendar year.16 () and () are the schedules specified by
the ACA determining the cap on the share of AGI to be spent on premiums and the discount on
out-of-pocket costs, respectively. Because the full premium is 0.7M and the ACA says that a
family with AGI equal to Y does not have to spend more than (Y)Y, the subsidy is 0.7M  (Y)Y
unless the full premium is already less than the spending cap.
In addition to the legal residency requirement and the eligibility criteria embedded in ()
and (), the ACA also conditions exchange subsidy eligibility on a household’s access to
employer-sponsored insurance.17 Specifically, during any month that a person is eligible for
coverage through her current employer or through a family member’s current employer, and the
coverage is affordable, 18 he is ineligible for exchange subsidies. I refer to this as the “ESI
criterion.” Note that an offer of continuation coverage through a former employer, or through a
family member’s former employer, does not prevent an exchange plan participant from receiving
15

The 0.7 represents the fact that silver plans have 70 percent actuarial value. Neither component of M
includes expenses, such as cosmetic surgery, that are not covered by health insurance.
16
The ACA slightly modifies the traditional AGI measure—its modification is called modified adjusted
gross income or MAGI—but this paper does not examine the differences between AGI and MAGI.
17
In addition, exchange subsidy recipients cannot be eligible for government-sponsored (minimum
essential) coverage, must be enrolled in an exchange plan, cannot be enrolled in employer-sponsored
coverage, and (if married) must file a joint tax return with their spouse. As noted below, the governmentsponsored coverage criterion renders the elderly ineligible.
18
Employer coverage is considered affordable if self-only coverage under the plan is no greater than 9.5
percent of household income (U.S. Government Printing Office, 77 FR 30380).

11

subsidies as long as the participant is not enrolled in the continuation coverage (U.S.
Government Printing Office, 77 FR 30381).
For families whose member(s) work for employer that do not offer coverage, the ESI
criterion is irrelevant, which is why the exchange subsidies are embedded in equation (2)’s g and

 terms and are not given special attention for the purposes of examining the full-time
employment tax faced by such families. But consider a single-earner non-elderly family in
which the earner is offered affordable employer coverage if and only if he works full time. For
him, the ESI criterion creates an implicit full-time employment tax because the exchange
subsidies are foregone during periods of full-time employment. The budget constraint is (5):
,

1

1
,

,

(5)

,

where, for simplicity, equation (5) ignores any untaxed government subsidies other than the
exchange subsidies. As noted above, Y is AGI expressed as a ratio to the federal poverty line
(FPL). S is the entire family’s exchange subsidy as a ratio to the federal poverty line and s is the
subsidy in dollar terms. The first term in the budget constraint is the subsidy that is received
during the weeks of the year when the worker is either not employed or working part time. The
second term is his AGI after taxes.
Collecting terms, the budget constraint (5) is in a form more readily compared with
equation (2):

,

1

,
1

(6)

If subsidies were independent of AGI (they are not, especially the exchange subsidies), then the
budget constraints (2) and (6) would be isomorphic with each other, with equation (2)’s constant
pZ serving the same function as s/(1-L).

More generally, a non-ESI worker with the budget

constraint (2) and an ESI worker with the budget constraint (6) lose the same amount of after-tax
income from (i) crossing the hours threshold P or (ii) changing their employment rate n if they
12

both face the same marginal earnings tax rate (inclusive of the earnings taxes implicit in any
subsidies they receive) and pZ = s/(1-L-).19 This is why I refer to the exchange subsidies as an
implicit full-time employment tax in an amount equivalent to an employer penalty of s/(1-L-

).20
The same constraint (6) applies to a married ESI worker with a working spouse if the
spouse is not eligible for ESI.

In this case, the spouse working without ESI can change

employment status (i.e., cross the hours threshold P or leave employment all together) without
affecting her eligibility, or her family’s eligibility, for exchange subsidies as determined by the
ESI criterion. The spouse would face a budget constraint like (2) if she were working for an
employer that does not offer coverage to its full-time employees.
Unilateral work status changes have no effect on exchange subsidy eligibility for married
families with more than one ESI-eligible worker. In effect, each worker in such a family faces a
constraint like (6) but with s = 0.21 The dependent workers and the elderly are in a similar
situation; s is automatically zero for the elderly because of their eligibility for Medicare
coverage. However, any dependent or elderly person working for an employer that does not
offer coverage to its full-time employees faces the budget constraint (2).

Appendix I has the proof and shows that the implicit marginal tax rate  has a somewhat different
interpretation depending on whether the comparative static is hours per week (crossing the threshold) or
the employment rate.
20
At first glance, it might appear that my results for the ACA are at odds with Summers (1989) who
concludes that mandated employee benefits do little to drive a wedge between labor supply and labor
demand. But Summers was only referring to a transactions between employer and employee, and not
transactions between the government treasury and labor market participants. If the employer penalty
were paid to employees rather than the treasury, nonworkers were ineligible for the new subsidies, and
part-time workers were ineligible, then the ACA’s subsidies and penalties would look more like a
mandated employee benefit.
21
The exchange subsidies create incentives for coordinated changes in employment status by husband and
wife, but those are ignored in this paper. Note that such incentives are roughly half of the incentives
shown in equation (6) because two workers, rather than one, need to change employment status in order
to obtain s. The behavioral responses are presumably less than half because a person on the margin
between two employment statuses may be married to an inframarginal worker.
19

13

III.

Determinants of the Size of the Full‐time Employment Tax
The ultimate objective of this paper is to estimate the distribution of full-time

employment taxes created by the ACA. This section takes the first measurement step, namely, to
characterize the determinants of the size of the taxes.

A. The business‐tax value of employee compensation
As noted above in connection with equation (3), a $2000 penalty is not the same as
$2,000 in wages because only the latter is deductible from business taxes (and subject to
employer payroll tax). The salary equivalent of the employer penalty depends on the employer
payroll tax rate, which I assume to be s = 0.0765, and the employer’s marginal business income
tax rate b. I assume that any for-profit private employer’s marginal business income tax rate is
equal to the sum of the statutory federal corporate income tax rate (35 percent) and the state
corporate income tax rate, with the latter adjusted for the federal deductibility of state corporate
income taxes. 22 The rate is adjusted for loss carry forwards as explained in Appendix II. I
assume that government and private nonprofit employers have b = 0.23
I used the March 2012 Current Population Survey (hereafter, CPS) to assign each worker
a probability of working for an employer not offering coverage to its full-time employees
(hereafter, non-ESI employer). Appendix II gives the details. For each worker I calculated
2000/[(1b)(1+s)] based on their state of residence and whether they were a private sector
worker. Table 1 shows some of the results. The average salary-equivalent, weighted by the
probability of working for a non-ESI employer, is $2,753 and the median is $3,025. The salaryequivalent for a nonprofit or government employer is only $1,858 because they do not pay
business income tax. The highest salary equivalents among profitable corporate employers are
almost $3,200 and occur in DC, IL, IA, MN, and PA where the highest corporate income tax
rates are.
22

For states with a gross receipts or commercial activity tax instead of a corporate tax (as of 2014, those
states are Ohio and Washington), I take the state rate to be zero. Texas has a one percent margin tax that
allows employee wages as a deduction, so I assume a Texas state rate of 0.01. The other states’ 2014
corporate rates are from Tax Foundation (2013). My data do not permit me to measure whether a
person’s private-sector employer is organized as a corporation, so I use the corporate rate for all private
employers. Note that corporate rates are generally set near to the rates applicable to other business forms,
such as S-corporations.
23
Because the March CPS does not distinguish private sector employees according to whether their
employer is a for-profit business, I randomly impute employer for-profit status (see Appendix II).

14

Note that the employer penalty is $2,000 for 2014, when it is not enforced, and is greater
in subsequent years. It will be $2,084 in 2015 and increase with health cost inflation thereafter.
The amounts shown in Table 1 are for a $2,000 penalty and therefore need to be scaled up
proportionally in order to have estimates of the salary-equivalent of penalties in the years 2015
and beyond.

B. The work‐hour equivalent of full‐time employment taxes
A $2,000 penalty creates a different incentive for a high-wage worker than it does for a
low-wage worker. I therefore attempt to convert penalty dollar amounts pZ into work-hour
equivalents p, by which I mean the number of extra hours employees would have to work for
free to compensate their employer for the penalty owed on their full-time work. This is not to
say that the employer penalty is the responsibility of employees, just to gauge the economic
significance of the penalty to the employment relationships affected by it.
The conversion factor Z needed to calculate the extra hours p depends on the way in
which the extra hours were supplied. If they were supplied as longer weekly work schedules h,
then the conversion factor would be Z = w. If they were supplied as a higher employment rate n,
then the conversion factor would be essentially Z = w  q/h. I use the latter conversion factor
because it is more readily measured in the CPS data, namely as the wages and fringes per hour
worked.24 For example, a private sector minimum wage employee needs to work about 8 hours
per week, 52 weeks per year, for free in order to compensate his employer (subject to a 39
percent business income tax rate – recall equation (3)) for a $2,000 annual penalty because the
federal

minimum

wage

is

$7.25

per

hour

and

8

is

approximately

equal

to

2000/[52*7.25*(10.39)*(1+0.0765)].
One challenge for calculating hour-equivalent penalties is that the CPS has imperfect
measures of hours, earnings, and therefore hourly earnings. The measurement errors would tend
to exaggerate the heterogeneity of hourly earnings and thereby exaggerate the heterogeneity of
the hour-equivalent penalty. By exaggerating the heterogeneity of hourly earnings, the ratio
24

Presumably the optimal way to supply additional hours is a combination of both margins because, in
practice, employers do not economize on quasi-fixed costs to such an extent that employees work 24
hours per day 365 days per year. This suggest that the ideal conversion factor is somewhere between w
and w  q/h.

15

estimator of the average hour-equivalent penalty is biased upward, although I mitigate that bias
(and potentially over-correct for it, because I do not censor the right tail of the measured wage
distribution) by censoring measured wages at the federal minimum of $7.25.
As an alternative approach to measuring the hour-equivalent penalty, I take each CPS
worker’s log Z to be the fitted value from a regression of log average hourly compensation
(including the value of employer contributions for health insurance) on indicator variables for
state of residence and occupation; gender interacted with marital status, and parenthood; class of
worker; and education indicators interacted with a quartic in age in a sample of full-time workers
aged 20-64 in the March 2012 CPS. 25 The fitted values are censored below at the federal
minimum wage of $7.25. By discarding wage measures among part-time, teen, and elderly
employees, the demographic-wage approach gets closer to measuring the marginal wage w, but it
fails to account for differences in human capital between full-time prime-aged workers and the
rest of the workforce.
The “demographic-wage” approach understates the heterogeneity in wages because
wages are not equal within demographic groups and occupations. As a result, using the
demographic wage causes the ratio estimator to underestimate the average hour-equivalent
penalty.

I believe that this underestimation of the average hour-equivalent exceeds the

overestimation (if any) by the ratio estimator that uses individually-measured wages because the
residual variance in the log hourly compensation regression far exceeds available estimates of
measurement error variance.26 I suspect that the best estimate of the average hour-equivalent
penalty is somewhere in between the two estimates based on demographic and individual wages,
and probably closer to the latter even though that estimate is biased upward somewhat.

25

For workers reporting that they obtain coverage from their job, the value of employer contributions is
the difference between the total premium and the worker contribution to those premiums. The former is
estimated as the silver plan premium for family members covered by the plan, scaled by 83/70 to reflect
the fact that silver plans have 70 percent actuarial values whereas employer plans average 83 percent
(Gabel, et al. 2012). The worker contribution is assumed to be either 18, 23, or 28 percent of the total
premium depending on whether one, two, or more than two family members are covered by the plan,
respectively. The 18 and 28 percentages are from (Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and Health Research &
Educational Trust 2012) for employee-only and family coverage, respectively.
26
Bound, et al. (1994) find that errors in the measurement of log 1986 earnings by the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics have a variance of about 0.02, as compared to the 0.28 variance of the residual from
the regression used to project demographic wages. Unless the measurement error my sample is an order
of magnitude greater, the Bound et al estimate suggests that the majority of the measured wage variation
within demographic groups is true wage variation.

16

Both approaches convert wages to 2014 dollars and exclude the unincorporated selfemployed due to the difficulty with measuring their wages.

Figure 1 shows the results

conditional on working for an employer that does not offer coverage to its full-time employees.
The orange histogram is based on individually-measured wages and the other on demographic
wages. The penalty is for 2016 and is assumed to have increased 3.9 percent, relative to wages,
beyond what it was in 2014. As reported in Table 2, the average penalty based on the individual
(demographic) wage is 4.3 (3.9) hours per week, respectively.27 The density spike above 8 hours
per week reflects workers earning $7.25 per hour (or less) and working for profitable private
employers in states with corporate income tax.28 Thus, although a four-hour weekly penalty is a
central estimate of the employer penalty from the perspective of people working for employers
that will be penalized or be threatened with penalties, there is significant variation around that
penalty.
Figure 1 shows histograms of workers facing the employer penalty – meaning that pZ
appears in their budget constraint as shown in equation (2). Many of the workers facing the
penalty will not pay it because they will work part time, and estimating their frequency would
require estimates of the behavioral responses to the employer penalty.

As noted in the

introduction to this paper, Figure 1 is intended as a starting point for behavioral analysis, and
does not reflect equilibrium results.

C. Exchange plan premium estimates and the value perceived by
participants
Equation (4) shows that the amount of the exchange subsidy depends on the amount spent
on covered medical expenses, both by the plan and by the patient in the form of deductibles,
copayments, etc.

I do not attempt to estimate a distribution of subsidies that reflects the

distribution of health conditions, doctor visits, etc. Instead I look at the variability associated
with family composition and age as represented by the prices of silver plans on the exchanges.
Because silver plans are supposed to cover 70 percent of covered medical expenses on average,
27

The median of the hour-equivalent penalty based on individual wages is 3.9 hours per week (see also
Table 2). Because the true distribution is unlikely symmetric, the median is a biased estimate of the mean
but may be of independent interest or taken as a perhaps conservative estimate of mean.
28
The density spike at about 7.9 hours per week reflects workers at or below $7.25 per hour and working
for private employers in states without corporate income tax.

17

with the rest financed by patient out-of-pocket charges, I take covered medical expenses m to be
the premium divided by 0.7. I estimate the silver plan premium from two versions of the
national Kaiser premium calculator, which I reference as KFF1 and KFF2,29 and project them to
2016 by assuming that they grow a cumulative 3.9 percent in excess of wages (the same growth
factor that I use above for the employer penalty) between 2014 and 2016.
A comparison of budget constraints (2) and (6) shows that both the exchange subsidies
and employer penalty are tied to full-time work. However, one difference is that a worker has to
go to the exchange and purchase a plan in order to avoid the withholding of her subsidy whereas
the penalty can be avoided without any contact with the exchange. To the extent that going to
the exchange and purchasing a plan is costly, an exchange subsidy that costs the government,
say, $3,000, does less to discourage full-time work than a penalty that yields the government
$3,000 because the cost of exchange participation has to be netted against the amount of the
subsidy. Throughout this paper, I refer to the difference between the amount of the subsidy and
the cost of exchange participation as the “value” of the exchange subsidy (to the worker and his
family).
I refer to the cost of exchange participation as the “exchange features discount.”
Exchange plans have higher deductibles than the average employer plan (before cost-sharing
subsidies), and many states’ exchange plans limit participants to narrower provider networks
than employer plans do (Hancock 2013). In theory, ACA regulations and participant cost sharing
(with after-tax dollars) may be encouraging more economical health spending on the exchanges,
and the narrower provider networks may merely reflect improved value for the premium dollar.
Moreover, the more economic health spending may be especially attractive to the unemployed
and part-time workers who would like to be covered but have limited cash flow. But it is also
possible that ACA regulations reduce the value of health spending on the exchanges, especially
as perceived by persons who would otherwise have employer coverage. For example, sellers may
distort their offerings—perhaps with narrow provider networks—in order to discourage more
expensive participants from joining their plan. The ACA may also disproportionately require

29

As explained by Mulligan (2014, Chapter 4), KFF2 has the better estimates of 2014 silver plan
premiums, but they are thought to be temporarily low because of, among other things, the ACA’s
temporary subsidies for exchange plans that lose money. This paper primarily uses KFF1, which has
premiums that are 16 percent greater than KFF2 and approximately 16 percent less than comparable
employer-sponsored plans.

18

exchange plans to offer benefit options that some of the participants value at less than what the
benefits cost (e.g., contraception benefits from the perspective of participants who are not trying
to avoid pregnancy). It is also possible that those familiar with employer coverage fail to
appreciate the advantages of exchange plans simply because the latter are less familiar, or
because exchange plans are stigmatized as a form of “welfare.”
For the purposes of quantifying incentives to change employment status, the cost of
exchange participation is the amount of the discount, if any, on an exchange plan that a part-time
or non-employed person would need to be indifferent between participating in an exchange plan
and the next best alternative coverage option. Suppose, for example, that a full-time worker with
employer coverage were forced to work part-time. If, in this forced part-time situation, he would
voluntary pay full price for an exchange plan rather than going uninsured and rather than
continuing his coverage (under COBRA or related statute), then he has revealed that exchange
participation has no additional cost relative to the next best alternative. In this case, every dollar
that the ACA pays to reduce his premium below full price is a subsidy to part-time work because
the subsidy reduces an amount that he would voluntarily pay. However, if instead the worker
strictly prefers, say, to be uninsured than to pay full price, then the first dollar of exchange
subsidy is not a subsidy to part-time work because he would not take up a subsidy of just one
dollar.
The value v of the exchange subsidy is therefore:
,

max 0,0.7

1

0.3

(7)

where  is the exchange-features discount, expressed as a percentage of the silver premium
0.7M.30 The other parameters are the same as those in equation (4). Throughout the paper I
show results for two exchange features discounts: a zero discount and a discount  = 25 percent
of the premium. The 25 percent discount is based on Mulligan’s (2014) analysis of coverage
patterns of the unemployed and take-up of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act’s
temporary program of premium assistance. However, the ACA’s exchange plans are unique and
still evolving – both in terms of objective plan features and consumer perceptions – so it is
I treat  as a constant across persons, but a richer model would let it vary across persons and/or be a
function of age and other demographic characteristics.
30

19

currently impossible to have a precise estimate of the exchange features discount. Under the
weak assumption that exchange subsidy take-up will be less than one hundred percent, failing to
discount the exchange subsidies would exaggerate the effects of the subsidies on employment
status.

D. The sliding scale for exchange subsidies
Table 3 displays the parameters that describe the schedules () and () from equations (4)
and (7). Each row is a household income interval relative to FPL beginning at the income
amount indicated in the first column. The second column shows the premium charge for a family
with income at the bottom end of the interval, expressed as a percentage of household income.31
The premium percentage increases smoothly within the interval, and as it crosses the next
income threshold, with the exceptions (noted in the last column) of (1) the 11.33 interval where
the percentage is constant at 2 percent and jumps discretely to 3 percent and (2) the 4+ interval
where there is no premium cap (the premium jumps from 9.5 percent of income to the full
premium). For example, a family with AGI equal to twice the poverty line (Y = 2) has its 2014
family premium capped at 6.3 percent of income. In terms of equation (4), this means (2) =
0.063 for calendar year 2014. A family with AGI equal to 225 percent of the poverty line (Y =
2.25) has its 2014 premium capped at 7.175 percent of income because 2.25 is halfway between
2 and 2.5 and 7.175 is halfway between 6.3 and 8.05. Each premium cap is greater in years 2015
and beyond according to the degree to which health insurance premiums increase more than
national income.
Plan participants pay their designated premium, and then their healthcare providers are
reimbursed amounts that are expected to be less than (typically 70 percent of) total covered
medical expenses, with the remaining costs “shared with” (that is, charged to) plan participants
as various out-of-pocket costs such as deductibles, co-payments, coinsurance rates, etc. The third
column of the table shows the “cost-sharing” discount families receive as a function of their
household income. This discount is a step function of income, jumping down to 57 from 80
percent at 1.5 FPL, to 10 percent at 2 FPL, and then down to zero at 2.5 FPL. For example,
31

The premium charge is for the second-cheapest silver plan. Participants can choose a more expensive
plan at their own expense, or choose a less expensive plan in order to reduce the premium they pay.
Participants receive the same premium assistance regardless of which exchange plan they choose.

20

people at 1.4 FPL on a silver plan can expect (in the actuarial sense) to have their premiums
cover 70 percent of medical expenses. Of the remaining 30 percent, 6 percentage points would
be paid by the participant and the remaining 24 percentage points paid by taxpayers in the form
of a cost-sharing subsidy for the plan participant.
The exchange subsidies shown in equation (4) are a function of AGI Y and expected
family medical expenses M. Family medical expenses net of the subsidies are therefore the
difference between M and the subsidies shown in equation (4), which is itself a function of Y and
M. Figure 2’s solid lines graph the net expense function for two selected values of M: the blue
line corresponds to the relatively low value of M associated with a one-person household age
thirty, and the red line corresponds with a higher level associated with a couple age fifty with
two children. Values of M associated with families in between these two in terms of size or
member age would make a subsidy schedule between Figure 2’s solid lines. The horizontal axis
measures family income (Y) and the vertical axis measures the payments. Both schedules reach a
plateau indicating the full health payments without subsidies. For a high M family like the one
shown in red, the plateau is reached at 400 percent FPL because at that point the family ceases
being eligible for subsidies. For a low M family like the one shown in blue, the plateau is reached
at lower incomes because the full premium itself is considered affordable for families at, say,
350 percent FPL.32 The amounts shown in Figure 2 are not discounted for exchange features.

E. The correlation between exchange subsidies and hourly earnings
Household heads and spouses with high hourly earnings tend to be in high-income
families who are required by the ACA to pay more of their health expenses.

However,

household heads and spouses with high hourly earnings also have larger and older families that
have more health expenses. Consider, for example, the sample of non-elderly heads and spouses
of households between 100 and 400 percent of the poverty line working for an ESI employer, but
without a spouse working for an ESI employer. This is the group of workers for whom exchange
subsidy eligibility hinges only on their employment status (although some of them qualify for a
32

Algebraically, a plateau at income levels below 400 percent FPL reflects the max term in equation (4)
evaluating to zero.

21

zero subsidy because exchange plans are deemed affordable even at full price). A regression of
their annualized exchange subsidy forgone on their demographic group hourly compensation, the
number of related people in the household, and age of the worker yields a wage coefficient of
$181, a family size coefficient of about $2,400, and an age coefficient of $217. As expected,
holding constant family size and age, means-tested subsidies are less for high-wage workers
because their family income tends to be greater. However, high-wage workers are older and tend
to have larger families, both of which increase the amount of the subsidy holding family income
constant. The simple correlation between demographic-group wage and the exchange subsidy
foregone is positive in this sample.

IV.

The Distribution of Full‐time Employment Taxes
The first step is to estimate the number of workers who will not have one of the ACA’s

FTETs in their budget set, and characterize their situations vis-à-vis the law’s eligibility rules. I
then estimate the 2016 distribution of FTETs, measured in hour equivalents, among workers who
will face them. I conclude by showing how the prevalence and size of FTETs is correlated with
worker characteristics.

A. ESI employees facing no tax
Many people working for employers that offer coverage face no FTET. Table 4 lists
them, in mutually exclusive categories, according to the reason that their FTET (from the ACA)
will be zero. The estimates are based on the worker characteristics as measured in the March
2012 CPS and employer characteristics (for both worker and spouse) imputed as explained above
and in Appendix II. The most common reason is being in a household outside the eligible
income range for subsidies 1-4 FPL: 41 percent of workers and aggregate weeks worked. Elderly
and dependent workers from 1-4 FPL families supply 7 percent of workers and weeks. Another
5 percent are supplied by non-elderly heads and spouses working for ESI employers but not
having exchange subsidy eligibility on their employment status solely because their spouse
works full time for an ESI employer. One percent of workers satisfies all of the eligibility

22

criteria for exchange subsidies, except the ESI criterion, but would get no subsidy because their
silver plan premium is sufficiently low in comparison to their income.

B. The distribution of FTETs among those with positive FTETs
Figure 3 shows the results for calendar year 2016 conditional on facing a positive implicit
FTET from the ACA. It is only for ESI workers and therefore does not include the employer
penalty. One histogram is based on individually measured wages (orange) and the other on
demographic wages (black outline). These are histograms of workers facing an implicit FTET –
meaning that s appears in their budget constraint as shown in equation (6). The s term is scaled
by the tax factor (1L) with the non ACA marginal earnings tax rate (reflecting personal
income and payroll taxes) assumed to be 25 percent and the ACA marginal earnings tax rate 
taken to be the product of the within-person average phase-out rate from equation (4) and the
fraction of a year that an average full-time non-elderly employed ESI head or spouse is not on a
payroll and can thereby get exchange subsidies.33 As reported in Table 2, the averages of the
two histograms are 10.5 hours per week (orange) and 9.7 hours per week (black outline),
respectively.
Many of the workers facing the FTET will not pay it because they will work part time,
and estimating their frequency requires estimates of the behavioral responses to the employer
penalty. As noted in the introduction to this paper, Figure 3 (and Figure 1) is intended as a
starting point for behavioral analysis, and does not reflect equilibrium results.
Figure 3 uses the full value of the exchange subsidies, without any discount for exchange
features. As noted above, the implicit tax is sometimes less than the full value of the subsidy
withheld because the subsidies require exchange plan participation and some workers would not
pay full price for an exchange plan even when they were not eligible for any other coverage.
Figure 4 therefore repeats the exercise in Figure 3, but subtracts 25 percent of the full premium
from the amount of the premium subsidy, unless the premium subsidy is less in which case the
value of the premium subsidy is assumed to be zero (that is, the histogram shows v/(1-L-), with
v from equation (7), rather than s/(1-L-) as shown in Figure 3). For clarity, the respondents
33

As explained by Mulligan (2014, Chapter 5), the within-person average phase-out rate is (0.7M  (1)
+ (1)0.3M)/3 and smooths out all of the notches and cliffs between 100 and 400 percent of the federal
poverty line.

23

from Figure 3 with a nonzero subsidy amount but a zero value are omitted from Figure 4, which
shows the distribution conditional on positive value. If those omitted zero-value respondents had
been included in Figure 4, the averages of the distributions would be 7.5 hours per week (orange)
and 6.8 hours per week (black outline), respectively (see also Table 2).
Although Figure 4’s medians are similar to Figure 1’s, Figure 4 has remarkably more
heterogeneity because, as measured, the dollar value of the exchange subsidy varies more than
the employer penalty’s salary equivalent does. The annual subsidy forgone by ESI workers can
range from just a few dollars to $15,000, or more. A subsidy equivalent to 10 hours per week is
well within the support of Figure 4’s distributions, whereas the employer penalty is never more
than nine hours per week.
Although uncommon, it is even possible for the subsidy to exceed the income that could
be generated by 40 hours of work per week, 52 weeks per year. Take a couple in their 50s with
three young adult children at home. The full silver plan premium for their family could easily be
$20,000 per year, not to mention the deductibles and copayments that go along with that plan.
The husband works full-time for a non-ESI employer earning $30,000 annually and the wife
works part-time at an ESI employer for $11 per hour. With these employment arrangements –
especially that the wife continues to work too few hours to qualify for her employer’s health
coverage – the family is at 140 percent of the poverty line and qualifies for $21,000 in annual
premium assistance and cost-sharing subsidies. In order to earn an extra $21,000 after taxes, the
wife would, at $11 per hour and a 25% marginal earnings tax rate, have to work an extra 49
hours per week, 52 weeks per year. Because most of these instances involve married couples
with related adults and thereby strategic grey areas in terms of the definition of the household
and the reporting of dependents’ income, my calculations censor the hour equivalent of the
implicit FTET at 40 hours per week.34

34

In order to further mitigate the contribution of large households to the overall results, I: (i) treat
unmarried partners of the household head as his or her own one-person household, and (ii) exclude from
my exchange subsidy calculations any adults living in someone else’s household as an unrelated person
(e.g., a roomer or boarder), except that for health insurance purposes I treat foster children as related
children (e.g., a number of foster parents in the CPS have their foster children on their ESI plan).
Because a few married couples are supporting near-elderly (and thereby medically expensive) relatives
such as parents or adult siblings, I have also experimented with capping the premiums of related and
dependent adults at $5,000 per year (note that a silver plan for a near-elderly adult could be as much as
$9,000), but the situations are rare enough that such a cap reduces my average subsidy estimates by only
one percent.

24

Figure 5 shows the results with both types of FTETs included: the “explicit” FTET from
the employer penalty and the implicit FTET from the exchange subsidies’ ESI criterion. These
are histograms of workers facing a FTET – meaning that either pZ appears in their budget
constraint as shown in equation (2) or s appears in their budget constraint as shown in equation
(6). The pZ and s terms are measured as noted above.

The resulting distribution is bimodal,

with almost 90 percent of the observations at or below the 8-hour mode.

C. FTETs by demographic group
Table 5’s first column displays the coefficients from a linear probability regression. The
dependent variable is facing a full-time employment tax (under the rules for calendar year 2016)
and the independent variables are various demographic characteristics.

The sample is all

workers in the March 2012 CPS. More educated workers are less likely to face one of the
ACA’s FTETs because they are more likely to work for an employer offering coverage and
because they are more likely to earn above 400 percent of the poverty line. Married people and
elderly workers are less likely because they tend to be eligible for other coverage (through a
spouse’s employer or, in the elderly case, Medicare). Note that facing a FTET is different than
being affected by it – for example, the elderly are especially likely to work part time even
without a FTET and thereby would not adjust their behavior in response to one.
The second column is a regression of the FTET dollar amount on the same demographic
characteristics, using the same sample and including zeros for workers who do not face a FTET.
The third column is a regression of the FTET hourly amount on the same demographic
characteristics, using the same sample. For the purposes of Table 5, all three dependent variables
are net of a 25 percent exchange features discount. One interesting pattern is that the age profile
of FTET amounts is u-shaped among the nonelderly, and then sharply lower for the elderly. The
near elderly (ages 55-64) have relatively high incomes, but they also have high medical expenses
and the latter delivers them the largest foregone subsidy among all of the age groups. This
pattern is less pronounced for the hour equivalent of the FTET, but still the near elderly have the
largest average hour equivalent among all ages 25 and over. By either measure, the average
amount of the FTET is least for the elderly.

25

V.

Behavioral Effects of FTETs
An important reason for measuring taxes is to understand their behavioral effects. The

purpose of this section is to briefly discuss some of the effects of the ACA’s FTETs on
employment, hours, and productivity, building on the budget constraints from Section I. It is
limited to long-run analysis in the sense that market participants are assumed to understand and
adapt to the new taxes, that market prices are assumed to be flexible, and workers are mobile. I
begin with a discussion of the relationship between FTETs and employment taxes, largely
because the two have much in common and employment taxes have been widely studied. I then
discuss effects of the FTETs on weekly hours per employee and on output per hour.

A. Behavioral effects of employment taxes
Suppose for the moment that hours per week h were a fixed characteristic of a worker,
perhaps based on her occupation or family situation, so that the only real choice for workers is
the employment rate n. In this case, part-time workers with h  P have no I term in their budget
constraint (2) or (6), regardless of what they choose, and thereby are affected by FTETs only
indirectly through full-time workers. Full-time workers always have the I term equal to one and
for them the FTET is just an employment tax and thereby another example of a quasi-fixed cost
of employment. Unemployment benefits are an example of an (implicit) employment tax, and
one that has been well studied. 35

Unemployment benefits reduce labor supply both by

discouraging people from returning to work (Krueger and Meyer 2002) and by encouraging
layoffs (Topel and Welch 1980). In the long run, these two types of reactions to unemployment
benefits can be summarized in terms of the wage elasticity of labor supply (Mulligan 2012).
Like other labor supply shifters, the effect of unemployment benefits on equilibrium
employment and wages depends on (i) the size of the benefit, (ii) the degree to which the labor
supply shift is concentrated in specific industries or demographic groups, and (iii) the wage
elasticities of labor demand and supply. A uniform unemployment benefit (applicable to all
sectors and workers) would be fairly neutral across sectors and groups, so that the relevant labor
demand curve is the aggregate demand for employees. In the long run, this demand curve is

35

One difference between the ACA’s FTETs and unemployment benefits is the treatment of people out of
the labor force: they are eligible for the ACA subsidies but not the unemployment benefits.

26

thought to be highly wage elastic, which means that an employment tax primarily affects the
amount of employment and has little effect on equilibrium wages (measured as employer cost
inclusive of taxes).36
Table 2 shows that the average FTET is 5 or 6 hours per week among those who face it,
and they are 46 percent of the workforce (the residual from Table 4). Assuming for the moment
that weekly hours are a fixed characteristic of employees, about a quarter of the 46 percent find
the FTET to be irrelevant because they are part-time workers. That makes the overall average
employment tax created by the ACA’s FTETs equal to 1.9 hours per week, or about 4.8 percent
of the average full-time work schedule. If taxes on work were already 25 percent, then the
ACA’s FTETs would be reducing the after-tax share from 0.750 to 0.702, which is an impact on
average labor supply of 0.067 log points in the wage dimension. Assuming that aggregate labor
supply shifts reduce employment and aggregate hours worked rather than affecting wages, the
ACA’s FTETs reduce aggregate hours by 0.067 times /(1+), where  is the Frisch wage
elasticity of aggregate labor supply. For example, with  = 0.6, the impact on aggregate hours
and employment is 0.025 log points. Note that neither the 0.067 nor the 0.025 includes the
labor supply effects of the ACA’s implicit income tax.
To the degree that the employment tax is targeted at specific sectors and employees, the
aggregate employment effect depends on the fraction of workers targeted and the wage elasticity
of labor supply of both the targeted workers and all other workers. The composition of the
employment effect also depends on whether the taxed workers are complements or substitutes
with each other in the labor market and the degree to which employees can shift between taxed
and untaxed categories. Recall that the ACA disproportionately taxes large employers, low-skill
employees, near-elderly employees, and employees heading large families. The ACA also
differentially taxes employers offering coverage, although the direction of the difference varies
by type of employee.
I presume that, in the long run, employees are free to choose employers on the basis of
size and benefit offerings. This does not mean that everyone avoids the implicit and explicit
36

The wage elasticity of labor demand is less in the short run because, among other things, capital and
technology are fixed in the short run (Acemoglu, Autor and Lyle 2004, p. 505). But in the long run
capital and technology can adjust to match the supply of labor. For example, tens of millions of women
entered the workforce since the 1980s with a long-run effect on the general level of wages that is small
enough to be difficult to detect. Also note that the aggregate demand for labor is different from the
demand for a specific group’s labor.

27

employment taxes, just that employees who avoid them pay for the privilege of doing so in the
form of lower wages. In effect, all employees of the same skill, age, work schedule, and family
composition face an employment tax regardless of the type of employer they have, as if the
ACA’s employment taxes had been uniform by type of employee in an amount equal to the
average employment tax.37 Thus, for the purposes of understanding aggregate employment and
hours effects, sector- and group-specific employment taxes have a lot in common with uniform
employment taxes.
Of course, a sector-specific tax reduces the size of the taxed sector. However, the fact
that employment shifts away from the taxed sector does not mean that the aggregate employment
effect is zero. As long as a few workers remain on the margin between the taxed and untaxed
sectors, workers in the untaxed sector are induced to work less because the tax reduces their
wages.38

B. Offsetting effects on hours per employee
Presumably hours per employee h, and not just the employment rate n, can respond to the
ACA’s FTETs. At the same time, the weekly-hours response must be limited because we do not
observe employers hiring tiny numbers of employees at very high weekly hours, despite the fact
that the quasi-fixed costs of employment would reward such behavior.

Sherwin Rosen

developed models of this tradeoff, and concluded that, holding constant aggregate hours, the cost
of supplying weekly hours was increasing at the margin and that equilibrium weekly hours
reflect a tradeoff between the increasing hours cost and avoidance of quasi-fixed costs.39 Jobs
with high quasi-fixed costs (such as jobs subject to employment taxes) would be worked longer
hours than low-quasi fixed cost jobs.
37

This is the theory of equalizing differences (Rosen 1986), and has been an important part of tax
incidence theory (Harberger 1962). Mulligan and Gallen (2013) use the theory of equalizing differences
to examine the employment and productivity effects of the ACA’s sector-specific employment taxes.
38
This is why I disagree with the Congressional Budget Office’s (2014, p. 120) conclusion that “the cost
of forgoing exchange subsidies operates primarily as an implicit tax on employment-based insurance,
which does not imply a change in hours worked.” Because of compensating differences in the labor
market, their conclusion does not follow from CBO’s (correct) premise that “the tax can be avoided if a
worker switches to a different full-time job without health insurance (or possibly two part-time jobs) or if
the employer decides to stop offering that benefit.” In other words, the avoidance behaviors cited by
CBO have costs that reduce the net benefits of employment generally.
39
See Rosen (1968) and Rosen (1978).

28

Because the ACA’s FTET is essentially an employment tax for an employee that is
unwilling to work part-time, one effect of the FTETs is therefore to increase weekly work hours
among workers who continue to work full-time schedules, which by all accounts is a large
majority of employees, and decrease the employment rate. In Rosen’s model, the more convex
are the costs of supplying weekly hours, the less is the size of the effect of each unit of
employment taxation on h.
Some workers will change from full time to part time (as defined by the threshold P) as a
consequence of the FTETs. Absent the FTETs, many of them were working h > P, at a lower
employment rate, in order to save on the quasi-fixed costs of employment but the FTETs more
than offset that savings. Thus, FTETs reduce weekly hours for some workers and increase them
for others.40 The relative size of these groups depends on the threshold P. Mulligan (2014,
Chapter 6) finds that, with P = 29 hours per week, the combined effect of the two groups is to
leave weekly hours per employee essentially unchanged from what it would be without the ACA.
Although we should remember that the ACA’s FTETs affect the distribution of weekly hours,
the fact that they may hardly affect the average suggests that the h-fixed analysis above may tell
us a lot about the average employment and aggregate hours effects of the FTETs.

C. Productivity
The ACA’s FTETs have at least three effects on measured productivity. First, because
they are more significant for low-skill workers, the FTETs likely change the composition of the
workforce. All else the same, a workforce that is more intensive in high-skill workers is more
productive. Second, the fact that the FTETs are not uniform reduces total factor productivity as
the labor market sacrifices output as it reallocates labor in order to economize on the FTETs.
This is the kind of “misallocation” productivity effect emphasized by Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009).41

40

Also notice from equations (2) and (6) that FTETs create a nonconvex budget set, which create an
incentive for convex-preference consumers to trade in lotteries (i.e., gamble) to smooth out the
nonconvexities. In my model, the employment rate variable n serves many of the same purposes.
41
Total factor productivity can affect aggregate employment and hours, although the direction of the
effect is unclear because wealth and substitution effects are in opposite directions. The composition
effect does not affect labor supply, though; it is merely an artifact of measuring productivity without fully
adjusting for labor quality.

29

People and businesses may misreport hours worked (or manipulate their measurement, or
at least be careful to avoid accidentally over-reporting work hours) so that the employer avoids a
penalty or the employee remains eligible for exchange subsidies.

Misreporting hours and

incomes is not necessarily an alternative to genuine adjustments of employment and incomes,
especially if misreporting has limits and the ACA’s income or employment taxes are still
experienced by workers who misreport.

But the misreports would give the (false) impression

that workers have become more productive, because productivity is measured as output per
reported hour worked.
Full-time workers could also react to the ACA by splitting their work time between two
employers and being considered part-time employees of each. As it is, the model in this paper
already says that n may increase for workers who move from full-time to part-time as a
consequence of FTETs. The increase would reflect multiple-job holders if the model variable n
were interpreted as job-weeks rather than person-weeks worked, with each worker contributing
to job-weeks according to the number of jobs held during the week. In this case, n should be
measured from the U.S. Labor Department’s employer survey rather than its household survey,
because the latter does not distinguish between multiple-job holders and single-job holders for
the purpose of measuring employment during the reference week.

VI.

Conclusions
Both the ACA’s employer penalty and its exchange subsidies create full-time

employment taxes (FTETs), by which I mean taxes paid by full-time employees that are avoided
by both part-time employment and non-employment. The exchange subsidies create an implicit
tax in the sense that full-time employees pay it in the form of foregone subsidies. Almost half of
employees are directly affected by the new FTETs in the sense that they would pay a FTET by
working full time, their employer pays an FTET as a consequence of their employment, or that
their employer is dis-incentivized from hiring full-time employees because of the threat of
FTETs.
The dollar amount of the FTETs varies across workers based on their employers’ tax
situation; the size, age, and composition of families; and perceived costs of participating in the
30

ACA’s new exchanges. The implicit FTET is especially variable across workers. The meanstested subsidies (creating the implicit FTET) are less for high-wage workers because their family
income tends to be greater. However, high-wage workers are older and tend to have larger
families, both of which increase the amount of the subsidy holding family income constant. The
second effect is large enough that the simple correlation between demographic-group wage and
the exchange subsidy foregone is positive.
Among workers directly affected by FTETs, the average FTET amount is equivalent to
the income that would be earned in almost six extra work hours per week, 52 weeks per year.
This is enough to depress aggregate work hours more than two percent, even though it does not
include the implicit income taxes also created by the ACA. The FTETs have offsetting effects
on work hours per employee.
The FTETs are not the same as income taxes. The taxes examined in this paper are
avoided by changing work schedules – fewer weeks per year in a full-time position – whereas
income taxes are avoided by having less income. The ACA includes implicit income taxes
(Mulligan 2014, Chapter 5), which are in addition to the taxes examined in this paper.
At first glance, the results may seem at odds with Massachusetts’ experience with the
“Romneycare” health reform law signed by Governor Romney in 2006 because the evolution of
the Massachusetts labor market after that date does not appear to be significantly different than
in other states without health reforms (Dubay, Long and Lawton 2012). However, the labor
taxes created by Romneycare and the ACA are qualitatively and quantitatively different from
each other. The Romneycare employer penalty was proportional to total work hours at an
employer, rather than the number of full-time employees as with the ACA’s employer penalty,
and was an order of magnitude less than the penalty in the federal law (Mulligan 2013b).
Although both Romneycare and the ACA created subsidized health plans for persons who could
not obtain coverage from their employer, Romneycare hardly introduced any new implicit
employment tax because its subsidized coverage had a number of limitations and had been
preceded by longstanding health assistance programs for the unemployed.
The longstanding exclusion of ESI premiums from payroll and personal income taxes is
itself an instance of a full-time employment subsidy. That is, full-time workers can use the
exclusion to avoid taxes but non-workers and uncovered part-time employees cannot. The

31

exclusion is relevant for understanding coverage decisions under the ACA,42 for measuring the
combined total of ACA and non-ACA incentives, and for comparing actual full-time work
incentives with the incentives that would be present in a hypothetical world without taxes. But
the hypothetical no-tax world is not of interest in this paper. My purpose is to compare the labor
market with the ACA FTETs to how the labor market would be without the ACA FTETs and to
calculate the impact of the ACA FTETs as the difference between the two. In both of those
cases, ESI premiums are excluded from payroll and personal income taxation and thereby are
hardly relevant for understanding the impact of the ACA on the incentives to work full-time.
Because the ACA FTETs are not creating or eliminating the ESI tax exclusion, the tax exclusion
is not a significant part of the ACA-FTET contribution to overall incentives to work full-time.

VII.

Appendix I: Comparing the Exchange Subsidy to the Employer
Penalty

Recall that the worker budget constraint is either (2) or (5), depending on whether or not
he works for an ESI employer, respectively. Those constraints are repeated below:
1

,



(2)

1

1

(5)

In order to prove the claim from the main text that, as a full-time employment tax, an
exchange subsidy in the amount s/(1-L-) is equivalent to an employer penalty in the amount
pZ, take the difference between the two equations’ right-hand side:

,

,

1



(8)


42

See Rennane and Steuerle (2011) and Gallen and Mulligan (2013).

32

In order to examine the consequences of crossing the hours threshold P, evaluate the expression
(8) at two work schedules: h + h < P and h > P. The two evaluations are the same if (9) and
(10) hold:

,

1

Δ

,



(9)

Δ

,

(10)

which are the conditions noted in the main text. In particular, the left-hand side of equation (10)
is the exchange subsidy gained by the ESI employee as a consequence of incrementing his AGI
by wnh < 0 and the right-hand side is the subsidies gained by the non-ESI worker by
incrementing his AGI by the same amount.
A similar set of conditions imply that both types of workers face the same employment
tax. To see this, differentiate (8) with respect to the employment rate n:
1

′
,

1



(11)

where S is the phase-out rate of exchange subsidies with respect to AGI (recall that s = S FPL).
The expression (11) shows that the marginal tax rate condition for equivalency on the
employment margin is  = [1I(h>P)n]S, which is the effect of calendar year AGI on the
exchange subsidies combined for the parts of the year that the worker is eligible.

33

VIII. Appendix II: Imputation of employer benefit offerings and
business income tax rates
A. Health insurance offerings
I assign each employee in the CPS a probability of working for an employer that does not
offer coverage to its full-time employees. For nonelderly household heads and spouses working
with usual work schedules of at least thirty-five hours per week, this probability is initially set to
either zero or one depending on whether they are covered through their job or not, respectively.
Federal government employees are assigned a probability of zero. Among samples of the
elderly, dependents, or part-time workers, this would be a poor indicator of type of employer
because the elderly are typically insured by Medicare, dependents are typically insured by a
family member’s policy, and part-time workers are typically not offered coverage even while
their full-time coworkers are. For the elderly, dependents, and any worker working fewer than
thirty-five hours per week, I assign a probability that their full-time coworkers are not offered
ESI as the fitted value of a probit equation with dependent variable equal to the non-ESIemployer indicator noted above, estimated in the sample of nonelderly household heads and
spouses working at least thirty-five hours per week.43 All of the workers in the CPS sample have
their probability rescaled by the same factor (0.64) so that the sample-average probability is 26
percent, which is my estimate (see below) of the fraction of workers under the ACA who will
work for an employer that offers coverage to its full-time coworkers.
By all estimates, only a minority of employees work for employers that do not offer
coverage to their full-time employees. The CBO estimates that, in 2008, they were 27 percent of
all workers (Congressional Budget Office 2007). Using Census Bureau data, Janicki (2013)
estimates 29 percent for 2010. Using the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), Carroll and
Miller (2011) estimate 13 percent for 2011. The simple average of these three is 23 percent, but I
put somewhat less weight on the outlying MEPS estimate 44 and therefore estimate that 24
percent of workers before the ACA were working for an employer that did not offer coverage.
43

The independent variables are indicator variables for detailed industries and the interactions between
indicators for employer size more than one hundred employees and work schedule at least forty hours.
Part-time nonelderly heads and spouses that have ESI are assigned an indicator of zero, regardless of the
fitted value that the probit equation assigns them.
44
The Congressional Budget Office (2007) uses a variety of sources, including the MEPS and Census
Bureau data. Therefore my weight on MEPS is a bit larger than CBO’s, but still much less than 50
percent.

34

Whatever the historical percentage, it is likely at least a few employers will drop coverage
because of the ACA or because of ongoing health cost trends. I therefore assume that 26 percent
of workers will have employers that do not offer coverage to their full-time employees. This 26
percent is the basis for the rescaling factor noted in the previous paragraph.

B. Business income tax rates
In any given year, about one quarter of private-sector for-profit employee compensation
is paid by corporations that have no net income for the year.45 Without loss carryforwards or
carrybacks, or mergers of corporations, such employers would realize no tax advantage from
writing off employee compensation, or anything else. In this case, the ACA’s employer penalty
is valued in the same way that it is for public sector employers: a $2,000 penalty is equivalent to
$1,858 in employee salaries.
However, corporations can carry losses forward, and C-corporations can carry them
backwards, and in effect apply deductions taken during a year without net income against the
revenues earned in a year with net income (the deductions do not earn interest, though, and are
therefore less valuable when carried forward). Cooper and Knittel (2006) use a sample of
corporations with losses in 1993 to estimate the distribution of the amount of time (up to ten
years), if ever, that the corporations in the sample obtain a corporation income tax advantage
from their 1993 loss. They do not weight by employees and do not measure the use of tax losses
when a corporation ceases to exist through merger (or even the frequency of mergers among
corporations that cease to exist, which I assume to be one-half when weighted by 1993
employment).
Lacking any merger data, I assume that, among the corporations with 1993 losses that
eventually merge with another corporation, the distribution of time to merger is the same as the
time-to-tax-advantage distribution measured by Cooper and Knittel. As a result, I have Table 6’s
employee-weighted distribution of employer business income tax rates.

Public sector

employees, which are directly measureable in the March CPS, have an employer business
income tax rate of zero because their government employer does not pay business income tax.
45

According to the IRS Statistics of Income 25 percent of employee compensation reported by Ccorporations, S-corporations, and partnerships in 2011 were reported by businesses without net income.
The percentage varies from year to year, e.g., 20 percent in 2006 and 31 percent in 2001.

35

Employees of nonprofit businesses are in a similar situation, except that they are not separately
identified in the March CPS from other private-sector employees. I therefore randomly sample
nine percent of private-sector employees and assume that their employer is nonprofit.46
Seventy-five percent of the remaining private-sector employees (that is, sixty-eight
percent of private-sector employees) are assumed to have employers that owe business income
tax for the year and are therefore assigned the full tax rate (federal and state, recognizing the
deductibility of state taxes) as indicated by the scaling factor of one shown in the table’s final
column. Employers with losses that are carrying the loss back – their employee-weighted
frequency among the twenty-three percent of private sector employers with losses is taken from
Cooper and Knittel – are also getting an immediate tax benefit and are therefore also assigned a
scaling factor of one. The remaining private sector employees are allocated, based on the
Cooper and Knittle frequencies, to carryforwards of one to twelve years and assigned a scaling
factor equal to the interest rate factor for the relevant horizon.47
For all employees, their employer’s value of a dollar of wage deduction is assumed to be
the scaling factor times the full business income tax rate (federal and state combined, accounting
for the federal deductibility of state taxes).

46

Salamon et al (2012) report that ten percent of private sector employees in 2010 were working for notfor-profit businesses, but that was significantly above the percentage before the recession. I therefore
take nine percent as an estimate of the percentage that will apply in the year 2016.
47
Cooper and Knittel cannot look beyond the tenth year. I therefore assign the losses among the
remaining active corporations to the twelfth year.

36

Table 1. The salary equivalent of a $2,000 employer penalty
Among employers not offering health coverage, and assuming that private-sector employers pay the
top corporate rate applicable to the state of employment.
Mean
$2,753
Median
3,025
Non-profit and government employers
1,858
Mean among profitable corporate employers
in DC, IL, IA, MN, PA
3,175
Notes: DC, IL, IA, MN, PA are the highest corporate tax rate states. For the purposes of calculating
the median and mean, all private sector employers are assigned the corporate rate.
After 2014, the employer penalty exceeds $2,000. It is expexted to increase 3.9% more than wages
between 2014 and 2016. i.e., without wage inflation the 2016 employer penalty would be $2,077
(rather than $2,000) and the mean salary equivalent would be $2,859 (rather than $2,753).

Table 2. Estimators of the various hour-equivalent FTETs
Estimator of the average hour equivalent
Mean ratio, with Mean ratio, with
individual wage
demographic
in the
wage in the
denominator
denominator
4.3
3.9

Median ratio,
with individual
wage in the
denominator
3.9

Type of full-time employment tax
Employer penalty,
conditional on employer not offering coverage
Full amount of exchange subsidy,
10.5
9.7
7.5
conditional on positive subsidy
Value of exchange subsidy (25% features discount),
7.5
6.8
4.7
conditional on positive subsidy
Either FTET (25% features discount),
5.9
5.4
4.3
conditional on positive FTET
Either FTET (25% features discount),
2.7
2.5
0.0
entire population
Note : The hour equilavent of a tax is the number of hours to be worked each week in order to generate
enough employee compensation to pay the tax.

Table 3. Sliding Scale Exchange Subsidies
as a function of household income for the calendar year
Income as a Percentage of income
Discount on out-of-pocket cost
ratio to FPL
owed as premium (jumps when crossing thresholds) Notes on interval
1
2%
80% premium percentage is constant on this interval, jumping at 1.33
1.33
3%
80%
1.5
4%
57%
2
6.3%
10%
2.5
8.05%
0%
3
9.5%
0% premium percentage is constant on this interval
4
9.5%
0%
4+
full premium
0% premium jumps here because the premium cap is eliminated
Notes : (a) The first column indicates the bottom threshold of the income interval.
(b) Exchange participants pay a premium that is the minimum of the full premium and the applicable percentage from the second column.
The premium assistance is the amount, if any, that the premium is less than the full premium.
(c) Income percentages change linearly between income thresholds unless otherwise noted.
(d) FPL = federal poverty line.
(e) Income percentages for 2015-18, and any year thereafter in which the exchange subsides are less than 0.504% of GDP, are indexed to the
excess of health cost inflation over income growth.

Table 4. ESI workers free from implicit full-time employment taxes
Percentage of:
All workers All weeks worked
Family AGI is outside the 1-4 FPL eligible range
41%
41%
Family AGI is in the eligible range, but individual is an elderly or dependent
7%
7%
Family AGI is in the eligible range, but spouse works full time for ESI employer
5%
5%
None of the above, but silver plan premium would already be affordable
1%
2%
Note : The categories above are mutually exclusive. The omitted categories are non-ESI workers and ESI workers
who will face a FTET. Overall ESI workers supply about 3/4ths of all workers and weeks.

Table 5. Full-time employment taxation by demographic group
Sample is 93,477 workers from the March 2012 CPS
Dollar amounts are 2014 dollars. Coeffient standard errors in parentheses.
OLS regression dependent variable
Annual dollar
Weekly hour
ACA FTET is amount of 2016
equivalent of
positive
FTET
2016 FTET
Constant (less than age 25, no HS education,
0.48
1,843
4.10
dependent, unmarried male, not a parent)
(0.01)
(64)
(0.09)
Age 25-34
-0.06
-133
-0.93
(0.01)
(36)
(0.05)
Age 35-44
-0.08
-271
-1.37
(0.01)
(38)
(0.06)
Age 45-54
-0.09
-109
-1.33
(0.01)
(38)
(0.06)
Age 55-64
-0.07
542
-0.57
(0.01)
(40)
(0.06)
Age 65+
-0.22
-890
-1.40
(0.01)
(55)
(0.08)
Some high school, but not graduated
-0.04
-398
-1.12
(0.01)
(63)
(0.09)
High school diploma
-0.09
-691
-2.28
(0.01)
(55)
(0.08)
Some college, but not graduated
-0.14
-1,021
-3.05
(0.01)
(55)
(0.08)
College graduate
-0.27
-1,687
-4.30
(0.01)
(56)
(0.08)
Advanced degree
-0.35
-2,082
-4.83
(0.01)
(59)
(0.09)
Household head or spouse
0.29
1,172
2.05
(0.01)
(31)
(0.05)
Female
0.00
-50
0.43
(0.00)
(19)
(0.03)
Married
-0.13
-281
-0.75
(0.00)
(23)
(0.03)
Parent
0.09
809
0.95
(0.00)
(22)
(0.03)
2
Adjusted R
0.08
0.08
0.10
Std. error of the regression
0.48
2,817
4.15
Note : All three dependent variables measure FTETs net of a 25 percent exchange-features discount,
when applicable. The hour equivalent uses the demographic wage.

Table 6. Imputation of employer business income tax rates
Scaling factors are used to multiply statutory federal and state rates according to each worker's state
of residence.
Employer sector
Public vs. Private Subsector
Randomization factor Scaling factor
Public Sector
N/A
N/A
0
Nonprofit
0.0900
0
Private Sector
For-profit w/ net income
Private Sector
0.6825
1
For-profit, loss carryback
0.0344
1
For-profit, loss carryforward 1 year
0.0105
0.930
For-profit, loss carryforward 2 years
0.0240
0.865
For-profit, loss carryforward 3 years
0.0138
0.805
For-profit, loss carryforward 4 years
0.0202
0.749
For-profit, loss carryforward 5 years
0.0086
0.697
For-profit, loss carryforward 6 years
0.0064
0.648
For-profit, loss carryforward 7 years
0.0082
0.603
For-profit, loss carryforward 8 years
0.0045
0.561
For-profit, loss carryforward 9 years
0.0030
0.522
For-profit, loss carryforward 10 years
0.0022
0.485
For-profit, loss carryforward 12 years
0.0490
0.420
For-profit, losses never used
0.0426
0
Private-sector employee summary
0.81 Average scaling factor
0.13 Share assigned scaling factor of 0
Note : Private-sector employer types cannot be identified in the worker data, so workers are
randomized according to the factors shown in the table. Carryforwards are discounted 7.5 percent
per year.

Figure 1. The employer penalty's hour-equivalent distribution

0

.1

Density

.2

.3

based on two hourly wage measures

0

2

4
6
Hours per week
Individual wage

8
Demographic wage

10

Figure 2. 2016 health payments as a function of family income and
policy type

Payments by subsidy-eligible participants, ratio to FPL

1

full price

0.9

family of 4, parents aged 50, actual
family of 4, 28% approx.
1-person aged 30, actual
1-person family, 13% approx.

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

full price

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

family income, ratio to FPL

4

4.5

5

Figure 3. The implicit FTET's hour-equivalent distribution

0

.02

Density
.04

.06

.08

based on two hourly wage measures and no exchange-features discount

0

10

20
Hours per week

Individual wage

30
Demographic wage

40

Figure 4. The implicit FTET's hour-equivalent distribution

0

.05

Density

.1

.15

based on two hourly wage measures and a 25% exchange-features discount

0

10

20
Hours per week

Individual wage

30
Demographic wage

40

Figure 5. The FTETs' hour-equivalent distribution

0

.05

Density
.1

.15

.2

based on two hourly wage measures and a 25% exchange-features discount

0

10

20
Hours per week

Individual wage

30
Demographic wage

40

Bibliography
Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor, and David Lyle. "Women, War, and Wages: The Effect of
Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Midcentury." Journal of Political
Economy 112, no. 3 (June 2004): 497-551.
ADP Research Institute. ADP's 2012 Study of Large Employer Health Benefits.
http://adp.com/research, 2013.
Baicker, Katherine, and Helen Levy. "Employer Health Insurance Mandates and the Risk of
Unemployment." Risk Management and Insurance Review 11, no. 1 (2008): 109-32.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, Greg J. Duncan, and Willard L. Rodgers. "Evidence on the
Validity of Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data." Journal of Labor
Economics 12, no. 3 (July 1994): 345-68.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Sean Lyons, and Kosali I. Simon. "The Importance of the Meaning and
Measurement of "Affordable" in the Affordable Care Act." NBER working paper, no.
17279 (September 2011).
Carroll, William A., and G. Edward Miller. Health Insurance Status of Full-Time Workers by
Demographic and Employer Characteristics, 2008. Statistical Brief, Washington, DC:
HHS, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
Congressional Budget Office. "CBO's Health Insurance Simulation Model: A Technical
Description." CBO Background Paper, October 2007.
—. "The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2014 to 2024." Congressional Budget Office. February
2014. http://cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/45010-Outlook2014_Feb.pdf
(accessed April 3, 2014).
Cooper, Michael, and Matthew Knittel. "Partial Loss Refundability: How Are Corporate Tax
Losses Used?" National Tax Journal 59, no. 3 (September 2006): 651-63.
Dubay, Lisa, Sharon K. Long, and Emily Lawton. Will Health Reform Lead to Job Loss?
Evidence from Massachusetts Says No. Urban Institute, 2012.
Gabel, Jon R., et al. "More Than Half Of Individual Health Plans Offer Coverage That Falls
Short Of What Can Be Sold Through Exchanges As Of 2014." Health Affairs 31, no. 6
(June 2012): 1-12.
Gallen, Trevor S., and Casey B. Mulligan. "Wedges, Labor Market Behavior, and Health
Insurance Coverage." NBER working paper, December 2013.
Gamage, David S. "Perverse Incentives Arising from the Tax Provisions of Healthcare Reform:
Why Further Reforms are Needed to Prevent Avoidable Costs to Low- and ModerateIncome Workers." Tax Law Review 65, no. 4 (Summer 2012): 669-721.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte C. Madrian. "Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job Mobility:
A Critical Review of the Literature." In Health Policy and the Uninsured, edited by
Catherine G. McLaughlin, 97-178. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 2004.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996a.
—. Workdays, Workhours, and Work Schedules. Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research, 1996b.
Hancock, Jay. "‘Narrow Networks’ Trigger Push-Back From State Officials."
kaiserhealthnews.org. November 25, 2013.

37

http://www.kaiserhealthnews.org/stories/2013/november/25/states-balk-at-narrownetworks.aspx (accessed May 10, 2014).
Harberger, Arnold C. "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax." Journal of Political
Economy 70, no. 3 (June 1962): 216-40.
Heim, Bradley T., and Ithai, Z. Lurie. "Does Health Reform Lead to Increased Job Mobility?
Evidence from Massachusetts." manuscript, Indiana University, February 2014.
Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust. Employer Benefits
Survey: 2012 Annual Survey. Menlo Park, CA: Henry J. Kaiser Foundation, 2012.
Hirsch, Barry T. "Why Do Part-time Workers Earn Less? The Role of Worker and Job Skills."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58, no. 4 (July 2005): 525-51.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 4 (November 2009): 1403-48.
Janicki, Hubert. Employment-Based Health Insurance: 2010. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Commerce, 2013.
Krueger, Alan B., and Bruce D. Meyer. Labor supply effects of social insurance. Vol. 4, in
Handbook of Public Economics, edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 232792. Elsevier, 2002.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Average Marginal Tax Rates under the Affordable Care Act." NBER
working paper, no. 19365 (November 2013a).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Is the Affordable Care Act Different from Romneycare? A Labor
Economics Perspective." NBER working paper, no. 19366 (November 2013b).
—. Side Effects: The Economic Consequences of the Health Reform. forthcoming e-book, 2014.
—. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press
(redistributionrecession.com), 2012.
Mulligan, Casey B., and Trevor S. Gallen. "Wedges, Wages, and Productivity under the
Affordable Care Act." NBER working paper, no. 19771 (December 2013).
Oi, Walter Y. "Labor as a Quasi-Fixed Factor." Journal of Political Economy 70, no. 6
(December 1962): 538-55.
Rennane, Stephanie, and C. Eugene Steuerle. "Health Reform: A Four-Tranche System (Updated
and Revised)." www.urban.org. February 22, 2011.
http://www.urban.org/publications/901408.html (accessed March 15, 2013).
Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. "Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity."
Review of Economic Dynamics 11, no. 4 (October 2008): 707-20.
Rosen, Sherwin. "Short-run Employment Variation on Class-I Railroads in the U.S., 1947-63."
Econometrica 36, no. 3 (July 1968): 511-29.
Rosen, Sherwin. "The Supply of Work Schedules and Employment." In Work Time and
Employment. Washington, DC: National Commission for Manpower Policy, 1978.
Rosen, Sherwin. "The Theory of Equalizing Differences." In Handbook of Labor Economics,
vol. I, by Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard, eds. Layard, 641-92. Amsterdam: Northholland, 1986.
Salamon, Lester M., S. Wojciech Sokolowski, and Stephanie L. Geller. Holding the Fort:
Nonprofit Employment during a Decade of Turmoil. Nonprofit Economic Data Bulletin
#39, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Institute for Policy Studies, 2012.
Summers, Lawrence H. "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits." American Economic
Review 79 (May 1989): 177-83.

38

Tax Foundation. "State Corporate Income Tax Rates, 2000-2014." taxfoundation.org. 2013.
http://taxfoundation.org/article/state-corporate-income-tax-rates (accessed July 1, 2014).
Topel, Robert, and Finis Welch. "Unemployment Insurance: Survey and Extensions." Economica
47, no. 187 (August 1980): 351-79.
U.S. Government Printing Office. Federal Register. various issues.
United States Department of Health and Human Services. "Am I eligible for coverage in the
Marketplace?" healthcare.gov. 2014a. https://www.healthcare.gov/am-i-eligible-forcoverage-in-the-marketplace/ (accessed March 25, 2014).
—. "HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2015." gpo.gov. March 11, 2014c.
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-03-11/pdf/2014-05052.pdf (accessed April 11,
2014).
—. "How do I choose Marketplace insurance?" healthcare.gov. 2014b.
https://www.healthcare.gov/how-do-i-choose-marketplace-insurance/ (accessed March
25, 2014).
United States Department of Treasury. "Treasury and IRS Issue Final Regulations Implementing
Employer Shared Responsibility Under the Affordable Care Act for 2015." treasury.gov.
February 10, 2014. http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/pressreleases/Pages/jl2290.aspx (accessed February 11, 2014).
Wayne, Alex. "Target to Drop Health Insurance for Part-Time Workers." bloomberg.com.
January 22, 2014. Target to Drop Health Insurance for Part-Time Workers (accessed
August 1, 2014).

39

