NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF REGULATORY DISCRETION:
ESTIMATES FROM ENVIRONMENTAL INSPECTIONS IN INDIA
Esther Duflo
Michael Greenstone
Rohini Pande
Nicholas Ryan
Working Paper 20590
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20590

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We thank Sanjiv Tyagi, R. G. Shah, and Hardik Shah for advice and support over the course of this
project. We thank Pankaj Verma, Eric Dodge, Vipin Awatramani, Logan Clark, Yuanjian Li, Sam
Norris, Nick Hagerty, Susanna Berkouwer and Kevin Rowe for excellent research assistance and
numerous seminar participants for comments. We thank the Sustainability Science Program (SSP),
the Harvard Environmental Economics Program, the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy
Research (CEEPR), the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), the International Growth
Centre (IGC) and the National Science Foundation (NSF Award #1066006) for financial support. All
views and errors are solely ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20590.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Regulatory Discretion: Estimates from Environmental Inspections in India
Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 20590
October 2014
JEL No. D22,L51,Q56
ABSTRACT
In collaboration with a state environmental regulator in India, we conducted a field experiment to raise
the frequency of environmental inspections to the prescribed minimum for a random set of industrial
plants. The treatment was successful when judged by process measures, as treatment plants, relative
to the control group, were more than twice as likely to be inspected and to be cited for violating pollution
standards. Yet the treatment was weaker for more consequential outcomes: the regulator was no more
likely to identify extreme polluters (i.e., plants with emissions five times the regulatory standard or
more) or to impose costly penalties in the treatment group. In response to the added scrutiny, treatment
plants only marginally increased compliance with standards and did not significantly reduce mean
pollution emissions. To explain these results and recover the full costs of environmental regulation,
we model the regulatory process as a dynamic discrete game where the regulator chooses whether
to penalize and plants choose whether to abate to avoid future sanctions. We estimate this model using
original data on 10,000 interactions between plants and the regulator. Our estimates imply that the
costs of environmental regulation are largely reserved for extremely polluting plants. Applying the
cost estimates to the experimental data, we find the average treatment inspection imposes about half
the cost on plants that the average control inspection does, because the randomly assigned inspections
in the treatment are less likely than normal discretionary inspections to target such extreme polluters.

Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E17-201B
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu

Rohini Pande
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rohini_pande@harvard.edu

Michael Greenstone
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
mgreenst@uchicago.edu

Nicholas Ryan
Harvard Weatherhead Center
K239 1737 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
nicholas.ryan@yale.edu

I

Introduction
Regulatory agencies enforce standards using imperfect information on the parties they reg-

ulate (Laﬀont and Tirole, 1993). This imperfection suggests a need for policy to be flexible,
to allow regulators to collect and use local information. Yet, flexibility lends discretion, which
may lead to enforcement that reflects regulators’ personal objectives, rather than the social goals
of regulation (Stigler, 1971; Leaver, 2009). This tension between rules and discretion underlies
many debates on the design of regulatory agencies (Sitkin and Bies, 1994).
Environmental regulation in emerging economies is an important case in point. Countries
like China and India report levels of pollution that exceed the highest ever recorded in rich
countries, with dire health consequences (Chen et al., 2013).1 This pollution problem is severe
despite strict de jure regulatory standards.
To shed light on regulatory design in practice, we implemented a two-year field experiment
which increased the frequency of inspection for a sample of industrial plants in the Indian state
of Gujarat, in collaboration with the Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB). The de jure
environmental standards are strict maximum limits on the concentrations of pollution that plants
can emit. There are also regulatory requirements for inspection frequency and national laws that
build a criminal framework for punishment, giving regulators broad power to close down highly
polluting plants and cut oﬀ their utilities. However, de facto, we observe that the regulator uses
considerable discretion in deciding whom to inspect, whom to pursue and when to apply the
costly punishments at its disposal. In the control group, despite widespread noncompliance with
pollution standards, 44% of plants are inspected less than once per year during the experiment.
The experiment was conducted in a sample of 960 industrial plants, with half assigned to the
treatment group of increased inspection frequency. This “inspection” treatment had two features.
First, it provided the resources necessary to bring all treatment plants up to at least the required
minimum frequency of inspections. Second, it removed the regulator’s discretion by requiring
that these added inspections be allocated randomly across all treatment plants. For a regulator
that goes fishing for violations in a sea of industrial plants, the treatment expanded its fleet, but
sent the additional boats to all corners of the ocean, not just its favored grounds. The treatment
1

By one estimate, reducing particulate matter air pollution to India’s air quality standards would increase life
expectancy for the 660 million people in noncompliant areas by 3.2 years on average (Greenstone et al., 2014).

2

did not otherwise alter pollution standards, regulatory penalties or the process of regulation.
This inspection treatment was cross-randomized with an audit reform experiment in the subset
of 473 sample plants that were eligible for environmental audits (Duflo et al., 2013).2
The treatment was successful when judged by process measures, like increased regulatory
scrutiny. Actual inspection rates more than doubled for treatment plants relative to control
plants, and treatment plants report higher perceived inspection rates, suggesting the additional
scrutiny was felt. Additionally, the treatment greatly increased the number of plants found
with pollution emissions that exceed the legal standard and the number of regulatory citations
for such violations. However, the treatment was weaker for more consequential outcomes. For
example, the regulator was no more likely to identify extreme polluters (i.e., plants with emissions
five times the regulatory standard or more), and neither the frequency of more costly regulatory
penalties nor plants’ perception of these penalties diﬀer by plant treatment status. Perhaps most
importantly, we measured the eﬀect of the treatment on pollution levels by conducting an endline
survey of emissions independent of the regulator. Treatment plants only marginally increased
their compliance with pollution standards (four percentage points, or 6%; p-value = 0.087) and
did not significantly reduce mean pollution emissions. These pollution results are mixed but
consistent, since reductions came mostly from plants close to the regulatory threshold, rather
than from large polluters who had the most potential to bring average pollution down.
To understand these results, we follow the regulator’s net under the water to see what fish
are ensnared and which go free. We obtained access to the regulator’s administrative database
and identified 9,624 pieces of correspondence between the regulator and the plants in our sample.
These provide plant characteristics and document all interactions with sample plants over five
years (from two years before the experiment through one year after), including plant inspections,
pollution analysis, regulatory notices and penalties, as well as written responses by sample plants,
such as documentation of the installation of abatement equipment. We use this data to estimate
a dynamic discrete game between the regulator and polluting plants to recover the full costs
of environmental regulation (Aguirregabiria and Mira, 2010; Pakes et al., 2007). Using explicit
cross-references and dating, we assigned documents to 7,423 separate chains of interactions, each
2
In 1996, the High Court of Gujarat ordered GPCB to instate a third-party audit system wherein high-polluting
potential plants must provide an annual audit report to GPCB. Duflo et al. (2013) evaluated a potential reform
of this audit system and found making third party auditors more accountable to the regulator and less beholden
to the plants they audit improves truth-telling and lowers pollution.

3

of which begins with a new plant inspection and ends with the regulator accepting that the plant,
for now, is in compliance. Chains alternate moves between the regulator and plants and go on
for as many as nineteen rounds in the data.
The model is necessary to estimate the full costs of regulation because, while we can observe
mandated expenditures on pollution abatement equipment, the costs of regulatory penalties
(e.g., temporary plant closures) in terms of lost profits are not measured, but only implicitly
revealed through plant behavior. In the game, the regulator observes a measure of plant pollution
on its inspection and may choose, at any later round, to re-inspect a plant, warn it for past
violations, punish it with a costly penalty or accept it as compliant and end the game. The plant
can comply by installing abatement equipment or ignore the regulator altogether. Plants are
trying to minimize regulatory costs (maximize profits) by trading-oﬀ a known cost for abatement
equipment today against the risk of regulatory penalties for noncompliance, such as temporary
closure. Using this structure, we estimate conditional choice probabilities for regulatory actions
depending on pollution and the past actions of both parties. We use these choice probabilities
and state transition probabilities to construct the plant’s value function for each action at each
possible state, and estimate what regulatory penalties cost to plants by maximizing the pseudolikelihood of observing the actions taken in the data.
The structural estimates show that investments in pollution abatement, which are a typical
measure of regulation’s costs, account for less than two-thirds the total cost of regulation. The
balance is due to regulatory penalties that can be substantial: 3% of plants were closed multiple
times during our two-year experiment and one plant was closed on five separate occasions. We
find that the regulator largely reserves major penalties for plants with pollution readings that
exceed the de jure standard by a factor of five times or more. In turn, plants are most likely to
comply when such a high reading is cited against them. To provide some idea of the magnitude of
the costs of regulation, the average expected discounted cost of regulation for an extreme polluter
in a later round of the game is US$ 23,000, with 67% of this cost due to regulatory penalties
and the remainder to pollution abatement costs. This cost is equivalent to about one month of
mean plant profits, assuming a 10% profit margin, or two months of mean plant electricity bills.
We use the full costs of regulation as estimated from the structural model and the experimental variation in inspections to assess the value of regulatory discretion. We find that the average

4

inspection in the treatment, which is mostly assigned randomly, leads to about US$ 1,340 of
regulatory costs.3 This is roughly half of the US$ 2,650 in regulatory cost due to the average
inspection in the control where inspections are mostly discretionary. We interpret regulatory
costs per inspection as the value of an inspection consistent with the regulator’s own objectives
and preferences, but do not take it as a measure of social welfare.
The combination of a large-scale field experiment and structural estimation allows us to
make several contributions to the economic literatures on regulatory design and environmental
regulation. First, we believe this paper provides the first experimental evidence of the eﬀect
of inspection frequency on compliance with environmental regulation.4 Second, the structural
estimates allow us to estimate the full costs of environmental regulation and separate them
into mandated investment in abatement equipment and the regulatory penalties needed to force
that investment. We show that these penalties are a substantial portion of the total cost of
environmental regulation, raising the social cost of abatement through regulation relative to the
private cost of abatement to plants. Third, marrying the experimental variation in inspection
frequency with the estimates from the structural model allows us to value regulatory discretion.
With the rigid penalty structure in this setting, the data suggest that regulatory discretion is
valuable because it allows the regulator to target inspections at extreme polluters.5
The rest of the paper runs as follows. Section II describes environmental regulation in India,
the experimental design and data collection. Section III gives reduced-form results on the eﬀects
3

We say treatment inspections are “mostly” random because even in the treatment there are non-random
follow-up inspections.
4
Past studies of regulatory inspections in the United States show that inspections reduce pollution significantly (Hanna and Oliva, 2010; Magat and Viscusi, 1990), but at the cost of lower manufacturing productivity
(Greenstone et al., 2012). All these studies rely on observational data wherein dirtier plants are more likely to get
inspections (Hanna and Oliva, 2010). Studies of regulatory eﬃcacy in emerging economies are more mixed, with
Tanaka (2013), for example, finding large reductions in pollution from a control policy in China and Greenstone
and Hanna (2014) finding cuts in pollution in India from policies targeting air, but not water, pollution. Few
studies of the productivity impacts of environmental regulation exist, though negative productivity eﬀects of rigid
industrial regulation have been documented for India (Aghion et al., 2008; Besley and Burgess, 2004).
5
Environmental regulation is a classic setting for incentive regulation (Laﬀont and Tirole, 1993; Laﬀont, 1994;
Boyer and Laﬀont, 1999). Limited regulatory capacity and limited commitment will typically cause the optimal
regulatory policy in emerging economies to diﬀer dramatically from settings with complete markets (Laﬀont,
2005; Estache and Wren-Lewis, 2009). In addition, in these settings, the regulator may have especially poor
information on firm cost structure as firms are numerous and monitoring spread thin (Duflo et al., 2013). Papers
in organizational economics, such as Aghion and Tirole (1997) suggest that formal and real authority may then
optimally diverge leading to substantial value for discretion. More broadly, our findings resonate with an emerging
literature on eﬀective policy design when state capacity is limited (Besley and Persson, 2010). For instance,
consistent with this paper’s findings Rasul and Rogger (2013) report significant gains from providing Nigerian
bureaucrats autonomy in decision-making. Other papers note, to the contrary, that discretion in environmental
regulation may be misused by bureaucrats and politicians (Burgess et al., 2012; Jia, 2014).

5

of additional inspections on regulatory actions and plant pollution behavior. Section IV presents
a dynamic discrete game model of the interactions between the regulator and polluting plants.
Section V presents the model estimates on the costs of regulatory penalties for treatment and
control plants and uses them to value discretion in regulatory inspections. Section VI concludes.

II

Context, Experimental Design, Data, and Summary Statistics
This section describes the Indian regulatory framework, the experimental design and data,

and presents summary statistics on the sample plants and their interactions with the regulator.

A

Regulation of Industrial Pollution in India
India remains severely polluted despite powerful regulatory agencies and stringent environ-

mental regulations (Greenstone and Hanna, 2014). Regulations are command-and-control in
nature: plants must meet maximum allowable concentration standards for pollution emissions
in air and water. States may make their standards more strict than the national standards, but
cannot relax them (Ministry of Environment and Forests, 1986). State Pollution Control Boards
conduct basically all enforcement of environmental regulations.
We describe the enforcement practices of our partner regulator, the Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB), which are largely common with other Indian states. GPCB has 19 regional
oﬃces, each with several inspection teams and a Regional Oﬃcer in charge of assigning inspections. Plant inspections are undertaken by full-time engineer and scientist employees. During an
inspection, the team observes the state of the plant and its environmental management and often, but not always, collects pollution samples for laboratory analysis. Findings are summarized
in an inspection report which enters the plant’s file, and the laboratory analysis report, once
completed, is added to the same file. Oﬃcers in the region and at the head oﬃce review inspection results and analysis reports, covering qualitative information, such as on waste management
practices and plant housekeeping, the plant’s history of violations and especially pollution concentrations for air and water pollutants. The oﬃcers, not the field staﬀ, decide whether to take
any action, including whether to inspect the plant again, warning the plant or imposing penalties
(on which see below), or to leave the plant alone.
A first plant inspection may occur for several reasons. First, regulations mandate routine
6

inspection of plants in sectors with the highest pollution potential (“red” category plants) every
90 days if they are large- or medium-scale and once per year if they are small-scale.6 In administrative baseline data, routine inspections make up 35% of inspections. Second, inspections
occur when plants apply for an environmental consent, a license to operate a certain type of
manufacturing at a certain scale, and for renewal of this consent every five years; 30% of GPCB
inspections fall in this category. Third, the inspection may be to follow-up on a violation found
in a prior inspection, or to verify that the plant has taken a specific action as it claimed (24% of
inspections). The balance of 11% of inspections are in response to public complaints and other
miscellaneous reasons.
The staﬀ strength to attend to these competing priorities is, however, limited. Bhushan et al.
(2009) note that the approved number of employees for many Boards has declined even as the
number of plants the Boards were to regulate doubled or trebled. Of nominally approved staﬀ
positions, many Boards left a quarter or more unfilled due to financial or bureaucratic diﬃculties
in hiring. As a result, inspections occur less often than prescribed. Data from the year before the
experiment shows that inspection rates for red-category plants of small-, medium- and large-scale
occur roughly half as often as prescribed (once in 187, 224 and 534 days, respectively). Finally,
a subset of red-category plants are also required to submit annual environmental audit reports
to the regulator. Auditors’ conflict of interest has historically rendered these audits inaccurate,
such that inspections remain the key channel through which the regulator monitors plants (Duflo
et al., 2013).
While inspections are infrequent, plants found in violation of pollution standards can be
harshly penalized. National environmental regulations empower the regulator to issue written
directions for polluting plants to take abatement action or for the stoppage of water, electricity
or other services to those plants (Ministry of Environment and Forests, 1986). The regulator
applies these penalties often, including mandating that a plant install abatement equipment,
mandating that a plant post a bond against future performance and ordering that a plant’s
water and electricity be disconnected, closing the plant down. Utility disconnections can remain
6

The GPCB follows a government classification for plants based on their reported scale of capital investment,
with small-scale being investment less than INR 50m (US$ 1m), medium INR 50m to 100m (US$ 1m to 2m) and
large above 100m (US$ 2m). Throughout the paper, we use an exchange rate of US$ 1 = INR 50, a round figure
about equal to the exchange rate at the end of 2011 and slightly stronger (for the dollar) than the average of INR
46 over the experiment. The prescribed inspection rates are roughly comparable to those applied to large plants,
by air pollution potential, in the United States (Hanna and Oliva, 2010).

7

in force until the plant has shown progress towards meeting environmental standards, often,
again, by installing abatement equipment. The duration of closure depends on the oﬀense but
is typically several weeks; in our data the median duration of closure is 24 days.7 The regulator,
in principle, can also take a violator to court for criminal sanction, but this is rare and does not
occur in our data, because documenting violations to legal standards is burdensome and there
are long delays in prosecution.

B

Experimental Design
We worked with GPCB to design an experiment wherein the Board, between 2009 (quarter

3) and 2011 (quarter 2), raised inspection frequency for a randomly selected subset of plants out
of a sample of 960 highly-polluting plants. The sample was drawn as follows. First, we identified
the population of 3,455 red-category (i.e., high pollution potential) small- and medium-scale
plants in three regions of Gujarat (Ahmedabad, Surat and Valsad). This population, which
makes up roughly 15% of the more than 20,000 regulated plants in Gujarat, is of special interest
as it is highly polluting but hard to regulate. From this population, we selected all 473 audit
eligible plants in Ahmedabad and Surat.8 Next, we randomly selected 488 other plants from the
remaining non-audit-eligible population.
Inspection treatment assignment was randomized within region by audit-treatment-status
strata (treatment, control and non-eligible). The treatment was thus cross-randomized and
implemented concurrently with the audit reform treatment studied by Duflo et al. (2013). A
total of 481 plants were assigned to the inspection treatment, and each treatment plant was
guaranteed at least one annual inspection. Specifically, in the first quarter the plant was assigned
an initial inspection, after which it was randomly assigned on a quarterly basis to be inspected
again with probability 0.66, conditional on strata. After four quarters this cycle started over.
Thus the treatment assigned extra variation in inspection frequency within the treatment group
of plants, up to a maximum of four inspections per year.
Treatment inspections were conducted by newly created regional GPCB teams. Each team
7

This estimate is from comparing the dates of closure orders and the revocation of closure orders for the same
plant in regulatory files. This comparison probably somewhat overstates closure duration, because closures are
carried out by an order copied to the electric utility, which executes these orders at a lag.
8
Due to the requirements for audit eligibility, which were originally targeted at plants in Ahmedabad, few if
any plants in Valsad are audit-eligible.

8

consisted of an environmental engineer and scientist. In order to increase inspections without
overburdening GPCB staﬀ, one member of each team was a recently retired GPCB scientist
rehired for the experiment, and one an active environmental engineer.9 While this design does
draw on active staﬀ, GPCB judged that scientists, who are the only staﬀ able to take certain
pollution samples, were the main constraint in conducting additional inspections. Each morning,
the inspection teams thus created were randomly assigned a list of plants from the treatment
group at which to conduct a “routine” inspection that day. This mimicked GPCB’s practice of
assigning teams to plants each day, except that for these teams the plant assignment, rather
than being based on the RO’s discretion, was random. The additional teams were used only
for these routine inspections and not other GPCB work or follow-ups. Regional oﬃcers could
choose to shift their other teams away from routine inspections in treatment plants if they wished
(though, below, we find little evidence of displacement). Inspection reports from the additional
teams were treated like any other inspection report: the reports entered the same database, had
samples analyzed by the same GPCB labs and had the same oﬃcials at the GPCB deciding
whether or not to take action against plants.
Towards the end of the inspection treatment, in the month prior to the endline survey, we also
assigned, randomly and independently of the other treatments, some plants to receive a letter
from GPCB reminding them of their obligations to meet emissions limits. This letter reiterated
the terms of plants’ environmental consent, which in principle they already knew, but it may
have also served to increase the salience of regulatory compliance.

C

Channels of Influence
How should we expect the experimental manipulation to aﬀect plant and regulator behavior?
On the plants’ side, noncompliant plants facing a higher inspection rate may change their

investments in abatement equipment and/or their emission levels. Plants make respond in this
way to explicit penalties from the regulator, following inspections, or as part of a deterrence eﬀect,
from plants updating their expected penalties from remaining noncompliant. Treatment plants
were not formally notified of the change in inspection frequency, but they would have inferred it
from their experience. Plants that additionally received a letter from the regulator may have felt
9

GPCB observes a mandatory retirement age so many retired staﬀ are willing to work. GPCB identified
recently retired but interested staﬀ in each region.

9

under greater regulatory scrutiny. During the experiment, we do observe a significant diﬀerence
in perceived inspection probability between treatment and control plants, which is necessary for
a deterrence eﬀect. Whether, in practice, plant behavior changes will depend on a plant’s initial
compliance status, expected penalties and the cost of abatement, a trade-oﬀ explored in detail
in the context of the model.
On the regulator’s side, the treatment had two features: inspection resources increased and
were allocated across a representative group of plants. Given that pollution varies over time, this
increase in inspections generates more opportunities to catch potential violators that are already
being visited, as well as chances to catch new violators that are seldom visited. The number of
new violations detected and penalties imposed will depend on the extent of regulatory targeting
in the status quo and the regulatory penalty function, respectively, where the penalty function
relates pollution violations to penalties. If the regulator was already inspecting a random sample
of plants, and is now inspecting more of them and applying the same penalty function, violations
and penalties would scale linearly with additional inspections. If the regulator was targeting more
polluting plants in its inspections and penalties, then marginal random inspections may yield
fewer violations and penalties than average inspections, whereas if the regulator was avoiding
the heaviest polluters, marginal inspections may yield more.

D

Data Collection
The analysis uses two sources of data, an endline survey and GPCB administrative records.

The endline plant survey occurred between April and July, 2011 (the treatment increase in
inspection frequency ran through the end of June), and was conducted by independent agencies,
mainly engineering departments of local universities. The survey collected pollution readings
and data on recent investments in pollution abatement equipment and other aspects of plant
operations. The GPCB issued letters that required plants to cooperate with the surveyors and
also stated that the results would not be used for regulatory matters. With this regulatory help,
attrition was low; 12.9% of sample plants closed during the study and only 4.7% attrited for
other reasons. Attrition did not diﬀer by treatment status and nor did attrition on account of
plant closure in particular (See Online Appendix Tables B1 and B2).
The second source of data, GPCB records of its own interactions with sample plants, allows

10

us to examine the process of regulatory enforcement. Regulation, in practice, does not move
directly from observation to penalty but is mediated by a formal, sometimes lengthy dialogue
between the regulator and regulated plants. The records consist of internal regulatory documents,
letters and actions sent to plants and the written responses of plants to these actions. Table 1
presents an overview of the types of documents in the data, organized by the party and purpose
or action to which they correspond. These categories presage the discrete actions in our model
of regulation. Appendix A describes the data cleaning and collation process.
On the regulatory side, the main documents are internal inspection reports, warnings and
orders to plants. Inspection reports describe GPCB’s findings on visiting a plant and accompanying analysis reports record pollution readings for any samples collected in a visit. Warnings,
which may take several degrees of severity, urge the plant to clean up, cite it for pollution violations or threaten that the plant will be closed if it does not take some action to improve.
Punishments consist of requiring plants to post bank guarantees or orders that the plant be
closed down, possibly including a letter directly to the utility ordering that water or electricity
be disconnected.
On the plant side, the main documents are plant responses to the regulator’s warnings and
actions. We designate with the plant action Comply documents that record the installation of
abatement equipment, typically with a certification or invoice from the vendor that did the work.
The alternative to compliance is for the plant to Ignore the regulator, which is often inferred
from the absence of any response. If the plant writes to the regulator to protest but does not
demonstrate evidence of compliance, we also class this as Ignore, since protests are essentially
cheap talk and involve no expenditures.10
We group GPCB and plant documents into chains of related actions, where each action in
a chain references or logically follows the prior action. We observe 25,217 actions, of which
9,624 are documented and 15,593 imputed (Ignore is imputed 8,382 and Accept 7,211 times, as
the complements to observable actions), which are grouped into 7,423 chains of related actions.
All chains start with an inspection and end when GPCB Accepts. In between, the plant and
10

For example, a plant where GPCB found high air pollution readings claimed in correspondence: “At the time
of visit our chilling plant accidentally failed to proper working, so chilling system of scrubber was not eﬀective by
simple water. Same time batch was under reaction and we were unable to stop our reaction at that time. Now it
is working properly.” That is, a piece of air pollution control equipment failed, causing pollution to be higher than
normal during the visit. These types of explanations are common when plants are found well out of compliance.

11

regulator alternate moves at even- and odd-numbered rounds, respectively. (For completeness
and to maintain the game structure, we allow the plant to move in the second round, though in
the overwhelming majority of cases the regulator will take an action after an initial inspection
without the plant having a chance to respond.) Of the 5,771 actions in chains with more than
three rounds, 87% are linked based on the dating of the document relative to other documents
concerning the same plant, and 13% (16% of non-imputed actions) are linked by an explicit
reference to another document, for example when the regulator cites a prior inspection in taking
action against a plant. (For reference, the Online Appendix Table B3 gives an example of a
longer chain, showing the actions taken by each party at each turn and the underlying document
for each action.)

E

Status Quo Regulation and Randomization Check
Table 2 presents sample means and a randomization check for the inspection treatment. Each

row considers a separate plant characteristic; columns 1 and 2 report the means for treatment
and control plants, respectively, using administrative data for the year prior to the experiment.
Column 3 reports the coeﬃcient

on the inspection treatment dummy Tir from the following

regression, where for each outcome Yir for plant i in region r,

Yir = ↵r + AuditSampleir + Tir + ✏ir

(1)

where ↵r are region eﬀects and AuditSampleir is a dummy for a plant belonging to the audit
sample (i.e., being audit eligible, rather than being assigned to the audit treatment). Standard
deviations are in brackets and standard errors for the column 3 coeﬃcient in parentheses.
Panel A describes plant characteristics, which are well-balanced by treatment status. Fortyfive percent of sample plants are in the textiles sector and about 15% are chemical plants (mainly
upstream dye or dye intermediate producers). The average plant generates nearly 200,000 liters
of waste eﬄuent per day. About half of sample plants have air emissions from a boiler and many
are burning dirty fuels such as diesel or lignite in these boilers.
Panel B reports recent plant-regulator interactions for the year prior to the study. The regulator cites plants for violating pollution standards often and follows through on those citations
with costly penalties. The average plant was inspected about 1.3 times per year from January
12

2009 to the start of the experiment (July) in both the treatment and control groups. Despite limited contact with the regulator, many plants (15% and 18% in treatment and control) were cited
for violations. Moreover, regulatory action did not stop with citations; about 20% of plants were
mandated to install abatement equipment and 6% had their utilities disconnected. Across both
panels we observe no statistically significant diﬀerences between treatment and control plants.
Figure 1, Panel A shows for control plants the distribution of the annual rate of inspection,
rounded to the nearest inspection, over the roughly two-year course of the experiment. We
observe a very right-skewed distribution where a large number of plants have fewer than 2
inspections per year, with 44% of plants inspected less than once per year. Then, above about
four inspections per year, the distribution declines sharply, though some plants are visited nine
times a year. This disparity is striking, given that all sample plants were selected for high
pollution potential.

III

Results: Experimental Estimates

This section reports on how experimental variation in inspection frequency aﬀects regulatory
actions and compliance.

A

Regulatory Action
Equation (1) gives the basic estimating equation. Some specifications, noted below, also

include regressors for the audit treatment and the interactions of the audit and inspection treatments. Each row in Table 3 considers a diﬀerent regulatory outcome, and as before columns 1
and 2 report the means for control and treatment plants and column 3 the coeﬃcient on the
inspection treatment dummy. Panel A shows the rates of inspection in the treatment and control groups. Control plants were inspected an average of 1.40 times per year over the course of
the experiment. Treatment plants were assigned to be inspected 2.12 more times per year and
actually inspected an additional 1.84 times per year, more than doubling the rate of inspection,
to 3.24 times per year. Each assigned inspection yields 0.9 more actual inspections implying no
significant net substitution of GPCB’s own inspections away from treatment. This is not a mechanical implication of the experimental design since inspection teams could well have induced

13

crowd-in and/or crowd-out of regular GPCB actions.11
Panel B reports perceived inspection frequency. Though not oﬃcially told about increased
inspection frequency, treatment plants recognized the change. When asked to recall how many
inspections they received in a given year, both treatment and control plants overstated the
number of inspections they got. Treatment plants, though, recalled being inspected a significant
0.71 times more than control plants in 2010, which is correct in sign but understates by 58% the
actual diﬀerence in inspection rates. There was no diﬀerence in perceived inspections for years
prior to the experiment (not shown).
It is instructive to compare the distribution of annual inspection rates in the treatment
group in Figure 1, Panel B with the control group’s distribution in Panel A. The left side of
the treatment distribution is shifted to the right; the mass bunched against zero in the control
is instead in the range from 2-3 inspections per year. Only 8% of plants in the treatment have
less than one inspection per year during the experiment, a reduction of 36 percentage points
from the control. The treatment shifts mass up the distribution, but the skinny right tails of the
two distributions still look similar. Plants with this high rate of inspection are typically severe
violators and, regardless of the treatment, are apparently in continual contact with the regulator,
which inspects them repeatedly to gather additional evidence, to check whether they have taken
measures to reduce pollution emissions, or to verify that a punishment has been imposed.
The treatment-induced increase in inspections led to more detected pollution violations and
regulatory citations against plants, but no more of the really costly regulatory penalties. Table 3,
Panel C examines the number of regulatory actions against sample plants. Moving down the
table, the regulatory actions are ordered by increasing severity, from pollution readings, citations
and warnings through to actions like utility disconnections that have a direct cost to plants.
Treatment plants are a significant 0.21 more likely to have a pollution reading collected over the
nearly two-year treatment, on a meager 0.38 base in the control. These readings lead directly
to more treatment plants being found in violation of a standard (0.22) and a greater number
of citations (0.20) for these violations in the treatment. Given the treatment duration of about
two years, this means about one in 10 treatment plants receives an additional citation each year,
11
We test for crowd-out (the regulator shifting its own routine inspections away from the treatment group),
and crowd-in (treatment inspections generating GPCB revisits to treatment plants). Online Appendix, Table B4
shows that these eﬀects are small and statistically insignificant; hence the result in Table 3 that the net inspections
were nearly equal to inspections assigned by the treatment.

14

more than doubling the citation rate in the control.
Moving down to more severe regulatory actions, the diﬀerences between treatment and control
plants begin to taper oﬀ. More citations lead to a statistically significant increase of 0.08 closure
warnings, wherein the regulator formally threatens a plant with closure unless some action is
taken. However, closure directions are only insignificantly higher in treatment (coeﬃcient 0.041,
standard error 0.033). Other costly actions, such as the mandated installation of equipment or
disconnection of utilities, are more common in the treatment but by very small and statistically
insignificant amounts.
These costly penalties were not spared because treatment plants increased pollution abatement eﬀorts. Table 3, Panel D shows that 61% of plants in the control installed some piece of
abatement equipment over the experiment, with the average control plant installing 1.33 pieces
of equipment and spending somewhat under US$ 22,000 to do so. Treatment and control plants
do not diﬀer significantly on any of these measures of pollution abatement or numerous others
we collected to measure abatement expenditures during the experiment.
We probe the finding that treatment plants were not penalized more, despite getting more
inspections and citations and not substantially cleaning up. We observed in Duflo et al. (2013)
(Figure V, pg. 1538) that the GPCB reserves its harshest penalties mainly for plants that exceed
pollution standards by a factor of five or more. Figure 2 shows the number of plants in the
treatment and control groups with at least one pollution reading taken and that exceed the
relevant pollutant-specific standard by varying amounts (during the first year of the experiment,
in order to minimize changes due to the treatment and focus on regulatory selection of plants).
In the treatment group, the regulator takes many more pollution readings and finds many more
plants, roughly twice as many, with pollution readings above the standard and above twice
the standard. However, the striking finding is that the additional inspections and pollution
readings in the treatment fail to uncover any additional plants with pollution readings above
5p, above which penalties become much more severe, or above 10p. There are 35 (10) plants in
the treatment group with a pollution reading that is more than 5p (10p), compared to 33 (12)
in the control group. As is evident in the figure, these rates are practically identical, and the
null hypotheses that the probabilities of detection of plants with readings > 5p and > 10p do
not diﬀer by treatment status cannot be rejected (p-values: 0.80 and 0.67, respectively). This

15

suggests that the regulator is largely aware of which plants are violating its de facto standard,
even with the limited resources available for inspections in the status quo.

B

Pollution and Compliance
In Table 4 we report results from regressions of pollution levels (column 1) and compliance

(column 2) on treatment assignments for the inspection treatment, audit treatment and their
interaction. Pollution is measured in standard deviations for each pollutant at the plant-bypollutant level and standard errors are clustered at the plant level. All specifications include
region fixed eﬀects and an indicator for whether a plant is audit-eligible.
The treatment is estimated to have reduced plant pollution concentrations (column 1) by a
statistically insignificant amount, with a coeﬃcient of -0.105 standard deviations (standard error
0.084 standard deviations, p-value: 0.21). This eﬀect is about half the size of the statistically
significant -0.187 standard deviation reduction in pollution due to the audit treatment.12 The
audit-by-inspection interaction is large and positive, oﬀsetting the reductions in pollution from
the main eﬀects of audits and inspections. The magnitude of the interaction is puzzling. One
explanation is that the regulator is most focused on reducing emissions at plants that greatly
exceed the regulatory standard and there may not be enough of these plants in both the audit
and inspection treatment groups. An alternative explanation is that audits fail to produce any
additional information beyond what is uncovered in an inspection; indeed, the null that the sum
of the interaction and audit coeﬃcients is zero cannot be rejected (p-value: 0.41).
Column 2 repeats the column 1 specification, except that the outcome variable is compliance,
measured as an indicator for whether a plant-by-pollutant reading is below the pollutant-specific
standard. The inspection treatment marginally increased compliance with pollution standards:
treatment plants are 3.6 percentage points (standard error 2.1 percentage points, p-value 0.087)
more likely to comply, on a base of 61% compliant pollution readings in the control.13 The audit
treatment had a positive but smaller and statistically insignificant eﬀect on compliance.
The Online Appendix tests the robustness of the eﬀect of the inspection treatment on compliance. Online Appendix Table B5 runs placebo checks where compliance is coded to occur
12

The audit treatment eﬀect on pollution reported in Duflo et al. (2013) was estimated in the inspection control
group only and slightly larger.
13
Note that this rate of compliance is at the plant-by-pollutant level, but multiple pollutants are observed; the
rate of compliance is a scant 10% when measured as the share of plants compliant on all pollution readings taken.

16

at various multiples of the real standard (2p, 5p, 10p), and finds that the eﬀect of inspection
treatment on compliance is only statistically significant at the true standard.14
Compliance may increase without a large reduction in average pollution if plants near the
standard were the most likely to respond to the inspection treatment. Figure 3 tests this proposition by plotting the coeﬃcients on inspection treatment from regressions of indicators for a
pollutant reading being in a given bin, relative to the regulatory standard, on treatment assignments (as in Table 4, column 2 but with finer bins than just a single dummy for compliance).
Note that these pollution readings, from the endline survey, are not used for regulation and were
collected by independent teams without knowledge of treatment status. The inspection treatment is estimated to reduce pollution readings just above the standard, in the range of (0.0,0.2]
standard deviations, more than in any other bin, though this decrease is not statistically significant (p-value: 0.17). However, the treatment does significantly increase the number of readings
just below the standard in [-0.2,0.0]. It is evident that the treatment and its increased regulatory
scrutiny shifted some plants that were modestly out of compliance with the de jure standard
into compliance.
We note that the finding here that inspections change compliance but not average pollution is
the reverse of our finding that more truthful environmental audits induced a reduction in pollution
from highly polluting plants only, with no eﬀect on compliance (Duflo et al., 2013). There are
several reasons why the audit and inspection interventions may have diﬀered in this way. Audits
already focus on a set of audit-eligible firms that have especially high pollution potential, whereas
inspections increased frequency for a broader sample of plants across the board. Additionally,
audits may have oﬀered new information on what plants were extreme polluters, since these
plants were frequently inspected by the government but had never been rigorously audited by
a private firm. By contrast, randomly allocated inspections may not have aﬀected scrutiny for
extreme plants, both because the inspections are less likely to be assigned to extreme plants and
because any added inspections of extreme plants through the same mechanism give the regulator
less new information.
14
Online Appendix Table B6 tests whether the letter treatment, of randomly sending letters reminding firms
of their compliance obligations, had any eﬀect on emissions and compliance. We cannot reject that the letter
treatment had no eﬀect on either treatment or compliance, and the eﬀect of inspections on compliance is somewhat
smaller and statistically insignificant in specifications that include the letter treatment and the interaction between
the letter and inspection treatments.

17

These findings raise some tension with respect to the regulatory status quo. The treatment doubled inspection rates and led to much higher rates of detected violations, citations and
warnings. However, treatment plants were no more likely to be subjected to costly regulatory
penalties, nor did they install more pollution abatement equipment. Further, the treatment
caused only modest changes in pollution emissions, for plants already close to compliance. These
mixed findings seem surprising because the regulator is powerful and can act forcefully; for example in the status quo, many plants are punished through mandated installations of pollution
abatement equipment and forced closures. The next section lays out and estimates a dynamic
model of regulator and plant behavior with the broad aim of understanding the source of these
results.

IV

A Dynamic Model of Plant and Regulator Behavior

Inspections begin a process that may result in the threat or use of costly regulatory penalties
and abatement. We model this process to answer two specific questions. First, what are the
full costs of environmental regulation for a plant, measured not only by the costs of pollution
abatement but also by the monetary value of regulatory penalties, like plant closures and utility
disconnections, in terms of lost profits that must be inferred from plants’ revealed behavior? The
former cost can be directly observed, while we use the model to estimate the latter. Second,
what is the value of regulatory discretion in choosing where to assign inspections, relative to
randomly assigned inspections?
We estimate a dynamic discrete choice structural model. At its core, the model involves
alternating rounds where, as described above, the regulator can choose among the four potential
actions of inspect, warn, punish, or accept and the plant at each round chooses whether to ignore
the regulator or comply. Table 5 summarizes the structure of the chained interactions between
the regulator and plants across rounds. Columns 1 through 7 give the frequency of actions of the
regulator or plant in that round, from regulatory records, and column 8 gives the total number
of observations in that round. All chains begin with a regulatory inspection. The players then
alternate moves in a chain until the regulator decides to Accept the plant’s compliance for the
time being, which terminates the chain. We pool treatment and control plants to estimate the
model; as discussed in Section II, treatment and control plants are treated identically in the
18

process of regulation, conditional on an initial inspection.
The regulator accepts many plants’ compliance at an early stage, as the rapidly descending
numbers of observations in column 8 show: fully 87% of chains end after a single inspection,
with the regulator accepting in the third round. There are still over nine hundred chains that
continue beyond that stage, however, and a handful that go on for a dozen rounds or more as
the regulator revisits violating plants and enforces actions against them. If the regulator does
not immediately accept the state of the plant, it is initially more likely to issue a warning: in
round three, 9.5% of actions are warnings against 2.2% punishments. Thereafter, the regulator
is increasingly more likely to punish. The probability of punishment conditional on reaching
a given round rises monotonically with each round from 2.2% in round 3 to 18.1% in round 9
before turning downwards, in late rounds that are seldom observed. On their side, plants are
unlikely to comply at first, but grow monotonically more likely to comply, with probabilities of
0.4, 7.2, 8.9, 16.5 and 17.5 percent over the second through tenth rounds, before their compliance
probability levels oﬀ. The shares of compliance and punishments are endogenous outcomes for
plants that have generally chosen not to comply up to a given round. We would expect these
plants to have higher abatement costs than those that comply at an early stage.
Thus status quo regulation implies that most fish slip quickly through the net, but a few big
ones are ensnared and thrash about. Regulation is a complex and sometimes protracted multistage interaction between the regulator and polluting plants. The remainder of this section
models this process as a dynamic game and presents the steps involved in the estimation of its
parameters.

A

Key Features of the Dynamic Game

1.

Actions and Payoﬀs in a Round
We now outline the basics of the dynamic game played by the plant and the regulator.

The plant’s objective is to minimize regulatory costs, the sum of pollution abatement costs
and regulatory penalties (or, in other words, to maximize profits). The regulator’s objective
may involve private and social goals. We do not specify this objective, but instead estimate an
empirical model for regulatory action. The main objects of interest are the parameters of the
regulatory penalty function, in terms of dollars imposed on regulated plants, which are revealed
19

by the plants decisions about when to abate and when to risk penalties.
A game (set of chained interactions) starts with an initial inspection, whether assigned in
the experiment or by the regulator. We let j index a plant, R refer to the regulator, and i index
either agent. Each game round is indexed by t = 1, 2, . . . and the regulator and plant alternate
moves. The regulator observes in round t a maximum pollution reading across pollutants of
pjt . (If no inspection in round t itself, then pjt is recalled as the maximum pollution reading
in the most recent inspection.) Each plant j has a type j , not observed by the regulator R,
that represents its idiosyncratic cost of reducing pollution through the installation of pollution
abatement equipment, which we assume is normally distributed.
Post inspection the regulator has a choice of four actions aRt in any round t: Inspect, W arn,
P unish or Accept. Figure 4 shows these actions and their payoﬀs within a round for the plant,
leaving the regulator’s payoﬀs unspecified. To Inspect is to revisit the plant and gather another
pollution reading and to W arn is to caution the plant that it is at risk of some regulatory action.
These actions are costless to the plant but continue the game and obligate the plant to respond.
The only action with a non-zero current payoﬀ for the plant is Punish,

⇡j (aRt = P unish|st ) =

h(pjt )

This imposes a cost h(pjt ) that depends on observed pollution, after which the game also continues. In practice this punishment is temporarily closing the plant down, with higher pollution
potentially leading to more costly penalties due to longer closures. Lastly the regulator may
Accept that the plant is compliant, which costs the plant nothing and ends the game. The
regulator is the only player who can end the game and thus moves after any plant move.
The plant acts, with the goal of minimizing costs, after the regulator chooses any action other
than Accept. Complying costs the plant

⇡j (ajt = Comply|st ) =
to install abatement equipment, where

j

c( j , j )

are observable plant characteristics and j an unob-

servable, plant-specific cost shock.15 The plant may instead Ignore the inspection, warning or
15

Because abatement capital is observable it is used to demonstrate compliance even when an initial pollutant
violation could be remedied by operational changes.

20

punishment, which costs nothing.
2.

State Transitions
An action today gives immediate payoﬀs in the round and may aﬀect future actions and

payoﬀs. For example, a high reading pjt when the regulator moves may imply a high likelihood
of future penalty and, therefore, make the plant more likely to comply today. Such eﬀects are
channeled through the state of the game, a vector st containing information on the history of
actions and pollution readings. The state transition matrix f (st+1 |st , ait ) gives the probability
of transitioning to state st+1 conditional on the present state and own action. The transition
matrix is known to each player through observing play in equilibrium.
3.

Value Functions
Letting V (st ) represent a plant’s value of state st , and v(ait |st ) the choice specific utility of

taking action ait , the total value of each of the plant’s actions when moving is given by

vj (ajt |st ) = ⇡j (ajt |st ) +
8
<
:

X

st+1

f (st+1 |ajt , st )

⇡j (aR,t+1 |st+1 ) +

X

st+2

X

aR,t+1

P r(aR,t+1 |st+1 ) ⇥

f (st+2 |aR,t+1 , st+1 )V (st+2 )

9
=
;

(2)

The plant discounts the value of future rounds by . The transition f (st+2 |st+1 ), from the plant’s
point of view, contains both the regulator’s action and any other change in the state before the
plant moves again.
For the plant, the value of a given state equals the value of taking the action with the highest
payoﬀ:

Vj (st ) = max vj (ajt |st ).
a2AP

(3)

In determining its move today, the plant takes into account today’s payoﬀs and the value of
future states that are likely to follow from that move.
As a repeated game with private information, this model has many possible equilibria.16
16

A fully specified equilibrium includes complete contingent strategies for the players and beliefs of the regulator

21

We follow the dynamic games literature in not specifying what equilibria are played, but rather
making several assumptions about equilibrium play that allow us to estimate the model parameters (Aguirregabiria and Mira, 2010; Pakes et al., 2007). Specifically, we assume that all plants
and the regulator play the same equilibrium in all interactions, that they have correct beliefs
about their opponents’ actions along the equilibrium path, and that players choose strategies to
maximize their expected payoﬀs subject to their beliefs.

B

Estimation Framework and Static Estimation of Abatement Cost and Action Choice
The goal is to develop measures of the full costs of environmental regulation by understanding

how plants trade-oﬀ the costs associated with the mandated installation of pollution abatement
equipment against the costs from regulatory penalties like plant closures. The abatement costs
can be measured directly in our data, whereas the parameters that determine regulatory penalties
are estimated by maximizing the likelihood of observing the actions the plant chose in the data.
Since the actions of the plant at each round depend on the value of future states, calculating the
likelihood involves several steps to build the plant’s dynamic value in each round by backwards
induction over future costs and regulatory penalties. This subsection walks through these steps.
1.

Abatement Costs
The first step is to specify the static cost to the plant of installing abatement equipment

today. Investment in abatement equipment, a fixed cost, is taken as the cost of the plant action
Comply, because capital equipment investment is what is documented by plants, observed by
the regulator and used in their judgment as demonstrating compliance. We define pollution
abatement cost as consisting of an observable and unobservable component:

ln c(i , i ) =
where

i

0
i ✓c

+ i

(4)

is a vector of observable plant characteristics, ✓c is a coeﬃcient vector for the eﬀects of

those characteristics on abatement costs, and i is a cost shock.
The parameters

i

are estimated from a linear regression of log abatement cost investments,

as to the distribution of idiosyncratic compliance costs among plants surviving after each history of actions.

22

measured in the endline survey, on a vector of plant characteristics ✓c .17 Table 6 presents estimates of equation 4 for plants that invested in abatement equipment during the experiment
(mid-2009 to the endline survey in mid-2011).18 Looking at columns 1 and 2, plants that are
medium-scale (bigger than the omitted category of small plants) and textile plants (which tend
to be larger and have greater air and water emissions) have economically and statistically significantly higher abatement costs. In column 3, we replace the textile dummy with indicators
for using coal as a fuel and for having a high volume of wastewater, which are associated with
higher air and water abatement costs, by 0.772 and 0.473 log points, respectively. Column 4
shows that the textile dummy has no explanatory power once these more precise characteristics
are included. Observing this, we use the parsimonious model in column 3 as our specification
for predicting plant abatement costs.
We assume the cost shock i is distributed normally conditional on

i,

i.e. i |

i

⇠ N (0,

2
 ).

An empirical concern is that plants with very high unobserved abatement cost shocks may not
make abatement investments, even under pressure, and in this case we would not observe what
their abatement expenditures would have been had they invested. This concern is somewhat
mitigated by our observing a large number of equipment installations over the course of the
experiment, i.e. 717 abatement investments among 791 plants completing the endline survey.
Nevertheless, we estimate the standard deviation



of this distribution via a Heckman

selection model (Heckman, 1979). Specifically, we use the same covariates and functional forms
from column 3 to estimate the selection equation where the dependent variable is an indicator for
the plant making some investment in pollution abatement equipment. The second-stage is then
the column 3 version of equation (4), except that it also includes as a regressor the inverse Mill’s
ratio that is determined in the selection equation. The selection model is therefore identified
from the assumption of joint normality of the selection and second-stage error terms. We recover
the standard deviation of idiosyncratic log abatement costs by estimating these two stages by
maximum likelihood.
In the dynamic estimation we will consider specifications which (i) assign the average abatement cost to all plants, (ii) allow costs to vary with observables, based on the column 3 estimates,
17
This vector includes a constant, indicators for plant size, whether a plant uses coal or lignite as a fuel and
whether a plant has more than 100,000 liters a day of wastewater. These last two variables are respectively
associated with higher air pollution emissions and greater regulatory stringency for water pollution.
18
The mean value of an equipment investment, not shown in the table, is US$ 17,030

23

and (iii) allow costs to vary with both observables and unobservables, based on the column 5
estimates. The factors in the cost model are associated with not only higher pollution and
abatement costs, but also greater plant size and revenues. Because penalties are imposed in
practice by plant closure we expect plants with higher revenues face higher penalties, which implies that abatement costs will be correlated with diﬀerences between actual plant penalties and
the average penalty function h(pjt ). When using plant cost estimates based on observables in
the dynamic estimation, we therefore scale predicted cost by predicted plant revenue, predicted
using the same set of factors as in the cost model (See Online Appendix, Table B7). With this
scaling the cost estimates measure whether plants have higher or lower abatement cost per unit
revenue rather than in absolute terms. This is equivalent to assuming the penalty function is
proportional to predicted revenue.
2.

States
The next step is to set the state vector, the variables that the players observe and act upon.

We specify the common state of the game as comprised of the pollution reading, the last two
actions of the players and the game round:

st = {pjt , aj , aR , 1{t > 2}, 1{t > 4}, 1{t > 6}} .
where the subscripts in ai reference the prior action of each player. If the regulator is to move
at turn t, then aR will be the regulator’s prior action at t
aR

will have been taken at t

2; if the plant is to move at t then

1.19 We specify the round as entering with several dummies

rather than continuously to allow the regulator to flexibly respond to the selection of plants that
may occur across rounds. The plant, in addition to this common state, knows its cost of abating
pollution. The state for the plant is thus sjt = st [ c(j ,
3.

j ).

State Transitions
The plant’s value depends on the current state and the future states it is likely to encounter,

and therefore on transitions between states. The state transition after the plant moves is wholly
19

In principle the whole history of player actions could enter the state. We investigated more complex states
but further lags of actions did not help predict player’s actions beyond the simple state as specified above.

24

deterministic, because the plant aﬀects only how its own action is recorded in the state: if it
chooses to Comply today, then aj

= Comply tomorrow. The transition after the regulator

moves has a deterministic part, for the regulator’s action, and a stochastic part. The transition
of the pollution state is stochastic, since the pollution readings the regulator takes vary with the
sampling and operating conditions of the plant and due to noise in the pollution tests themselves.
We use a simple count estimator for the pollution state transition when the regulator moves.
0

P r(p |pjt , aRt ) =

P

j,c,t 1{pj,t+1

P

= p0 |pjt , aRt }

j,c,t 1{pjt , aRt }

.

The pollution state may transition if aRt = Inspect but otherwise remains the same. We restrict
the pollution transition to depend on past pollution and the regulator’s move, but not the
plant’s past moves, because the count estimator may be biased for low-probability events in
finite samples, so that conditioning on more past actions will leave many cells empty (e.g., the
probability of pollution transitioning from above 5 times the standard to between 1 and 2 times
given that the plant complied and the regulator inspected).20
4.

Conditional Action Probabilities
The heart of the model consists of players’ decisions, given the observed state. We use a

multinomial logit model to estimate the conditional action probabilities, where:
P r(ait = a|sit ) = P

exp (✓a q(sit ))
a0 exp (✓a0 q(sit ))

✓a is a vector of coeﬃcients for each action and q(sit ) is a vector of state values. In particular,
we specify q(sit ) to include dummies for the possible most recent actions, categorical bins for
the observed pollution level pjt , and dummies for the stage of the game.
Table 7 presents estimates of multinomial logit coeﬃcients for the conditional action probabilities for both the regulator and plants. The first three columns give the estimated coeﬃcients
for the regulator’s actions, at its turns to move, and the last column the coeﬃcients for the
plant’s action Comply. We omit the costless actions Accept from the regulator’s actions and
20

Nonetheless, we find the count estimator preferable to smooth alternatives, such as an ordered logit model,
because it is simple and because some state transition patterns appear irregular in ways that would contradict
common modeling assumptions. For example, the pollution state transitions from the highest level into compliance
more often than into the next-highest level.

25

Ignore from the plant’s, so coeﬃcients are relative to those actions. Each row represents the
eﬀect of a diﬀerent component of the state on the column action choices of the players.
The regulator responds strongly to high pollution levels. The regulator is significantly more
likely to Warn or Punish the plant if pollution is slightly above the standard (1-2p), well above
the standard (2-5p) or far above the standard (> 5p). The coeﬃcients that predict Punish as an
action are monotonically and steeply increasing in pollution (column 3).
The regulator and plant’s past actions also matter for the regulator’s current actions. The
regulator is much less likely to Warn or Punish if it has warned before. On the regulator’s
response to the plant, consider a state in the fifth round where the lagged action of the plant
is Ignore, of the regulator Inspect, and no pollution reading was taken. If the plant previously
chose Comply instead of Ignore, it would cut the probability of Punish by 5.4 percentage points,
or about a third. The plant complying has a greater eﬀect on overall payoﬀs than only this
immediate decrease in punishments, because it also makes the regulator less likely to Inspect (by
10 pp) or Warn (by 8 pp). Thus plant compliance drops the likelihood of any inside action, that
continues the game, and raises the probability the regulator just Accepts to end the game.
Figure 5 gives a sense of the magnitude of how the regulator’s actions depend on pollution
and how the plant responds to these actions. The figure plots the predicted probabilities of plant
compliance and regulatory punishment, in pairs of bars for the five diﬀerent levels of pollution
in the model: null (no reading), [0, p), [p, 2p), [2p, 5p) and above 5p. As pollution increases, the
probability that the regulator penalizes and the probability the plant complies both increase.
The predicted baseline probability of Punish, in the state described above, is 14.5%, whereas if
the pollution reading goes from null to above 5p this probability more than doubles, to 31%.
For the same change, the plant’s probability of compliance rises 6 percentage points on a base
of 4.2%. Moreover, if the regulator had recently Punished the plant, this raises the probability
of compliance by 9.6 pp, more than tripling the baseline probability. The marginal eﬀects of
moving from null pollution to either [2p, 5p) or 5p on compliance and punishment are statistically
significant at the five-percent level for the plant and the regulator, respectively.
Overall, the estimated action probabilities suggest that the regulator and the plant respond
to past actions and pollution readings in a manner consistent with our equilibrium model of
their dynamic interactions. The regulator pursues plants with pollution violations and penalizes

26

plants for extreme pollution readings, and plants clearly respond to states that foretell future
regulatory action.
5.

Penalty Cost Function
The plant’s payoﬀs depend on abatement costs and the penalties associated with various

levels of pollution. We parameterize the pollution penalty function as

h(p) = ⌧0 1{p < p < 2p} + ⌧1 1{2p  p < 5p} + ⌧2 1{5p  p},
where p is the legally mandated pollution threshold. Recall that p = pjt is the maximum pollution
reading observed in the regulator’s most recent inspection of the plant, or the maximum prior
reading in the chain if no reading was taken on a given inspection. This functional form allows
that the regulator may not only punish high polluters with a higher probability but also levy
diﬀerent penalties conditional on punishment. The complete vector of plant cost- and payoﬀparameters is then ✓uP = {✓c , j , ⌧ } with ⌧ = {⌧0 , ⌧1 , ⌧2 }.
6.

Identification and Calculation of Likelihood
To recap, the preceding steps provide the critical ingredients for building the likelihood. The

vector ✓c allows for predicting each plant’s abatement costs based on observable characteristics,


allows for the incorporation of unobserved plant abatement costs, the count estimator yields

state transition probabilities, and the vector ✓a for all actions a 2 AR , gives predicted conditional
action probabilities for the regulator. The remaining unknowns in the dynamic game are the
penalty-cost vector ⌧ and the variance

a

of the plant action shock.

Identification of the penalty costs in the dynamic discrete choice model, given the assumptions
above that a single equilibrium is played and players have rational expectations, is analogous to
identification in a static discrete choice model (Rust, 1994; Aguirregabiria and Mira, 2007). Two
normalizations are required to identify the model parameters. For the first normalization, we
have set the payoﬀ from Ignore to zero for the plant. The second normalization is applied in the
penalty function: we omit penalty parameters for states when plants have no pollution reading
or a pollution reading less than the standard. Nonetheless, plants are occasionally penalized at
these states (0.34 and 0.51% of the time, respectively). We thus assume that the penalty actually
27

imposed when pollution is below the standard is zero; in eﬀect the regulator has made a mistake
and this is not costly to the plant.21 Note that, with two level normalizations, the variance of
the plant action shock is a free parameter to be estimated.
The estimation of the dynamic game finds estimates of the parameter vector ⌧ that maximize
the likelihood of the sequences of actions in the data being taken. For each iteration of the
maximization routine, model parameters and the draw i for idiosyncratic costs are taken as
fixed. The main diﬃculty in estimation is to calculate the values of diﬀerent actions for the
players given these parameters. For the empirical specification, we specify shocks to the utility
of each action. The action-specific value of ait then becomes

vi (ait , st ) = ⇡i (ait , st ) + ei (ait , st ).
We assume these shocks ei are distributed identically and independently across actions with a
type-I extreme value distribution.22
We calculate action-specific values for the plant using backwards induction. We assume the
game is finite and that the regulator will always accept in period T = 35, which is well beyond
the ultimate round of t = 19 actually observed in the data.23 In the finite game, we infer
action-specific values using the state transitions and choice probabilities, starting at the final
round.24 For the estimation, we restrict the sample to all plant actions taken in round t = 4 and
after, omitting t = 2 on the grounds that we believe the plant often does not have a chance to
respond to the regulator in t = 2 before another regulatory action is observed (See discussion
in Section II). We use a discount factor of 0.991 between rounds, which has been calibrated
given the average round length to match the annual returns on capital for Indian firms found in
Banerjee and Duflo (2014).
With the above specification of shocks and backward induction procedure, we have solved
21

If one believed that this were costly, then one could interpret the penalty coeﬃcients as the values of being
penalized for a given pollution reading relative to a null or low pollution reading.
22
This assumption, while not needed for identification, is very common in the literature on dynamic structural
estimation because it leads to closed-form solutions for action probabilities (Rust, 1987).
23
Given that the probability of regulator acceptance in any given round acts like a discount factor, this assumption on the game length is conservative (varying it somewhat did not significantly aﬀect plant values in earlier
rounds).
24
When t = T , then vj (aRt |st ) = 0. At t = T
1, the plant’s value equals its one-period profit plus an
action-specific shock, vj (ajt |st ) = ⇡j (ajt |st ) + ej (ajt , st ). The regulator always moves as estimated in the data.
At moves t = T 3 and all earlier moves of the plant, the plants action-specific value is found with the empirical
analogue to equation (2), where the plant’s profit in a given round depends on the parameters ✓uP .

28

for the values of each state for the plant, conditional on a given set of parameters. Estimation
involves selecting parameters to maximize the probability of the choices observed in the data.
The likelihood for the plant is

Lj (✓j ) =

YX
n

t=Tjn

!(✓jd )

d

Y
t=1

P r(ajnt |sjnt , ✓jd ).

Where ! are weights representing the distribution of . We integrate over this likelihood using
Gauss-Hermite quadrature. We keep the distribution of weights fixed according to our preliminary estimation of

,

the standard deviation of idiosyncratic cost shocks. Below, we describe

the results from this estimation procedure.

V

Results: The Full Costs of Regulation and the Value of Discretion
We begin by describing the estimates of the plant payoﬀ parameters. Next, we use these es-

timates to obtain the full costs of environmental regulation for a plant (i.e., the sum of pollution
abatement expenditures and regulatory penalties, and examine how this cost varies with a plant’s
initial level of pollution. Finally, to place a value on regulatory discretion, we exploit the experimental variation in inspection frequency to compare the costs imposed on plants by randomly
assigned inspections in the treatment and inspections assigned at the regulator’s discretion in
the control.

A

Estimates of Penalty Parameters
Table 8 presents estimates for the regulatory penalty function, h(p), and the standard de-

viation of the unobserved action shock in the plant’s action choice. These estimates provide a
monetary estimate of the value of the GPCB’s mandated plant closings, utility disconnections,
and other penalties that would not be observable without the estimation of the dynamic game.
The three columns of the table give the penalty parameters under diﬀerent abatement cost assumptions: when all plants have the mean abatement cost (column 1), using the cost model
based on observed characteristics (column 2) and both using the cost model and integrating over
the distribution of unobserved cost shocks (column 3). Units of all parameters are thousands of
29

US dollars.
Inference is by clustered bootstrap over 100 bootstrap samples with replacement, with clusters
at the plant-by-chain level (i.e., a series of regulatory interactions is drawn together).25 We report
the standard deviation and 90% confidence intervals of the coeﬃcient estimate across replications.
In column 1, we find that a regulatory penalty imposed when observed pollution is slightly
above (1-2p) the standard costs US$ 40,000. The point estimate for the penalty for pollution
well above the standard (2-5p) is slightly higher (US$ 54,000), and for pollution far above the
standard (> 5p) a bit smaller (US$ 41,000). In all cases, the estimates are significantly diﬀerent
from zero but, because the estimates are fairly imprecise, we cannot reject that the penalty
function is flat with respect to pollution.
The model coeﬃcients that adjust for predicted abatement cost per unit revenue are lower
across the board, by about 40% for the highest two pollution categories. This makes sense:
when all plants have the average cost, as in column 1, the only way to force a plant to comply is
through high penalties. But when costs vary, as in column 2, some plants comply because their
costs are lower than average, and the model can, therefore, match compliance rates with lower
penalties.
Finally, column 3 allows for both observed cost diﬀerences and unobserved, log-normally
distributed random cost shocks. The estimates from this model are US$ 29,000 - US$ 34,000 for
all pollution levels, flat with respect to pollution, and more precisely estimated. The coeﬃcients
are again lower than those based on average cost. Allowing some plants to have idiosyncratically
low costs, the model can rationalize the same rates of compliance with lower penalties, since
compliant plants may just have had low cost draws. The estimated variance of the action shocks
drops sharply in this specification, from over US$ 5,000 to US$ 2,600, because part of the variance
in plant actions is attributable to idiosyncratic and persistent cost draws.
Overall, the penalty estimates suggest that penalties are flat in pollution. In light of the
finding in Figure 5 that the probability of punishment is steeply increasing in observed pollution,
it is evident that expected value of regulatory penalties are higher for heavy polluters due to
the higher chance of being penalized at high emissions levels. The baseline penalty estimates,
using average abatement cost for all plants, amount to around US$ 40,000 per plant. If we allow
25

Note that on each bootstrap replication, we re-estimate not only the dynamic parameters but also the conditional choice probabilities, state transitions and discount factor that enter the dynamic estimation.

30

for cost-based selection into compliance, then the estimates with observed and unobserved cost
diﬀerences are lower across the board, but with confidence intervals that include the baseline
estimates. For simplicity, the next section reports results on the full costs of environmental regulation when using the column 1 estimates that are based on an average plant’s costs. However,
the results scale about linearly with penalty cost, so it is straightforward to adjust values for the
lower penalties estimated in models with heterogeneous costs.
Does the scale of estimated penalties accord with economic intuition? In column 2, the highest
penalty estimated, ⌧1 , is somewhat over three times the mean value of equipment abatement cost.
This ratio of penalties to costs seems reasonable given that penalties must meet or exceed costs to
induce abatement, and that penalties are applied infrequently, even for violating plants. Recall
from Figure 5 that a plant with an extremely high pollution reading has about a 1/3 chance of
being punished; this implies that the expected value of penalties at this state is about equal to
the average abatement cost. Bringing in data from our endline survey, the mean plant annual
sales are US$ 2,891,500. The typical GPCB penalty for severe pollution is to close a plant by
ordering its utilities disconnected; these disconnections have a median duration of 24.5 days. If
we assume a 10% profit margin for plants and that profit loss is proportional to closure (i.e.,
there is no substitution across periods), then this implies a profit loss of US$ 20 thousand, which
lies below the estimates from the column 1 model and about in line with the average estimate
across pollution levels of the model in columns 2. The penalty estimates thus are reasonable,
whether approached from the cost data used to estimate the model or from independent data on
plant revenues and penalty duration.

B

The Full Costs of Environmental Regulation
The value of the game to a plant summarizes the costs of environmental regulation. Figure 6

shows this value, at a variety of states, as calculated through backward induction given the
estimated costs of regulatory penalties and the mean cost of abatement. At each state, values are
divided between expected discounted future abatement costs (light grey) and expected discounted
future regulatory penalties (dark grey). The figure shows three diﬀerent dimensions of the state:
the time dimension is shown across panels, the pollution dimension is shown across clusters of
bars within a panel, and the dimension of regulatory action across bars within a cluster.

31

Panel A shows the expected discounted value for the plant when it can first act in t = 2. The
value is shown for the regulator’s lagged action Inspect, since this is the only action the regulator
can take in t = 1 by construction. There is a more than five-fold diﬀerence in value depending
on the pollution state; the value ranges from negative US$ 1,160, if the regulator did not take a
pollution reading, down to negative US$ 6,240 if the regulator found a pollution reading more
than five times the standard. Moreover, the composition of this value also changes. For pollution
readings below the standard, only 9% of the value is due to expected penalties, because penalties
are very unlikely. For higher pollution values this rises steadily until penalties account for 61%
of the value for extreme polluters with p > 5p. It is apparent that a measure of the costs of
environmental regulation that does not account for the monetary value of regulatory penalties
would be greatly understated, and diﬀerentially understated for more polluting plants.
States later in the game, when the regulator is more likely to act, have sharply lower valuations. Figure 6, Panel B shows the plant value at t = 6. Punishment is now much more likely as
is the prospect of the plant being forced into compliance and the installation of costly abatement
equipment. Within each pollution state, the regulator having punished in the last round is associated with lower valuations, presumably because it reveals plants that are unobservably dirty in
a way not captured by pollution readings, and thus more likely to be punished again (note these
values are forward-looking and so do not include the value of any punishment already incurred).
By contrast, if the regulator has recently Warned the plant, then this is associated with a higher
(less negative) value, indicating the regulator is less likely to take severe action in the future.
Again, the share of the value due to penalty costs is sharply increasing in pollution. A plant
in the highest pollution state, for example (rightmost cluster, weighting bars by their relative
probabilities), expects 67% of its US$ -23,248 future value to be due to penalties. The total
value to the plant, given the penalty estimates, equates to about half of the penalty conditional
on certain punishment.
What can these estimates tell us about the experimental results? First, despite a flat value
of the penalty function in pollution, the higher probability of penalty and of continuation in
the game gives starkly more negative values of regulation for plants with high pollution levels.
Hence, uncovering a large number of minor violators would not be expected to induce abatement,
because these minor violators do not expect to incur penalties. Second, the kinds of citations

32

actually issued in response to the treatment, which are classed as warnings, are associated with
higher (less negative) values and lower abatement cost. These estimates thus reconcile the fact
that the experiment generated additional violations, or warnings, but induced abatement only
near the regulatory standard—warning carries little weight and in fact may signal that plants
do not need to comply.

C

Interpreting Regulatory Costs as the Value of Discretion
This section combines the full costs of regulation, as estimated from the model, with exper-

imental variation in inspections to compare the costs of regulation for treatment and control
plants. We discuss the costs imposed on plants in these diﬀerent groups and then unpack under
what assumptions diﬀerences in the cost of regulation to plants measure the value of regulatory
discretion.
Table 9 presents estimates of regulatory costs by treatment status. Total costs include the
regulatory penalty costs estimated from the dynamic model of Table 8 and abatement costs.
These estimated costs are then applied to the pollution states and penalty and abatement actions
observed in the data for the treatment and control groups. The costs are summed up across all
plants and divided by the total number of regulatory inspections to present costs per inspection
for each group. Columns 1 and 2 show the treatment and control groups and column 3 reports
the diﬀerence between the ratios and the associated standard error in parentheses.
It is evident that inspections in the treatment group, which are far more likely to be randomly
assigned26 , are less likely to induce costs for plants. The total costs of environmental regulation
per treatment plant inspection are about US$ 1,340, compared to roughly US$ 2,650 for control
plant inspections. Both cost components are higher per inspection in the control—plants are penalized more often, at a value of about US$ 960 per inspection (versus US$ 620 in the treatment)
and install US$ 1,690 of equipment per inspection as opposed to US$ 710 in the treatment.
In principle, the costs imposed by control inspections may be higher because the regulator
targets more of these inspections or because there are diminishing marginal returns to additional
26

GPCB carried on its own routine inspections, which are meant to be more or less random but are assigned
at oﬃcials’ discretion, in both groups. Thus the random share of inspections in the treatment includes the 67%
of truly random inspections assigned by the treatment, plus any routine inspections, whereas the random share
of inspections in the control is the routine inspections alone. Before the experiment 35% of inspections in the
sample were routine.

33

inspections in the treatment. These are not exclusive, because as shown in the discussion of the
status quo, some plants are targeted and visited often, which may lead to diminishing returns
to inspections for those plants. One observation in favor of a targeting view is that the ratio
of abatement costs to penalty costs is higher in the control: penalties and abatement cost per
inspection are about the same in the treatment, but the abatement cost is nearly twice as high
as the penalty cost in the control, suggesting that the regulator is able to uncover chances to
abate and compel plants to take them.
Under what assumptions does this diﬀerence in costs imposed measure the value of regulatory
discretion or targeting? The penalty cost estimates are estimated from observed abatement
investments and the behavior of the regulator and plants in the data, as far as when to penalize
and when to abate. We believe that it is valid to interpret total regulatory costs per inspection
as the value of an inspection according to the regulator’s own objectives or preferences. There
are two important caveats to this interpretation.
First, some kinds of rent-seeking would cause our model to be mis-specified and the penalty
cost estimates to diﬀer from the objectives of the regulator. The penalty estimates are robust
in the sense that they will include side payments, if such payments occur when the regulator
chooses to punish the plant, e.g., if a punishment is applied and then removed when a payment
is made. This robustness is due to penalty costs being identified from plants’ willingness to make
abatement investments to avoid the punishment stage, and all costs therein, whether they are
transfer payments or reductions in profits from closure. If costs were being imposed at other
nodes of the game tree, such as plants having to pay an inspection team whenever they show
up, these costs would be a negative payoﬀ to environmental regulation omitted by our model.
The eﬀect such costs would have on our estimates of regulatory penalties is hard to forecast, as
it would depend on precisely in which states the costs occurred.
Second, we do not take the diﬀerence in costs per inspection as a measure of social benefits or
welfare. Such an interpretation would require that the regulator imposes costs on plants equal to
the change these costs induce in the external social damages of plant pollution. A full cost-benefit
analysis of the value of inspections and penalties would therefore require estimating monetary
damages of pollution in Gujarat, elasticities of plant pollution with respect to penalties and any
threat or deterrence eﬀects from these penalties. It would be heroic to expect even a regulator

34

focused only on social costs to optimally target and penalize plants. Moreover, any kind of
rent-seeking would break the connection between the costs of regulation and social welfare or
damages. To put it another way, the penalty function we observe looks rational given resource
constraints, but we have no evidence that it is optimal.

VI

Conclusion

This paper reports the results of an experiment to increase the frequency of inspection of
polluting plants in collaboration with the environmental regulator in Gujarat, India. Using
detailed data on regulatory interactions with plants and independent pollution readings, we are
able to follow this increase in regulatory scrutiny through to the most important regulatory
outcomes and assign a comprehensive value to regulatory inspections.
The treatment was successful when judged by process measures, since treatment plants were
more than twice as likely as control plants to be inspected and to be cited for violating pollution
standards. However, the treatment was much less successful when judged by more consequential
outcomes; the regulator was no more likely to identify extreme polluters or to impose costly
penalties in the treatment group. Further, treatment plants only marginally increased compliance
with standards and did not significantly reduce mean pollution emissions.
To explain these results and recover the full costs of environmental regulation, we modeled the
regulatory process as a dynamic discrete game where the regulator chooses whether to penalize
and plants choose whether to abate to avoid future sanctions. Using data we assembled on 10,000
interactions between plants and the regulator, the model produces estimates that indicate that
the costs of environmental regulation are mainly reserved for extreme polluters. By combining the
experimental and model results, we find that the average treatment inspection imposes about half
the costs on plants as the average control inspection, because these randomly assigned inspections
are less eﬀective at identifying extreme polluter than the regulator’s discretionary inspections in
the control group. Overall, the data suggest that regulatory discretion has considerable value in
this setting.
Considering lessons for the state of environmental regulation in India, we see the fisherman’s
net as half-full, mainly with big fish. The other half may be left empty because command-andcontrol regulation in the form studied here is clearly very costly. The estimates imply that a
35

large part of the cost of environmental regulation for plants is due not to abatement investments
but to regulatory penalties, applied mainly through plants being closed down. Since the threat
of closure is necessary to induce compliance, every closure helps the regulator to establish a
reputation, but each instance of closure also creates deadweight loss, in the form of foregone plant
production and profits. By our estimates, even in the control, inducing every dollar of actual
abatement investment requires 57 cents of deadweight penalties. A full cost-benefit analysis of
regulation is beyond the scope of this paper, but the large share of deadweight loss in the cost to
plants would burden the cost side of the ledger. From the perspective of a social planner taking
the technology of regulation as given, these losses in the regulatory process increase the costs
of pollution abatement and may rationalize, to some extent, why for many plants abatement
remains low and pollution high.
Yet, in the full half of the net—where the big fish are caught up—the regulator appears to
be applying a rational penalty function, albeit one where the de facto standard lies much above
the de jure standard. Moreover, the regulator is able to eﬀectively target plants which are high
polluters and have greater scope for improvement. We do not claim this targeting is optimal,
but targeting in something like this manner appears necessary to address high pollution levels
given tight resource constraints, poor information and a rigid penalty structure. Future research
might consider more fundamental reforms of the command-and-control status quo, for example
changes to the technology of monitoring or to the nature of incentives for compliance.

References
Aghion, P., Burgess, R., and Redding, S. (2008). The unequal eﬀects of liberalization: Evidence
from dismantling the license Raj in India. American Economic Review, 98(4):1397–1412.
Aghion, P. and Tirole, J. (1997). Real and formal authority in organizations. Journal of Political
Economy, 105:1–29.
Aguirregabiria, V. and Mira, P. (2007). Sequential estimation of dynamic discrete games. Econometrica, 75(1):1–53.
Aguirregabiria, V. and Mira, P. (2010). Dynamic discrete choice structural models: A survey.
Journal of Econometrics, 156(1):38–67.
36

Banerjee, A. V. and Duflo, E. (2014). Do firms want to borrow more? Testing credit constraints
using a directed lending program. The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2):572–607.
Besley, T. and Burgess, R. (2004). Can labor regulation hinder economic performance? Evidence
from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):91–134.
Besley, T. and Persson, T. (2010). State capacity, conflict and development. Econometrica,
78:1–34.
Bhushan, C., Yadav, N. K., Roy, A., , and Banerjee, S. (2009). Turnaround: Reform agenda for
India’s environmental regulators. Centre for Science and Environment.
Boyer, M. and Laﬀont, J.-J. (1999). Toward a political theory of the emergence of environmental
incentive regulation. The RAND Journal of Economics, pages 137–157.
Burgess, R., Hansen, M., Olken, B., Potapov, P., and Sieber., S. (2012). The political economy
of deforestation in the tropics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4):1707–1754.
Chen, Y., Ebenstein, A., Greenstone, M., and Li, H. (2013). Evidence on the impact of sustained
exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China’s Huai River policy. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 110(32):12936–12941.
Duflo, E., Greenstone, M., Pande, R., and Ryan, N. (2013). Truth-telling by third-party auditors
and the response of polluting firms: Experimental evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 128(4):1499–1545.
Estache, A. and Wren-Lewis, L. (2009). Toward a theory of regulation for developing countries:
Following Jean-Jaques Laﬀont’s lead. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(3):729–770.
Greenstone, M. and Hanna, R. (2014). Environmental regulations, air and water pollution and
infant mortality in India. NBER Working Paper 17210.
Greenstone, M., List, J. A., and Syverson, C. (2012). The eﬀects of environmental regulation
on the competitiveness of us manufacturing. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

37

Greenstone, M., Nilekani, J., Pande, R., Ryan, N., Sudarshan, A., and Sugathan, A. (2014).
Lower pollution, longer lives: Life expectancy gains if India reduced particulate matter to
air-quality standards. Mimeo, Harvard Kennedy School.
Hanna, R. N. and Oliva, P. (2010). The impact of inspections on plant-level air emissions. The
BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 10(1).
Heckman, J. J. (1979). Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1):153–
161.
Jia, R. (2014). Pollution for promotion. mimeo.
Laﬀont, J.-J. (1994). Regulation of pollution with asymmetric information. Springer.
Laﬀont, J.-J. (2005). Regulation and Development. Cambridge University Press.
Laﬀont, J.-J. and Tirole, J. (1993). A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation. MIT
Press.
Leaver, C. (2009). Bureaucratic minimal squawk behavior: Theory and evidence from regulatory
agencies. American Economic Review, 99(3):572–607.
Magat, W. A. and Viscusi, W. K. (1990). Eﬀectiveness of the epa’s regulatory enforcement: The
case of industrial eﬄuent standards. JL & Econ., 33:331.
Ministry of Environment and Forests (1986). The environment (protection) rules, 1986. Gazette
of India, 844(E).
Pakes, A., Ostrovsky, M., and Berry, S. (2007). Simple estimators for the parameters of discrete
dynamic games (with entry/exit examples). The RAND Journal of Economics, 38(2):373–399.
Rasul, I. and Rogger, D. (2013). Management of bureaucrats and public service delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian civil service. Mimeo, UCL.
Rust, J. (1987). Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: An empirical model of Harold
Zurcher. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 999–1033.

38

Rust, J. (1994). Advances in Econometrics, Sixth World Congress, chapter Estimation of dynamic
structural models, problems and prospects: Discrete decision processses. Cambridge University
Press.
Sitkin, S. and Bies, R. (1994). The Legalistic Organization. Sage Publications.
Stigler, G. (1971). The theory of economic regulation. Bell Journal of Economics and Management, 2(1):3–21.
Tanaka, S. (2013). Environmental regulations on air pollution in China and their impact on
infant mortality. Mimeo, Tufts University.

39

VII

Figures
Figure 1: Distribution of Inspection Rates by Treatment Status

150
100
0

50

Frequency

200

250

A. Control Plants

0

2

4

6

8

10

150
100
0

50

Frequency

200

250

B. Treatment Plants

0

2

4

6

8

10

The figure shows the distribution of the annual inspection rate (i.e., inspections per year) over the approximately
two years of the experiment by treatment status. The inspection rate is pro rated for the actual duration of the
treatment in each of three regions. Data on inspections comes from administrative records of inspection reports
filed with the regulator.

40

0

Number of Plants with Reading
50
100
150
200

250

Figure 2: Regulatory Targeting of Extreme Polluters

Any Reading

_
_
_
>1p
>2p
>5p
Pollution relative to regulatory limit
Control

_
>10p

Treatment

The figure shows the number of plants with pollution readings taken and that fall in various bins, relative to the
regulatory standard, during the first year of the intervention for the control and treatment groups, respectively.
The first pair of bars shows the number of plants that had at least one pollution reading taken. The remaining
four pairs show the number of plants with at least one reading above the standard (>1x), more than 2 times the
standard (>2x), more than 5 times the standard (>5x) and more than 10 times the standard (>10x).

Inspection treatment (=1) coefficient in bin
.05
-.05
.1
0

Figure 3: Inspection Treatment Eﬀect on Pollution Relative to Regulatory Standard

-1
-.5
0
.5
1
1.5
Pollution in standard deviations relative to regulatory limit
The figure reports coeﬃcients on the inspection treatment assignment from regressions of dummies for a pollution reading being in a given bin relative to the regulatory standard on inspection treatment, audit treatment,
inspection ⇥ audit treatment, a dummy for being audit-eligible and region fixed eﬀects. Pollution readings are
standardized by subtracting the regulatory standard for each pollutant and dividing by the pollutant’s standard
deviation; bins are 0.2 standard deviations wide and centered at the regulatory standard shown by the vertical
line. Each plant has multiple pollutant observations and regressions are run pooled for all pollutants together.
Standard errors are clustered at the plant level and the whiskers show 95% confidence intervals for the inspection
treatment coeﬃcient.

41

Figure 4: Actions of the Players at Each Node

The figure gives the actions of the players at each node and the terminal nodes give the payoﬀs in the stage game
for the plant only. The game begins with an inspection where the regulator (R) observes pj1 . The regulator
may take four actions. If R Inspects, R gets a new signal and moves again. If R W arns or P unishes, the
Plant moves. If R Accepts, the game ends. When the plant can move, he Ignores or Complies. After either
action of the plant the regulator moves again.

Probability of Action
.1
.15
.2
.25

.3

Figure 5: Predicted Probabilities of Compliance and Punishment

0

.05

_

Null

_
_ _
_ _
[0,p)
[p,2p)
[2p,5p)
Pollution Reading Relative to Standard
Plant: Comply

_
>5p

Regulator: Punish

The figure shows the predicted probabilities of the plant taking the action Comply and the regulator taking
the action Punish, respectively within each pair of bars, as calculated in the model of Table 7 for the pollution
component of the state taking on diﬀerent values relative to the regulatory standard. The probabilities are
evaluated in round t = 4 for the plant and t = 5 for the regulator, at a state when the regulator previously
Inspected and the plant previously Ignored.

42

Figure 6: Total Costs of Environmental Regulation for Regulated Plants
A. Value at t = 2

I W P

I WP

I WP

I W P

I WP

Value to Plant (USD 1000s)

0

−10

−20

−30

None

Cost due to abatement
Cost due to penalties
<p
[p, 2p)
[2p, 5p)
Pollution Component of State

≥ 5p

B. Value at t = 6

I W P

I WP

I WP

I W P

I WP

Value to Plant (USD 1000s)

0

−10

−20

−30

None

Cost due to abatement
Cost due to penalties
<p
[p, 2p)
[2p, 5p)
Pollution Component of State

≥ 5p

The figure shows the cost of regulation to plants in thousands of US dollars as measured by the expected discounted
value of diﬀerent game states. Values are divided between expected discounted future abatement costs (light grey)
and expected discounted future regulatory penalties (dark grey), both of which, as costs to the plant, have negative
value. The figure shows three diﬀerent dimensions of the state along which plant value varies. First, the panels
show the time dimension, with panel A evaluated when it is the plant’s turn to move at t=2, and panel B at
t=6. Second, the five clusters of bars on the horizontal axis show diﬀerent maximum lagged pollutant readings
observed during the regulator’s prior inspection. Third, within each group, the letters I, W and P show how the
value to the plant changes if the regulator’s lagged action was Inspect, Warn or Punish, respectively.

43

VIII

Tables
Table 1: Mapping of Player Actions to Raw Documents

Action

Document

Inspect

Inspection report

Warn

Letter

Description
Panel A. GPCB Actions
Analysis of air and water samples; report on plant
characteristics.

Citation
Closure Notice

Non-threatening letter ordering improvement in pollutant concentrations.
Threatening letter demanding explanation for high
pollution levels, missing permit to operate, or missing
pollution abatement equipment.
Notice that the plant will be ordered to close in 15 days
if the plant does not take action to improve pollution.

Punish

Closure Direction
Utility notice

Order to close immediately.
Notice that water or electricity has been disconnected.

Accept

Revocation
of
Closure Direction
Implicit

Permission to start operation.
No further GPCB action.
Panel B. Firm Actions

Ignore

Implicit
Protest

Implied by consecutive GPCB actions.
Oﬃcial letter of protestation to GPCB. Challenges parameter readings and other directives.

Comply

Equipment
installed
Process installed
Bond posted

Notice that pollution abatement equipment has been
installed.
Notice that a process has been installed.
Letter from bank to GPCB explaining that the firm
has posted a guarantee against future misconduct.

44

Table 2: Inspection Treatment Covariate Balance
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Panel A. Plant Characteristics
Capital investment Rs. 50m to Rs. 100m (=1)
0.071
0.087
[0.26]
[0.28]
Located in industrial estate (=1)
0.37
0.33
[0.48]
[0.47]
Textiles (=1)
0.45
0.45
[0.50]
[0.50]
Dyes and Intermediates (=1)
0.16
0.13
[0.36]
[0.34]
Eﬄuent to common treatment (=1)
0.35
0.37
[0.48]
[0.48]
Waste water generated (kl / day)
196.8
192.1
[316.4]
[310.9]
Lignite used as fuel (=1)
0.35
0.35
[0.48]
[0.48]
Diesel used as fuel (=1)
0.17
0.19
[0.38]
[0.39]
Air emissions from boiler (=1)
0.52
0.50
[0.50]
[0.50]
Bag filter installed (=1)
0.13
0.14
[0.34]
[0.35]
Panel B. Regulatory Interactions in Year Prior to Study
Number of inspections
1.25
1.22
[1.32]
[1.32]
Any equipment mandated (=1)
0.21
0.19
[0.41]
[0.39]
Any citation issued (=1)
0.15
0.18
[0.36]
[0.39]
Any water citation issued (=1)
0.069
0.077
[0.25]
[0.27]
Any air citation issued (=1)
0.010
0.013
[0.10]
[0.11]
Any utility disconnection (=1)
0.056
0.063
[0.23]
[0.24]
Any bank guarantee posted (=1)
0.021
0.017
[0.14]
[0.13]
Observations
480
480

Diﬀerence
(3)
-0.017
(0.017)
0.032
(0.027)
-0.0092
(0.020)
0.027
(0.022)
-0.021
(0.031)
4.30
(16.2)
-0.0063
(0.018)
-0.013
(0.024)
0.019
(0.020)
-0.011
(0.021)
0.026
(0.079)
0.021
(0.021)
-0.032
(0.024)
-0.0086
(0.017)
-0.0022
(0.0068)
-0.0064
(0.015)
0.0040
(0.0087)

The table tests for the balance of covariates across inspection treatment using administrative data
from the regulator covering the year prior to the experiment. Columns (1) and (2) show means with
standard deviations in brackets. Column (3) shows the coeﬃcient on treatment from regressions
of each characteristic on treatment and region fixed eﬀects. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.

45

Table 3: Regulatory Interactions During Experiment
Treatment
Panel A. Inspections by Treatment Status
Number inspections assigned in treatment, annual
2.12
[0.57]
Total inspections, scaled and annual over treatment
3.11
[1.77]
Observations
480

Control

Diﬀerence

0
[0]
1.40
[1.59]
480

2.12⇤⇤⇤
(0.026)
1.71⇤⇤⇤
(0.11)

Panel B. Perceived Inspections by Treatment Status
Perceived Inspections by GPCB oﬃcials, 2010
3.62
2.92
[1.46]
[1.58]
Total Perceived notices and closures received, 2010
0.30
0.27
[0.70]
[0.64]
Observations
403
388

0.71⇤⇤⇤
(0.11)
0.025
(0.048)

Panel C. Regulatory Actions by Treatment Status
Pollution reading ever collected at plant (=1)
0.60
0.38
[0.49]
[0.49]
Any pollution reading above limit at plant (=1)
0.55
0.34
[0.50]
[0.47]
Number of pollution readings above limit at plant
2.84
1.17
[3.67]
[2.58]
Total citations
0.35
0.15
[0.69]
[0.42]
Total water citations
0.12
0.046
[0.37]
[0.22]
Total air citations
0.042
0.021
[0.20]
[0.14]
Total closure warnings
0.17
0.094
[0.48]
[0.34]
Total closure directions
0.20
0.16
[0.54]
[0.48]
Total bank guarantees
0.065
0.060
[0.25]
[0.27]
Total equipment mandates
0.040
0.027
[0.23]
[0.19]
Total utility disconnections
0.042
0.040
[0.20]
[0.22]
Observations
480
480

0.21⇤⇤⇤
(0.032)
0.22⇤⇤⇤
(0.031)
1.67⇤⇤⇤
(0.20)
0.20⇤⇤⇤
(0.037)
0.071⇤⇤⇤
(0.020)
0.021⇤
(0.011)
0.077⇤⇤⇤
(0.027)
0.042
(0.033)
0.0042
(0.017)
0.013
(0.014)
0.0021
(0.013)

Panel D. Equipment installations since start of experiment
Firm made at least one equipment installation
0.63
0.61
[0.48]
[0.49]
Number of equipment installations made
1.39
1.30
[1.65]
[1.61]
Total cost of all equipment installations
20.0
21.8
(USD 1000s)
[89.4]
[61.0]
Observations
403
388

0.019
(0.035)
0.090
(0.12)
-1.79
(5.46)

The table shows diﬀerences in actual and perceived inspection rates (Panel A), other regulatory actions (Panel
B) and equipment installations (Panel C) between the treatment and control groups of plants during the
treatment period of approximately two years. Columns (1) and (2) show means with standard deviations
in brackets. Column (3) shows the coeﬃcient from regressions of each variable on treatment, where each
regression includes region fixed eﬀects and a control for the audit sample. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤
p < 0.01.

Table 4: Endline Pollution and Compliance on Treatments
Pollution
(1)

Compliance
(2)

Inspection treatment (=1)

-0.105
(0.0839)

0.0366⇤
(0.0213)

Audit treatment (=1)

-0.187⇤⇤
(0.0849)

0.0288
(0.0258)

Audit ⇥ inspection treatment (=1)

0.286⇤⇤
(0.142)

-0.0365
(0.0353)

Inspection and audit control mean
Observations

0.682
4168

0.614
4168

The table shows regressions of pollution (column 1) and compliance (column 2) on
treatment assignments at the plant-by-pollutant level. Pollution consists of air and
water pollution readings for each plant, taken during the endline survey, where each
pollutant is standardized by dividing by its standard deviation. Compliance is a
dummy for each pollutant being below its regulatory standard. The table regresses
these outcomes on inspection treatment assignment, audit treatment assignment and
inspection ⇥ audit treatment. Specifications also include region fixed eﬀects and a
control for the audit sample. Standard errors clustered at the plant level in parentheses. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.

47

Table 5: Structure of Chained Regulator-Plant Interactions
Inspect
(1)

Regulatory Action
Warn Punish Accept
(2)
(3)
(4)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15+

100.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

9.5

2.2

87.3

23.3

4.8

5.3

66.6

18.8

11.8

9.9

59.6

21.3

5.5

18.1

55.1

26.3

3.5

10.5

59.6

26.1

4.3

8.7

60.9

16.7

8.3

0.0

Total

31.0

3.2

1.1

Plant Action
Ignore Comply
(5)
(6)

N
(7)

% left
(8)
100.0

99.6

0.4

92.8

7.2

91.1

8.9

83.5

16.5

82.5

17.5

87.0

13.0

75.0

77.8
100.0

22.2
0.0

7423
7423
7423
941
941
314
314
127
127
57
57
23
23
9
9

29.4

34.6

0.6

25217

100.0
12.7
4.2
1.7
0.8
0.3
0.1

The table reports actions taken by the GPCB and by the firm using administrative data from the
regulator. All chains start with an inspection. Action rounds within a chain alternate between
GPCB action and firm action. A chain ends when the GPCB accepts, and issues no further
inspections, warnings or punishments that follow up directly with the initial inspection. When a
chain ends it is dropped from the table. Rounds after the 15th round are not shown and the row
15+ summarizes these rounds; 6 chains go at least 17 rounds and 4 chains go 19 rounds.

48

Table 6: Model of Plant Cost for Abatement Equipment
Log Cost of Abatement Equipment, Per Piece
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Medium size industry (=1)
Textiles (=1)

0.888⇤⇤⇤
(0.230)

Coal or lignite as fuel (=1)
Waste water generated > 100
kl/day
Constant

1.642⇤⇤⇤
(0.0701)

1.091⇤⇤⇤
(0.242)
0.971⇤⇤⇤
(0.128)

1.107⇤⇤⇤
(0.110)

0.827⇤⇤⇤
(0.224)
0.772⇤⇤⇤
(0.179)
0.473⇤⇤⇤
(0.174)
1.012⇤⇤⇤
(0.104)

0.858⇤⇤⇤
(0.225)
0.119
(0.261)
0.727⇤⇤⇤
(0.184)
0.410
(0.250)
1.000⇤⇤⇤
(0.110)

Sigma
R2
Residual SD
Mean
Observations (plants)
Observations (equipment)

0.839⇤⇤⇤
(0.231)
0.765⇤⇤⇤
(0.220)
0.546
(0.885)
0.943
(0.758)
1.216
(0.0434)

0.0439
1.340
1.747
398
717

0.167
1.251
1.747
398
717

0.213
1.216
1.747
398
717

0.214
1.215
1.747
398
717

1.275
1.747
912
1231

The table presents regression estimates for the fixed cost of abatement equipment on plant characteristics. Columns 1 through 4 present OLS regressions for the set of firms undertaking any
abatement investment during the experiment and column 5 reports maximum likelihood estimates
of a Heckman selection model among all plants with administrative baseline data on covariates.
Plant abatement equipment costs are measured in the endline survey, for all investments over the
prior two years of the experiment, and specified in logged thousands of US dollars (US$ 1 ⇡ INR
50). Medium size is a regulatory designation for capital stock above INR 50m (the sample includes
only small- and medium-sized plants), Textiles is a dummy for belonging to the textile industry,
Coal or lignite is a dummy for using one of those fuels, and Waste water generated is a dummy for
discharging more than 100 kl/day of eﬄuent. Column 5 reports the estimates of the second stage
of a Heckman selection model and Sigma is the estimated variance of the error term in that stage,
used to characterize the distribution of idiosyncratic cost shocks. The first, selection stage includes
all of the model’s independent variables and has coeﬃcients (not reported) of: Medium size industry
(=1), 0.504 (0.327); Coal or lignite as fuel (=1), -0.292 (0.213); and Waste water generated > 100
kl/day, 3.136⇤⇤⇤ (0.363). Standard errors clustered by plant in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p <0.01

49

Table 7: Multinomial Logit Model of Action Choice Conditional on State

Lagged regulatory actions
Warn, lag 1
Punish, lag 1
Lagged plant actions
Firm: Comply, lag 1
Last observed pollution reading
0-1x
1-2x
2-5x
5x+
Period
Constant
t>3
t>5
t>7
N

Regulator Move
Inspect
Warn
Punish
(1)
(2)
(3)

Plant Move
Comply
(4)

0.33
-2.05*** -2.10***
(0.23)
(0.32)
(0.31)
1.80*** -2.22*** -0.53*
(0.23)
(0.56)
(0.30)

-0.23
(0.30)
1.29***
(0.26)

-1.80*** -1.03**
(0.32)
(0.47)

-0.82**
(0.37)

-0.53
(0.66)

0.052
(0.24)
0.37**
(0.18)
0.70***
(0.17)
1.15***
(0.21)

-0.18
(0.38)
0.39*
(0.23)
0.74***
(0.22)
0.90***
(0.26)

-4.41*** -2.47*** -3.91***
(0.13)
(0.057)
(0.11)
2.91*** 1.26*** 2.56***
(0.25)
(0.28)
(0.27)
0.073
-0.35
-0.50
(0.21)
(0.32)
(0.30)
0.059
-0.55
0.55*
(0.24)
(0.37)
(0.29)

-5.71***
(0.21)
2.59***
(0.33)
0.18
(0.28)
0.50*
(0.28)

-0.38
(0.23)
-0.20
(0.16)
-0.17
(0.17)
0.27
(0.21)

-0.25
(0.16)
0.55***
(0.098)
0.84***
(0.10)
0.63***
(0.16)

8897

8897

The table reports coeﬃcients from multinomial logit models for the action choice probabilities of
each player conditional on the state of the game. See Table 1 for action definitions. Plant and
regulatory actions are reported in administrative data by the regulator. The omitted action for the
regulator is Accept and for the plant is Ignore, so the coeﬃcients are to be interpreted as the eﬀect
of each component of the state on the player taking the specified column action relative to the
omitted action. Pollution readings are taken during inspections throughout the treatment period.
The omitted pollution reading is null, which occurs when the regulator inspects but does not take
a pollution reading. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01

50

Table 8: Estimates of Plant Utility Parameters (US$ 1000s)
Assumption on Cost
Cost Model
Prediction and
Mean Cost
Prediction
Cost Shock
(1)
(2)
(3)
Parameters of penalty function
h(p) = ⌧0 1{p < p < 2p} + ⌧1 1{2p  p < 5p} + ⌧2 1{5p  p}
⌧0

40.03
(27.51)
[11,81]

10.46
(35.94)
[-30,43]

31.25
(21.57)
[6,73]

⌧1

54.23
(28.04)
[18,110]

34.04
(25.66)
[-2,89]

34.15
(18.14)
[12,71]

⌧2

41.41
(18.93)
[20,81]

23.77
(13.69)
[8,50]

29.11
(12.04)
[12,51]

5.88
( 0.29)
[5,6]

5.29
(0.31)
[5,6]

2.60
(0.24)
[2,3]

1474

1474

1474

Standard deviation of action shock

Observations

The table presents pseudo-maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters
of the plant profit function, from the dynamic discrete game. The three
parameters ⌧ give the value of penalties applied by the regulator, by choosing the action Punish, conditional on the pollution component of the state
being between the standard and twice the standard (⌧0 ), between twice and
five times the standard (⌧1 ) and above five times the standard (⌧2 ). The
three columns represent diﬀerent assumptions on the costs of abatement.
Column (1) uses the mean abatement capital cost for installing a piece
of equipment, measured in the endline survey, column (2) uses the predicted value of that installation based on plant observable characteristics
and column (3) uses that prediction and integrates over the distribution of
unobserved shocks to installation costs. Observations are those at which
the plant moves in rounds t=4 and onwards; t=2 is omitted because a
large number of actions in that round are imputed (see text). Inference
is by the bootstrap over 100 samples with replacement, where samples are
taken at the level of the plant-chain (i.e., series of interactions) stratified
on the maximum pollution reading observed in the chain. Standard errors
equal to the standard deviation of bootstrap estimates are in parentheses
and 90% confidence intervals giving the 5th and 95th percentiles of the
bootstrap estimates are in brackets.

51

Table 9: Cost of Environmental Regulation to Plants Per Inspection (US$ 1000s)
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Diﬀerence
(3)

1.34
[0.18]
0.62
[0.12]
0.030
[0.00]
0.71
[0.14]
0.066
[0.01]

2.65
[0.44]
0.96
[0.24]
0.050
[0.01]
1.69
[0.39]
0.097
[0.02]

-1.31⇤⇤⇤
(0.02)
-0.34⇤⇤⇤
(0.01)
-0.020⇤⇤⇤
(0.00)
-0.97⇤⇤⇤
(0.02)
-0.032⇤⇤⇤
(0.00)

480

480

Total cost per inspection
Regulatory penalty cost
Number of penalties
Abatement equipment cost
Number of installations
Observations

The table tests for diﬀerence in the expected costs due to penalties and equipment installation requirements as result of a GPCB inspection. Includes firms with at least one recorded
inspection. Firm penalty costs are estimated using firm pollution levels in the round where
the GPCB issues a punishment. Firm expected equipment costs per inspection are estimated using total observed equipment costs, controlling for plant characteristics. Costs
and inspections are aggregated across all plants by treatment and control groups before
the cost per inspection is calculated. The cost and number of penalties are recorded in the
administrative data from the regulator during the treatment period. The cost and number
of equipment installations are recorded in the endline survey. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01

52

A

Data Appendix
We clean administrative records on interactions between GPCB and sample plants and map

the documents to the actions of the dynamic inspection game. Cleaning involves linking documents that are related and putting sets of linked documents into separate chains of related
actions. Mapping involves reducing the many possibly signals between the regulator and the
plant to the basic purpose of each action.
The documents are mostly letters between GPCB and the plants of various kinds. The Actions
in Table 1 represent groupings of underlying documents based on their purpose. Sometimes
these correspond directly to a single underlying type of document in the raw data, such as for
inspections, and sometimes they represent a category of documents. On the regulatory side, for
GPCB, there are four Actions and so four categories of underlying document. The broadest class
is for the action Warn, which includes a progression from simple letters requesting explanation
to closure notices that threaten the plant with closure if it does not reduce pollution. We group
these as a single category because, while they represent a range of threats, they impose no
immediate costs on the plants. The plant has two possible actions. We infer when the plant has
ignored the regulator from written replies that do not have any direct cost or by imputing Ignore
from other moves in the game (as described below). The plant can comply through installing
abatement equipment, installing a new process or posting a bond against future performance
(which is rare). These actions are documented in correspondence from plants with verification
from third-party equipment vendors.
We link actions into chains, or sequences of actions, based on their underlying documents and
references therein. This linking is done through explicit references, dates and some imputations.
Some documents explicitly cite a preceding document by date—for example, a closure direction
will reference high readings from a pollution analysis report a month before, giving the date and
document number of that report. Explicit links are much more likely for documents from the
GPCB, which follows formal procedures for citation, than from plants, which often do not cite
or cite inaccurate dates. To account for this, we link plant documents with GPCB documents
by allowing the date on the plant letter to diﬀer from the reference date by up to one digit.
Even documents that do not explicitly cite others are dated. We use document dating and
knowledge of the typical regulatory process to expand chains of documents through a set of
53

logical rules. The full set of rules for chain construction is given in the list below. The rules
are designed to match links in a chain that are both logically appropriate and within the typical
range of time lags observed between actions that do have explicit references.
Chain Construction Rules
1. Explicit matching.
(a) Match documents if document explicitly cites (by document number and/or date) an
inspection or other earlier document.
(b) If no match, match documents by explicit but fuzzy match that allows dates to diﬀer
by one digit.
2. Date matching. Order remaining documents, which have been grouped into chain fragments
by the explicit matching process, by the date of document within plant. Match chain
fragments for each plant if the following conditions on the documents and relative dating
are met:
(a) GPCB inspection followed by plant reply or protest (within 30 days).
(b) GPCB inspection followed by GPCB action (letter, show cause notice, closure notice,
closure direction) (within 60 days).
(c) GPCB action followed by inspection (within 30 days).
(d) GPCB action followed by plant reply or protest (within 30 days).
(e) GPCB punishment (closure notice, closure notice, utility confirmation of action) followed by plant compliance (equipment installation, process installation, bank guarantee posted) (within 30 days).
(f) Plant compliance followed by GPCB acceptance (revocation of closure direction)
(within 60 days).
(g) GPCB inspection followed by GPCB acceptance (within 60 days).
3. Impose logical rules. Using the raw matching based on explicit references and dates, apply
logical rules by imputing actions or truncating chains to enforce the structure of the game.

54

(a) Chains end with an acceptance. Split chains at any internal acceptance. Impute
GPCB Accept at chain end if no further follow-up actions.
(b) Chains start with an inspection. Search for available inspections, append to the beginning of chain without an inspection if within 1 month of chain start, else truncate
chain before first inspection.
(c) Chains alternate moves. Impute plant move Ignore between any consecutive GPCB
actions.
The chains of actions constructed in steps (1.) and (2.) do not always adhere to the logical
rules of the game we use to characterize the data. In the final stage of data cleaning, we
therefore combine or impute actions where appropriate to cast all actions into coherent moves
in the game. The main assumptions in imputing moves to complete the game are that the plant
had an opportunity to respond to all regulatory actions with compliance, even if it in fact did
not comply, and that similarly when regulator had an opportunity to continue pursuing plants
at the end of each chain but did not this is equivalent to choosing Accept.

55

Online Appendix for:
The Value of Regulatory Discretion:
Estimates from Environmental Inspections in India
Esther Duflo⇤
Michael Greenstone†
Rohini Pande‡
Nicholas Ryan§
September 29, 2014

⇤

MIT, eduflo@mit.edu
MIT, mgreenst@uchicago.edu
‡
Harvard, rohini pande@harvard.edu
§
Corresponding author. Yale, nicholas.ryan@yale.edu
†

1

I

Tables

Table B1: Attrition in the Endline Survey

Survey completed
Plant closed
Plant refused survey
Other
Total

N
(1)

%
(2)

791
124
5
40
960

82.4
12.9
0.5
4.2
100.0

The table shows how many plants completed the endline survey, and the reasons for attrition for those that did not. Plant
closed includes plants that were permanently closed (111),
plants that were temporarily closed, and plants where production was temporarily suspended. Refused survey includes
plants that were operating at the time of the visit, but that
refused to respond to the questions in the survey. Other includes plants that moved to an unknown address, and plants
for which an incorrect address had been recorded

Table B2: Endline Attrition by Inspection Treatment Status

Survey completed
Plant closed
Plant refused survey
Other
Observations

Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Di↵erence
(3)

0.840
[0.367]
0.123
[0.329]
0.008
[0.091]
0.029
[0.168]

0.808
[0.394]
0.135
[0.343]
0.002
[0.046]
0.054
[0.227]

0.031
(0.024)
-0.013
(0.022)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.025⇤
(0.013)

480

480

The table shows di↵erences in endline responses and reasons for attrition between
the treatment and control groups. Columns (1) and (2) show means with standard deviations in brackets. Column (3) shows the coefficient on treatment from
regressions of each characteristic on inspection treatment assignment, region fixed
e↵ects, and audit sample control. Reported are treatment e↵ects, with region controls. Plant closed includes plants where production. was temporarily suspended,
and plants that were temporarily or permanently closed. Refused survey includes
plants that were in production at the time of the visit, but that refused to respond
to the questions in the survey. Other includes plants that moved to an unknown
address, and plants for which an incorrect address had been recorded. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

2

Table B3: Sample Chain
Round
(1)

Player
(2)

Action
(3)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

GPCB
Plant
GPCB
Plant
GPCB
Plant
GPCB
Plant
GPCB
Plant
GPCB
Plant
GPCB

Inspect
Ignore
Punish
Comply
Inspect
Ignore
Inspect
Ignore
Punish
Comply
Inspect
Comply
Accept

Document
(4)
Inspection report
Closure Direction
Equipment installed
Inspection report
Inspection report
Closure Direction
Process installed
Inspection report
Process installed
Revocation of Closure Direction

Date
(5)
2008-09-05
2008-09-05
2009-01-12
2009-01-28
2009-01-31
2009-01-31
2009-02-04
2009-02-04
2009-05-22
2009-05-30
2009-06-16
2009-06-16
2009-06-24

The table displays a 13-round chain of interactions between GPCB and one plant during the experiment. Column (3)
indicates the category of action, while Column (4) reports the underlying document to which the action corresponds.
Ignore actions by the plant in Rounds 2, 6 and 8 have been imputed based on adjacent actions in the chain and hence
Column (4) is left blank in these rounds. All chains begin with a regulatory inspection, Inspect. The players then
alternate moves until the regulator decides to Accept the plant’s compliance for the time being, which terminates the
chain. Table 1 in the paper describes the way in which the actions are mapped to the underlying documents, and the
Data Appendix provides a full explanation of the rules used to construct the chains.

3

Table B4: Annual Number of Inspections on Inspection Treatment
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Di↵erence
(3)

2.98
[1.72]

1.40
[1.60]

1.59⇤⇤⇤
(0.096)

Inspections, as part of treatment

1.62
[0.74]

0
[0]

1.62⇤⇤⇤
(0.031)

Inspections, not part of treatment

1.37
[1.36]

1.40
[1.60]

-0.029
(0.089)

Inspections, not part of treatment,
first day of chain

1.21
[1.18]

1.28
[1.38]

-0.062
(0.077)

Inspections, not part of treatment,
after first day of chain

0.12
[0.35]

0.088
[0.34]

0.035
(0.022)

480

480

Inspections

Observations

The table shows the di↵erences in the number of di↵erent types of inspections between the treatment
and control groups during the treatment period of approximately two years. A treatment inspection is
an inspection that was assigned as part of the treatment, or a follow-up inspection that follows such an
inspection in the same chain. Columns (1) and (2) show means with standard deviations in brackets.
Column (3) shows the coefficient from regressions of each variable on treatment, where each regression
includes region fixed e↵ects and a control for the audit sample. The table uses administrative data from
during the experiment. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01

Table B5: Endline compliance on treatment (All Obs)
[0, p)
(1)

[0, 2p)
(2)

[0, 5p)
(3)

[0, 10p)
(4)

Inspection treatment assigned (=1)

0.0366⇤
(0.0213)

0.0144
(0.0193)

0.00323
(0.0131)

-0.000368
(0.00824)

Audit treatment assigned (=1)

0.0288
(0.0258)

0.0154
(0.0238)

0.0123
(0.0162)

0.0166⇤
(0.00917)

Audit ⇥ inspection treatment (=1)

-0.0365
(0.0353)

-0.0245
(0.0316)

-0.0109
(0.0214)

-0.0106
(0.0116)

Inspection and audit control mean
Observations

0.614
4168

0.813
4168

0.928
4168

0.975
4168

The table presents regression estimates for compliance on inspection treatment assignment and audit treatment assignment, using pollution levels taken from the endline survey. Compliance is defined as pollution
being below N times the limit p, with N being 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10 respectively. Pollution standardized by
backcheck standard deviation. Standard errors in parentheses. Includes audit treatment and treatment
interaction controls, and year and region fixed e↵ects. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01

4

Table B6: Endline Pollution and Compliance on Letter Treatment
Pollution
(1)

Compliance
(2)

Inspection treatment assigned (=1)

-0.0160
(0.0866)

0.0248
(0.0238)

Letter treatment assigned (=1)

-0.0482
(0.0928)

0.0311
(0.0241)

Inspection treatment
⇥ Letter treatment (=1)

0.0326
(0.130)

-0.00340
(0.0345)

0.652
4168

0.595
4168

Inspection and Letter control mean
Observations

The table shows regressions of pollution (column 1) and compliance (column 2) on inspection
and letter treatment assignments. Observations are at the plant-by-pollutant level, where
pollution consists of air and water pollution readings for each plant, taken during the endline
survey, and each pollutant is standardized by dividing by its standard deviation. Compliance
is a dummy for each pollutant being below its regulatory standard. The table regresses these
outcomes on inspection treatment assignment, letter treatment assignment and inspection ⇥
letter treatment. The letter treatment was a letter sent by the regulator to plants shortly
before the endline survey reiterating the terms of plants’ environmental consents and reminding them of their obligations to meet emissions limits. Specifications also include region fixed
e↵ects. Standard errors clustered at the plant level in parentheses. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05,
⇤⇤⇤
p < 0.01.

5

Table B7: Model of Plant Revenue
Log Revenue
(1)
(2)
(3)
Medium size industry (=1)

1.410⇤⇤⇤
(0.236)

Textiles (=1)

1.582⇤⇤⇤
(0.266)
0.732⇤⇤⇤
(0.189)

Coal or lignite as fuel (=1)
Waste water generated > 100
kl/day
Constant
R2
Residual SD
Observations

1.366⇤⇤⇤
(0.254)

11.11⇤⇤⇤
(0.0975)

10.70⇤⇤⇤
(0.174)

0.122
(0.234)
0.846⇤⇤⇤
(0.216)
10.64⇤⇤⇤
(0.175)

0.0962
1.358
694

0.160
1.309
694

0.201
1.277
694

(4)
1.336⇤⇤⇤
(0.271)
-0.109
(0.316)
0.163
(0.271)
0.905⇤⇤⇤
(0.249)
10.65⇤⇤⇤
(0.182)
0.202
1.277
694

The table presents regression estimates of plant revenue on plant characteristics. Plant
revenue is measured from the endline surveyed and specified in logged thousands of
Indian rupees. Medium size is a regulatory designation for capital stock above INR
5m (the sample includes only small- and medium-sized plants), Textiles is a dummy
for belonging to the textile industry, Coal or lignite is a dummy for using one of those
fuels, and Waste water generated is a dummy for discharging more than 100 kl/day of
e✏uent. Standard errors clustered by plant in parentheses. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤
p < 0.01

6

