                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SECOND TRIMESTER SUNLIGHT AND ASTHMA:
                     EVIDENCE FROM TWO INDEPENDENT STUDIES

                                          Nils Wernerfelt
                                           David Slusky
                                        Richard Zeckhauser

                                       Working Paper 20599
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20599


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




We thank Amitabh Chandra and Scott Weiss, MD, for detailed comments and suggestions, and seminar
participants at the Leonard Davis Institute, Princeton’s Center for Health and Wellbeing, and MIT.
We also thank Bob Krasowski of the Centers for Disease Control, and Jean Roth and the rest of the
staff at NBER for outstanding assistance compiling our datasets, and Diane Alexander, Asaf Bernstein,
Hoyt Bleakley, Anne Case, Alma Cohen, Janet Currie, David Cutler, Moshe Hazan, Fernanda Marquez
Padilla, Sarah Moshary, Paul Murphy, Stephen Murphy, Joseph Newhouse, Jessica Pickett, Analia
Schlosser, Benjamin Sommers, Heidi Williams, and especially Adam Sacarny for valuable comments.
Wernerfelt gratefully acknowledges the support of an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. This paper
explored allergy and asthma emergency rates in children using outpatient data from Arizona and New
Jersey, State Emergency Department Databases (SEDD), Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP),
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The findings and conclusions in this paper are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Research Data Center, the National
Center for Health Statistics, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Nils Wernerfelt, David Slusky, and Richard Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Second Trimester Sunlight and Asthma: Evidence from Two Independent Studies
Nils Wernerfelt, David Slusky, and Richard Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 20599
October 2014
JEL No. I12,I18,J13

                                            ABSTRACT

One in twelve Americans suffers from asthma and its annual costs are estimated to exceed $50
billion. Simultaneously, the root causes of the disease remain unknown. A recent hypothesis speculates
that maternal vitamin D levels during pregnancy affect the probability the fetus later develops asthma.
In two large-scale studies, we test this hypothesis using a natural experiment afforded by historical
variation in sunlight, a major source of vitamin D. Specifically, holding the birth location and month
fixed, we see how exogenous within-location variation in sunlight across birth years affects the
probabilityof asthma onset. We show that this measurement of sunlight correlates with actual
exposure,and consistentwith pre-existing results from the fetal development literature, we find
substantial and highly significantevidence in both datasets that increased sunlight during the second
trimester lowers the subsequentprobability of asthma. Our results suggest policies designed to
augmentvitamin D levels in pregnantwomen, the large majority of whom are vitamin D insufficient,
could be very cost-effective.


Nils Wernerfelt                                    Richard Zeckhauser
MIT Department of Economics                        John F. Kennedy School of Government
77 Massachusetts Avenue, E19-750                   Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02139                                79 John F. Kennedy Street
nilsw@mit.edu                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                   and NBER
David Slusky                                       richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
Department of Economics
Princeton University
and
Department of Economics
The University of Kansas
1460 Jayhawk Boulevard
Lawrence, KS 66045
david.slusky@ku.edu
                                     I. Introduction

       The worldwide incidence of asthma imposes staggering physical and financial

costs. Asthma afflicts more than 300 million individuals worldwide and kills more than

250,000 people annually (Cruz et al., 2007). The resulting cost - measuring both direct

treatment expenditures and indirect productivity loss - is enormous, estimated at about

$56 billion annually in the U.S. alone (Barnett and Nurmagambetov, 2011).

Simultaneously, asthma’s root causes appear varied and remain poorly understood. A

recent hypothesis with growing support speculates that maternal vitamin D levels during

pregnancy may affect the probability that the unborn child later develops asthma (Weiss

and Litonjua, 2011). If validated, this hypothesis presents a low-cost way to reduce

asthma incidence, resulting in both improved quality of life for millions of individuals

and reductions in net healthcare spending.

       To assess this hypothesis, we examine the impact of local weather conditions

while in utero on the probability of developing asthma later in life. Specifically, our

approach holds fixed the location and month of birth, and then analyzes how exogenous

within-location variation in sunlight levels across birth years affects the probability of

asthma onset. Though we cannot observe maternal vitamin D levels directly, the

motivation for our approach stems from the well documented connection between

vitamin D levels and sunlight. Namely, Americans obtain over 90% of their vitamin D

from sunlight exposure (Holick, 2004), and we provide evidence in our Appendix that the

sunlight variation we are exploiting correlates with actual exposure, but not with other

factors that might be affecting asthma incidence.




                                                                                        2
         In two independent datasets, we find highly significant evidence that an increase

in sunlight in an individual’s location during the second trimester in utero reduces his/her

probability of becoming asthmatic. This result is consistent with pre-existing research

from the fetal development literature, which has found substantial evidence suggesting

vitamin D is particularly important during this period for asthma pathogenesis.

         We report the results from our two datasets separately. Our first dataset (Study I)

draws on individual level data on the state, month, and year of birth for more than

260,000 Americans. We find that doubling the amount of sunshine1 during the second

trimester lowers the probability of an asthma diagnosis by 1.15 percentage points, which

at a mean incidence of 11.49% represents a 10.0% reduction. In our second dataset

(Study II), we look for an effect of sunlight on a separate, more cost-relevant margin -

hospital discharges from asthma - on the county level using data on more than 2.1 million

births aggregated into about 3,000 birth month-county cohorts. Here we find that

doubling the amount of sunlight during the second trimester reduces the per capita rate of

asthma emergencies by 2.21 percentage points, which is a 21.3% reduction at the mean.2

Both sets of results pass several robustness checks detailed in the Appendix (Section 6).

         Current estimates are that nearly three out of every four adults are either vitamin

D deficient or insufficient (Ginde, Lui, and Camargo, 2009).3 Among pregnant women,

multiple smaller scale studies have reported rates that are if anything slightly higher

(Bodnar et al., 2007; Holmes et al., 2009; Johnson et al., 2011). Our results suggest these

numbers may be more costly than previously known and that policies designed to boost

1
  e.g., about the difference between the average summer in Nevada and that in New Hampshire.
2
  This estimate is significantly different from the previous one, but this is understandable given the datasets
look at two different margins. We report the results here in terms of doubling sunlight for sake of
comparison, but we describe each result in more detail in Section IV.
3
  Deficiency is defined as less than 10 ng/ml blood; insufficiency is 10-30 ng/ml.


                                                                                                              3
maternal vitamin D levels during the second trimester -- either through increased usage of

(or adherence to) vitamin D supplements or increased sun exposure -- may greatly

enhance welfare.4

         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the background

from both the medical and economics literatures. Section III describes our two datasets in

greater detail. Section IV presents our results and Section V concludes.



                                                   II. Background

         Our paper builds off of two separate literatures, and so we provide the relevant

background for the two sequentially before discussing the connection between sunlight

and vitamin D in more detail.



II. A. Prior Medical Literature: Many studies in both animals and humans point to a role

for maternal vitamin D levels during pregnancy in asthma pathogenesis.5,6 One stream of

this literature has tried to find evidence of a clinical effect. Multiple studies on human

subjects in different parts of the world have found associations between low maternal

vitamin D levels during pregnancy and asthma incidence in the child (Camargo et al.,

2007; Devereux et al., 2007; Erkolla et al., 2009; Miyake et al., 2010; Belderbos et al.,


4
  A year’s worth of vitamin D supplements typically costs less than $20 online. In addition, exposure to as
little as ten minutes of direct sunlight a day -- far less time than it takes to sunburn -- is adequate for most
individuals to obtain their daily recommended dosage (Holick, 2007). In contrast, the average asthma-
related hospitalization lasts three days and can cost between $12,000 and $24,000 (Milet et al., 2007).
5
  There have also been studies recently that look at treating current asthmatics with vitamin D (e.g., Castro
et al., 2014). This is a related, but distinct hypothesis from what we consider in this paper.
6
  We note at the outset that the evidence is sufficiently strong that two randomized-controlled trials have
been started to look at maternal vitamin D supplementation and during pregnancy and asthma outcomes.
These studies are the Maternal Vitamin D Supplementation to Prevent Childhood Asthma (VDAART) and
Vitamin D Supplementation During Pregnancy for Prevention of Asthma in Childhood (ABCvitaminD);
their ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers are NCT00920621 and NCT00856947, respectively.


                                                                                                                   4
2011). By design though, these studies can only report associations, and other

associational studies report either no correlation or a positive one between low maternal

vitamin D levels and later asthma incidence (e.g., Gale et al., 2007). Separately, in a

controlled study on animals, rats born to mothers who were experimentally deprived of

vitamin D exhibit several lung abnormalities similar to those found in human asthmatics

(Gaultier et al., 1984).

         A second stream of literature has been more developmentally focused and tries to

determine when in a human pregnancy maternal vitamin D levels are most important.

Human lung development occurs in five stages: embryonic (roughly 4-7 weeks post-

conception), pseudoglandular (7-17 weeks), canalicular (17-26 weeks), saccular (27-36

weeks), and alveolar (36 weeks to about 2 years old) (Burri, 1984; Weiss and Litonjua,

2011). Several studies find suggestive evidence that maternal vitamin D levels could be

important during part of the pseudoglandular and canalicular stages.7,8 Not only is

vitamin D present in fetal lung tissue during much of this period (Brun et al., 1987), but it

is also known to affect either the growth or gene expression of several types of cells that

are active in the lungs at this time (Lunghi et al., 1995; Stio et al., 1997; Bossé, Maghni,

and Hudson, 2007). At week 11 of the pregnancy, many vitamin D related genes are

suddenly activated that are known to be involved in lung development and differentially

expressed in asthmatics (Kho et al., 2013). These studies illuminate a pathway through

which vitamin D deficiency could lead to the abnormal airway development in asthma



7
  It is worth emphasizing that the fetal supply of vitamin D is completely determined by the mother’s (e.g.,
Heaney et al., 2003), and so statements about vitamin D in fetal lungs during this period reflect the
mother’s supply.
8
  We note that other studies have also reported results consistent with the third trimester (e.g., Glasgow and
Thomas, 1977; Phokela et al., 2005). We do not find evidence in support of this, but note that there may
well be an effect during that period that is not large enough to observe in our data.


                                                                                                             5
(Weiss and Litonjua, 2011). Based on these results, we look for evidence within weeks

11-26 post conception, which overlaps relatively closely with the second trimester.



II. B. Prior Economic Literature: Our paper relates most closely to the literature within

economics on the long-run impacts of events early in life. Much of that research shows

that outcomes of considerable interest -- such as educational achievement, income, and a

host of health conditions -- are strongly influenced by events early in life (e.g., Heckman,

2006; Bleakley, 2007; Fletcher, Green, and Neidell, 2010; Bharadwaj, Løken, and

Neilson, 2013) or in utero (e.g., Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2007; Almond, Edlund,

and Palme, 2009). Almond and Currie (2011) show how this empirical evidence of the

“fetal origins hypothesis” can fit within a standard economics modeling framework.

Namely, using a constant elasticity of substitution production function with health

investments at different ages as inputs, they show that complementarities between health

shocks and later investments could amplify small initial differences across individuals.9

           Our paper also relates to several prior economic analyses that rely on weather as a

proxy variable for a variable of interest. For example, Maccini and Yang (2009) report on

several positive long-term outcomes for women who were exposed to more rainfall early

in life, where the presumed causal channel operates through increased agricultural

production and hence income. Jensen (2000) uses rainfall as a proxy for agricultural

conditions to study investments in children, and Oster (2004) uses temperature as a proxy

for economic conditions to study the prevalence of witchcraft trials. Similar to these




9
    This is an adaption of a model from Heckman (2007).


                                                                                            6
studies, we do not observe maternal vitamin D levels directly,10 but run our analyses

using sunlight instead (which we provide evidence is correlated). Clearly, direct

measurement would be ideal, but our approach still enables us to provide evidence of the

hypothesized effect.



III.C. Sunlight and Vitamin D: As mentioned, humans obtain the vast majority of their

vitamin D supply from sunlight (in fact, a nickname for vitamin D is “the sunshine

vitamin”). Though there are many dietary sources of vitamin D - such as several fish

species or a range of fortified dairy products - it would take about 30 glasses of vitamin D

fortified milk to produce the same amount of vitamin D as from an average of 5-10

minutes of direct sunlight exposure (Holick, 2007).

        Similarly, in the northern hemisphere, vitamin D levels are known to follow

strong seasonal cycles of being highest in the summer and lowest in the winter as the

number of sunlight hours varies (and the pattern is reversed in the southern hemisphere;

Chen, 1999). Isolated data from small scale studies have similarly found seasonal

fluctuations in the vitamin D level of both pregnant women and their newborns (Disanto

et al., 2013; Bodnar et al., 2007). Finally, on a separate but related note, rickets (which is

caused by vitamin D deficiency) was documented more than a century ago to follow

similar seasonal cycles (Kassowitz, 1897). For identification purposes, the variation in

sunlight we exploit is within-location rather than seasonal, but we include this section to

simply convey a sense of the tight connection between sunlight and vitamin D.




10
 There are a few datasets that contain information on vitamin D levels, the largest of which is the
NHANES, but even that does not have enough geographical and seasonal variation for our purposes.


                                                                                                      7
                                         III. Data

        This paper presents two separate studies. Table I provides an overview of each.

The text then elaborates on the description of each dataset.



Table I. Overview of our two studies.


                                     Study I                          Study II
Unit of observation        Individual                   Cohort
Level of observation       Each individual’s state,     Each cohort’s county, birth
                           month, and year of birth     month, and year of birth
Weather data               Hours of sunlight, at the    Average intensity of sunlight at
                           state, month, and year       the county, month, and year level
                           level
Outcome variable           The individual’s self-       Per-capita number of emergency
                           reported asthma condition    department discharges for asthma
                                                        for that cohort
Years                      1914-1987                    1999-2009
N                          264,701 individuals          2.1 million people grouped into
                                                        3,036 birth month-county-year
                                                        cohorts



We employ two analyses first to see if our main effect replicates, and second since each

study has distinct advantages. Study I has the advantage of having individual level data,

with sunlight aggregated by state, over a national sample. Study II, by contrast, operates

at the more granular county level for sunlight exposure, uses more up-to-date data in a

narrower time frame, and has a more definitive indication of asthma from emergency

department discharges. We note that the two studies have no overlap in data (with respect

to either time frame or data sources). This creates a highly independent replication.




                                                                                            8
Study I: Individual level data on the state and month of birth (as well as health status and

controls) for more than 260,000 Americans were obtained from the 1997-2008 National

Health Interview Survey (NHIS). This data was merged with historical weather data from

the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

         An adult from the NHIS data was coded as asthmatic if he/she responded

affirmatively to the question “Have you EVER been told by a doctor or other health

professional that you had asthma?” and similarly for a child below 18 years old if a

knowledgeable adult in the household answered affirmatively to an equivalent question

about the child. Negative responses were coded as a 0; all other responses were omitted

(e.g., refused to answer, not ascertained, don’t know).11 The publicly available NHIS data

also provides information on each individual’s year and month of birth, as well as

demographic data such as gender and ethnicity. The restricted-use data we used included

each individual’s state of birth. Thus, for every individual in our sample we knew his/her

state, month, and year of birth.

         Historical sunlight data were collected from 240 NOAA weather stations located

around the country. The data range from 1891-1987, though not all stations cover the

entire time period.12 Each station measured the total number of hours of sunlight at its

location each month. For example, we can see in our data that Asheville, North Carolina

had 188 hours of sunlight in January of 1977. For states with more than one weather

station reporting in any month, the average within-state correlation in sunlight hours was

quite high (0.86), and so monthly data were averaged in such cases. In Section 2 of the

11
   The NHIS is described as the “principal source of national asthma prevalence data for the United States”
(National Center for Environmental Health, 2014). It still relies on self-reported asthma status though, and
so our second study measures asthma using hospital discharge data.
12
   The average duration of a weather station was just above 60 years, and the vast majority were reporting
over continuous stretches.


                                                                                                           9
Appendix we provide figures to demonstrate the variation in sunlight at the level of

identification (Figures A.1-A.2).



Study II: Our second dataset looks at birth month-county-year cohorts, not individual

data. Sunlight data came from the National Solar Radiation Database (NSRD) at the U.S.

Department of Energy, asthma hospital discharge data from the Health Care Utilization

Project, and birth records from the CDC’s Vital Statistics.

         The sunlight data shows for each 10 km x 10 km grid cell a measure of sunlight

intensity at hourly intervals (though for our analysis we use the monthly average) for

1998-2009.13 To map the NSRD to counties, since there is minimal sunlight variation

within a county for a particular month and year, we matched the coordinates of the

population weighted county centroid to the 10 km x 10 km gridded cell that contains it.

As for Study I, Section 2 of the Appendix contains visual depictions of the variation in

sunlight used in this study at the level of identification (Figures A.3-A.4).

         We use hospital discharge data from the State Emergency Department Database,

which records visits to the emergency room that did not result in an admission. We were

able to obtain data from two states: New Jersey and Arizona. The discharge data for these

states contains the patient’s county of residence, birth month, and birth year, information

critical for our analysis. We limit our sample to children aged 0-10 years old when



13
  For each 10 km x 10 km grid cell, Geostationary Operation Environmental Satellites measure solar
radiation reflected back from any cloud cover. Ground radiation can then be calculated from subtracting
reflected radiation from total radiation, presumably using latitude and day of the year to calculate total
radiation (Perez et al. 2002). These ground radiation estimates are then integrated over an hour, since the
most granular data available is at the hour-day-month-year level. Any gaps in the satellite data are
corrected using a long fill method with data from other years for that time and location, smoothing
endpoints. The units for each hour are watt-hours per square meter, or equivalently an average
instantaneous rate of watts per square meter.


                                                                                                              10
discharged, and we assume that their county of residence is also the county of birth.14

Discharges are coded as “asthma” if the diagnosis code they have falls into that category

as defined by the clinical classifications software.

         As mentioned, this study aggregates data to the county-birth month-birth year

cohort. We thus normalize the discharge data by the number of live births in each county

in the respective birth month and birth year, using vital statistics data from the CDC.15

         Whereas Study I focuses on incidence of asthma (without any measure of

exacerbations), Study II fundamentally covers exacerbations of asthma, without any real

measure of incidence across the population. A high per capita asthma emergency

discharge rate could be caused by more individuals in that cohort having asthma and

therefore more individuals having emergencies, or it could be caused by the same types

of individuals who would have had asthma in a different cohort having more severe

asthma and therefore more emergencies. In this way, the two studies complement each

other, and show that the relationship between sunlight in utero and asthma is robust to the

choice of outcome measure.



Given this background, Table II provides means and general summary statistics for our

two datasets.16
14
   We limit the sample to ages 0-10 to minimize the effects of cohort differences across time (e.g., changes
in maternal smoking habits). With regards to our county of birth assumption, we note that even if there
were significant movement, it would enter our regressions as classical measurement error as the movement
should not be correlated with whether a county was having a more or less sunny month relative to its mean.
The measurement error would not be classical only if individuals moving somewhere somehow caused that
place to be relatively sunnier than it had been before.
15
   Unfortunately, the publicly available data covers only counties with populations greater than 100,000.
For birth years 1999-2009, data is publicly available for 18 of New Jersey’s 21 counties, but only 5 of
Arizona’s 15 counties. This should not bias the results of this analysis, since there is not likely to be a
relationship between county population and within-county-month annual sunlight variation. Furthermore,
there is a concern that less populated counties will have a count of emergency asthma or allergy emergency
discharges censored at 0, which will bias a linear regression model. Omitting those counties helps avoid
that bias.


                                                                                                          11
Table II. Summary statistics for Studies I and II.

                         Study I                                                   Study II

N                                   264,701                    N                                3,036
                                                               N (total births)                 2,119,857

Percent asthmatic:                  11.49%                     Per capita rate of               0.10417
                                                               asthma emergencies

Average year of birth:              1956.06                    Average year of birth:           2004
Fraction female:                    56.0%                      Average cohort share             48.8%
                                                               female:

Major Ethnicities:                                             Major Ethnicities (average cohort share)
     White                          81.2%                         White                         79.1%
     African American               15.7%                         African American              13.0%
     Other                          2.8%                          Other                         n/a

Hours of Sunlight:                                             Sunlight intensity (W/m2):
  Mean ± Std. Dev.                                               Mean ± Std. Dev.
  1st Trimester:             673.74±196.79                       1st Trimester: 182.88±65.99
  2nd Trimester:             676.58±197.28                       2nd Trimester: 182.42±65.49
  3rd Trimester:             668.82±197.24                       3rd Trimester: 182.10±65.55




Construction of the sunlight variable: Neither dataset enables us to trace the weather

exactly back to the day of birth. Given this coarseness in our data, we cannot determine

the precise weeks of the pregnancy to which a sunlight measure pertains. However, we


16
   For Study I, our full sample consists of 595,093 people, but analyzing the means of our variables of
interest across the entire dataset and those for whom we have asthma data reveals no major differences
(Table A.1 in the Appendix, Section 1).
17
   The per capita rate of asthma emergencies is calculated by the count of 2005-2009 emergency
department discharges with an asthma diagnosis for a particular birth month - birth year - county cohort,
divided by the number of individuals born in that cohort. This rate is larger in magnitude than one might
expect since multiple discharges for the same individual are counted separately and since it pools multiple
years. Data limitations make it impossible to track the same individual across discharges and years, which
would be necessary to calculate an individualized rate.


                                                                                                          12
can give a range. For example, in the Appendix, Section 3 we run regressions at the

month level (i.e. instead of trimesters on the right hand side we have months). Consider if

we found that the month two months prior to birth was significant. For individuals born

on the first day of their month of birth this would be the second to last month of the

pregnancy, but for those born on the last day of the month, it would be the third to last.

We thus bound our results accordingly and in that case would say that we find evidence

of significance within the last two to three months of the pregnancy.

          For both studies, our trimester measurements for sunlight sum three adjacent

months. Thus, our third trimester starts with the sunlight from one month prior to the

birth month and adds to it the amounts in the two preceding months. We define the other

trimesters correspondingly. We start one month prior to the birth month so that our

second trimester measurement aligns better with the late pseudoglandular and canalicular

stages.



                              IV. Methodology and Results

          At a very broad level, we begin by comparing the distributions of normal and

asthmatic births across the calendar year utilizing no controls, employing the dataset from

Study I. The distributions differ significantly (Pearson’s Chi-squared test, 2=25.73,

df=11, p=0.0071), with asthmatic births more common roughly during the summer.

Figure I shows the frequency of asthmatic births by month (e.g., among January births,

11.24% in our sample were later diagnosed with asthma).




                                                                                        13
Figure I. Probability of being diagnosed with asthma as a function of birth month.




Note: The dashed red line denotes the sample average, the blue dots represent the data,
and the green line fits the data with a cubic spline (knots at months 1, 6 and 12).



Given the seasonal variation in weather across most of the nation, these data suggest a

potential connection between sunlight and asthma. However, other factors could

contribute to or produce this pattern. For example, it is known that seasonality of birth

correlates with race (e.g., Bound and Jaeger, 2001; Buckles and Hungerman, 2013;

Currie and Schwandt, 2013). Therefore, to the extent that race is correlated with asthma

incidence, racial differences in the season of birth could conceivably produce this pattern.

         To study our research question in greater detail, we now turn to our main results,

which use the aforementioned natural experiment to rigorously test the sunlight

hypothesis. Our approach fixes the birth location and month, and then assesses how

within-location sunlight variation across years affects the probability of asthma.18 We


18
  For this approach to provide meaningful evidence on a possible vitamin D connection, we need to
assume that this variation in sunlight correlates with vitamin D levels. Though this may seem obvious, to
provide supportive evidence, we merged our data from Study II with that from the American Time Use


                                                                                                            14
report results as linear probability models with our binary measure of asthma as the

dependent variable and measures of sunshine and our controls as independent variables.



Study I: Given the individual-level data, this study’s regressions take the following form:

                     ASTHMAismy    sm  y   ln(SUNsmy )  X i   ismy ,

where ASTHMAismy is the asthma status of individual i born in state s in month m and year

y. sm are state of birth interacted with month of birth fixed effects; y are year of birth

fixed effects; ln(SUNsmy) is the log-transformed measurement of sunlight; and the Xi are

individual controls for race and gender.

         In words, this specification proceeds as follows. Individuals born in July in

Georgia in 1978 received a certain exposure to sunlight in utero; individuals born in July

in Georgia in 1979 received a different exposure. We assess how that variation in

exposure affects the probability of developing asthma, taking into account a possible

national trend in asthma diagnoses across years with the y.

         Our main results are displayed below in Table III. We report our analysis using

log-transformed sunlight to express our results in terms of percent changes, but an

analysis using linear sunlight yields very similar outcomes.19




Survey, to show that the variation we exploit correlates with individuals’ time spent outside. Since we view
this as supportive and not our main results, we refer the reader to the Appendix, Section 4, for more on this
point.
19
   See Table A.6.


                                                                                                          15
Table III. Regression output of main results from Study I.

                                     (1)                        (2)                        (3)
     Dependent variable:           Asthma                     Asthma                     Asthma

Log Hours of Sun                   0.00123                    0.00156                    0.00140
3rd Trimester                     (0.00711)                  (0.00707)                  (0.00711)

Log Hours of Sun                  -0.01615***                -0.01592***                -0.01653***
2nd Trimester                     (0.00595)                  (0.00590)                  (0.00596)

Log Hours of Sun                   0.00274                    0.00318                    0.00360
1st Trimester                     (0.00726)                  (0.00728)                  (0.00717)

State of Birth*Month of               x                          x                          x
Birth Fixed Effects
Year of Birth Fixed                   x                          x                          x
Effects
Race controls                                                    x                          x
Gender                                                                                      x
            N                      264,533                    264,533                    264,533
            R2                      0.0081                     0.0089                    0.01073

Notes: The results indicate that greater sunlight exposure during the second trimester
reduces the probability of being diagnosed with asthma later in life. For the coefficient on
the second trimester sunlight, p=0.0091, 0.0095, and 0.0079 for Columns (1)-(3),
respectively. All regressions are done with robust standard errors clustered at the state
level. (*** denotes significance at 0.01)



           This Table’s striking finding is that sunlight exposure during the second trimester

has a large and significant effect on the probability that a child is later diagnosed with

asthma. More specifically, doubling the amount of sunshine during this period lowers the

subsequent probability of asthma by 1.15 percentage points.20 Thus, at the mean

incidence rate of 11.49%, such an increase in sunlight would lower the probability of

asthma by around one tenth. In contrast, neither sunlight during the first or third trimester

is significant. To put these results in context, the average number of hours of sunlight in

the summer in Nevada is about twice that for New Hampshire. Similarly, a baby born in


20
  This number comes from multiplying the coefficient on the second trimester in Column (3) by ln(2): -
0.01653*ln(2)=-0.0115.


                                                                                                         16
December in New Mexico has on average about three times as much sunlight during the

second trimester as a baby born in May in Michigan.

         Bounding the time window as mentioned in the Data section, these results

provide evidence for significance inside weeks 10-26 of the pregnancy. This is a close

match with the window of weeks 11-26 we specified earlier.21

         Our results pass various robustness checks detailed in the Appendix, Section 6

(Table A.8). Namely, if we add an additional pregnancy’s worth of sunlight data both

before conception and after birth to our main regressions, none of these extra terms is

significant while our main effect persists. Similarly, repeating our analysis using an

indicator variable for low birth weight or whether an individual’s father graduated from

high school (neither of which is hypothesized to be connected to in utero vitamin D) as

the dependent variable, none of the sunlight coefficients is significant.



Study II: The main regression used in this study is:

                         ASTHMA cmy    cm   y   ln(SUN cmy )   cmy ,

where ASTHMAcmy is the per-capita number of emergency department discharges for

asthma in county c for individuals born in month m and year y. cm are county interacted

with month of birth fixed effects; y are year of birth fixed effects; and ln(SUNcmy) is the

log-transformed measurement of sunlight.

         In words, what this specification does is as follows. The cohort of individuals

born in Mercer County, New Jersey in March, 2006 received a certain exposure to

sunlight in utero; individuals born there in the March, 2007 cohort received a different
21
  Given our data from both studies are at the month level, we repeat the analysis at this finer level in the
Appendix, Section 3, to see if we can learn more about when during this period sunlight exposure is most
important (Table A.2).


                                                                                                               17
exposure. We are determining how that variation affects the incidence rate of emergency

department discharges for asthma for those cohorts, taking into account possible trends

across birth years that would affect all counties. Our main results from this study are in

Table IV. As above, we report our analysis using log-transformed sunlight, but rerunning

with linear sunlight yields very similar outcomes.22


Table IV. Regression output of main results from Study II.

                                                   (1)                         (2)
                Dependent variable:              Asthma                      Asthma

             Log Average Sunlight                 0.0114                    -0.0226
             intensity 3rd Trimester             (0.0244)                   (0.0339)

             Log Average Sunlight                -0.0319***                 -0.0598***
             intensity 2nd Trimester             (0.0098)                   (0.0209)

             Log Average Sunlight                 0.0205                    -0.0124
             intensity 1st Trimester             (0.0197)                   (0.0197)

             County of Birth*Month                  x                           x
             of Birth Fixed Effects
             Year of Birth Fixed                    x                           x
             Effects

                    Birth years                 1999-2009                  1999-2004
                         N                        3,036                      1,656
                        R2                        0.7624                     0.7467

Notes: We run the same regression on the full sample and a subset of the birth years.23
The results indicate that greater sunlight exposure during the second trimester reduces
that cohort’s per capita rate of emergency department discharges for asthma later in life.
For the coefficient on the second trimester sunlight, p=0.004, and 0.009 for Columns (1)-
(2), respectively. All regressions are done with robust standard errors are clustered at the
county level. (*** denotes significance at 0.01)


22
   See Table A.7.
23
   One might be concerned that there are fewer years of discharge data available with 2005-2009 for
cohorts born after 2004 since they were alive for less of the five year observation period. The birth year
fixed effects in the main regression should take care of these level differences, but may be then entangled
with an abnormally large or small cohort year. Column (2) therefore omits the birth cohorts born after
2004 and re-runs the main regression on the 1999-2004 cohorts. All of these six cohorts have a full five
years of discharge data. The second trimester coefficient in Column (2) is actually larger than that of the
main result in Column (1), strongly suggesting that the main result is robust to the inclusion of younger
cohorts.


                                                                                                        18
         This Table shows that there is a large negative and highly statistically significant

coefficient on the relative amount of sunlight during the second trimester, the exact same

period we documented in Study I. Other trimesters show no effect. To interpret our

second trimester coefficient, consider the following. Across this dataset, compared to the

mean sunlight exposure within a specific county-month pair, the minimum and maximum

levels are approximately -0.2 to 0.2 log points away. If everyone had the sunniest second

trimester in the data set for their month and county of birth, this would thus yield on

average approximately 20% more sunlight. That 20% increment would lower the rate of

asthma emergency department discharges by 0.2*0.03 = 0.006, which at the mean rate of

0.10 observed in this dataset, is about a 6% reduction relative to the average. For a rough

comparison, the 1989 introduction of two new surfactant drugs as a treatment for

neonatal acute respiratory distress (considered a “home run” technology judged by cost

effectiveness) reduced overall infant mortality by 5% (Chandra and Skinner, 2012). Thus,

variation in sunlight even at the county-month level can exert a substantial effect.24 These

results pass robustness checks similar to those described for Study I (see the Appendix,

Section 6, Table A.9).



Alternative Hypotheses: We provide evidence that within-location variation in sunlight

across birth years affects the probability of asthma pathogenesis. For our results to

provide evidence of a causal role for vitamin D, we must assume that our variation in

24
  If we repeat this analysis on a similar sample from Study I (babies born in December in New Jersey), we
see a 4.8% decrease in asthma diagnoses at the mean. While these values are of similar magnitude, the two
are in fact significantly different. This is not surprising though, as given the range of symptoms present in
asthmatics, it seems likely that the effect of sunlight may differ for those who receive borderline diagnoses
versus those with sufficiently extreme cases to entail emergency department visits.


                                                                                                           19
sunlight correlates with maternal vitamin D levels and is uncorrelated with other factors

that might actually determine asthma. As mentioned earlier, in Appendix 4 we provide

suggestive evidence of the former. As an example of the latter, if sunnier weather causes

pregnant women to smoke more, and smoking during the second trimester affects asthma

incidence, we would see the same results in our data even though vitamin D would not be

involved at all.

        While we cannot rule out all such alternative stories, we wanted to address as

many as we could given our data. First, at a broad level, we find no evidence in Study I

(Table A.8) that the variation in sunlight we are using affects the probability of being low

birth weight. If we interpret this outcome as a proxy for more general fetal health, then

this provides evidence against any alternative channels that would affect overall fetal

health as well (e.g., maternal exercise).

        Second, from the fetal development literature, two specific stories that have been

studied in particular involve smoking while pregnant and pollution.25 Namely, there have

been associational studies that document correlations between in utero exposure to each

of maternal smoking and pollutants such as carbon monoxide and asthma later in life

(e.g., Stick et al. 1996; Gilliland, Li, and Peters, 2001; Mortimer et al., 2008). We note

that apart from only reporting correlations, the exact biological pathways in utero

connecting these to asthma remain unclear. In comparison, the connection between

vitamin D and sunlight is very well documented, and the pre-existing evidence on in

utero vitamin D and asthma has a clear, well researched biological pathway. To consider

these further though, we provide evidence in Appendix 5 that our variation in sunlight


25
  The negative effects of cigarette smoke on current asthmatics is very well documented; note here we are
referring to the smaller literature on in utero exposure to smoke.


                                                                                                       20
does not correlate with smoking (Table A.4), nor does adding controls for carbon

monoxide levels in utero substantially diminish our results (Table A.5).


                                      V. Conclusion

       Our results from two completely independent studies provide evidence that

greater sunlight during the second trimester of pregnancy reduces the probability the

unborn child will later develop asthma. The presumed causal channel operates through

the mother’s conveyance of vitamin D to the fetus, the vast majority of which comes

from her sunlight exposure. Similarly, we have provided evidence that sunlight exposure

is correlated with the variation in weather we exploit. To judge the overall significance of

our results, we note if the true effect were zero, the probability of finding effects at less

than the 1% significance level in two independent studies is less than one in ten thousand.

       Our results suggest low levels of maternal vitamin D during pregnancy may be

more harmful than previously thought. As mentioned earlier, vitamin D deficiency and

insufficiency are extremely widespread, with multiple studies of pregnant women

documenting overall rates in excess of 80% (Bodnar et al., 2007; Holmes et al., 2009;

Johnson et al., 2011). Hence, our results suggest that if we could raise vitamin D levels in

these women, the savings in terms of both future quality of life and healthcare costs could

be substantial.

       The most practical methods for augmenting vitamin D levels would either be

supplements or increased sunlight exposure. Both may be valid, but when regularly

available, we prefer the latter for two reasons. First, many women already take

supplements during pregnancy that include vitamin D, but some studies have found their

insufficiency rates are similar to those who do not take supplements (e.g., Holmes et al.,



                                                                                          21
2009, or see Vieth et al., 2001). This may be due to inadequate dosages, absorption

problems, or compliance issues, but it suggests supplementation is not completely

straightforward. Second, sunlight exposure is a very efficient means of vitamin D

production -- a rule-of-thumb in the medical literature is that most people may obtain a

sufficient daily dose of vitamin D from 10 minutes of direct sunlight exposure (Holick,

2007).26 Further, unlike supplements, which can only deliver vitamin D in fixed

quantities, production of vitamin D from the skin automatically shuts off when levels are

sufficiently high (Holick and Garabedian, 2006). The main cost of additional sunlight

exposure would be a slightly higher risk of sunburn and melanoma, but given how little

sun exposure most people need to obtain sufficient vitamin D compared to how much is

necessary for a sunburn, this risk seems modest.

         Additionally, while this study has focused on asthma due to data limitations, other

diseases are linked to low levels vitamin D (e.g. multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia, and

cardiovascular disease). Future work could consider whether increased sunlight reduces

incidence of those diseases as well, perhaps using this paper’s empirical framework.

         Prior research has shown the mechanisms that underlie asthma are numerous and

complex. We find evidence suggesting that sunlight during the second trimester (which

we posit proxies for maternal vitamin D levels) is a significant factor. Given the extent of

the asthma epidemic afflicting the world today, arriving at a better understanding of this

complex disease and its numerous contributing factors is extremely important. This paper

demonstrates that statistical analyses of existing data can provide an inexpensive

complement to epidemiological and experimental studies in making such determinations.


26
  The specific amount required varies with ethnicity, altitude, latitude, etc. - there are several calculators
available online, such as http://nadir.nilu.no/~olaeng/fastrt/VitD-ez_quartMEDandMED_v2.html.


                                                                                                                 22
                         Appendix

                       Table of contents:



Section 1…………………………………………………Mean Comparison for Study I

Section 2……………………………………………………..Sunlight Variation Figures

Section 3………………………..……………………………….Month Level Estimation

Section 4……………………………………………Sunlight and Time Spent Outdoors

Section 5………………………………………………Sunlight and Smoking, Pollution

Section 6……………………………………………………...………Robustness Checks




                                                         23
1. Mean Comparison for Study I


As mentioned in the Data section, here we show that the means of our variables of

interest are similar if we include our entire sample versus if we restrict to those for whom

we have asthma data. This is simply to suggest that by ascertaining asthma status we

were not biasing our sample in any way. We also note that the data we are using is used

by the federal government for many of its asthma statistics, so others have had a vested

interest in making sure these samples are similar.




Table A.1. Comparison of summary statistics across samples.


                                      Full Sample            Restricted Sample

N                                     595,093                     264,701
Percent asthmatic:                    11.49%                      11.49%
Average year of birth:                1957.24                     1956.06
Gender:
  Female                              52.9%                       56.0%

Major Ethnicities:
 White                                81.6%                       81.2%
 Black/African American               15.0%                       15.7%
 Other                                3.2%                        2.8%


Hours of Sunlight:
  Mean ± Std. Dev.
  1st Trimester:                  674.85±197.18                673.74±196.79
  2nd Trimester:                  677.52±197.33                676.58±197.28
  3rd Trimester:                  669.28±197.29                668.82±197.24


Notes: Restricted Sample refers to the full dataset restricted to those for whom we have
asthma data on. (Note the 11.49% in both is mechanical due to the missing data.)




                                                                                           24
2. Sunlight Variation Figures


To better convey a sense of the variation in sunlight we are exploiting in each study, we

here provide graphics that look at sunlight levels in different locations across years for

two sample months (December and June).



Figure A.1. December sunlight variation, Study I




Notes: To illustrate the sunlight variation we exploit in Study I, this Figure demonstrates
for select years the log deviations from the state-month mean level. In other words, we
can see that December of 1980 was a particularly cold month for Washington state but
particularly hot for Vermont, compared to their average Decembers (data from NOAA).




                                                                                             25
Figure A.2. June sunlight variation, Study I




Notes: Here we redo Figure A.1 but for the month of June (data from NOAA).




                                                                             26
Figure A.3. Arizona sunlight variation, Study II

                            Figure A.3a. December weather




                               Figure A.3b. June weather




Notes: These two subfigures show the log deviations from the county-month mean for
Arizona for December and June for the different years used in our analysis (data from
NSRD). Scale ranges from -0.24 to 0.14 log points. The black dots indicate the
population weighted county centroid.



                                                                                        27
Figure A.4. New Jersey sunlight variation, Study II


                            Figure A.4a. December weather




                               Figure A.4b. June weather




Notes: Here we repeat Figure A.3 with data from New Jersey (data from NSRD).



                                                                               28
3. Month Level Estimation



Since data from both studies are available at the month level, we now rerun our main

regressions at this level to see if we can provide evidence for when in the late

pseudoglandular and canalicular stages vitamin D may be most important. Table A.2

contains the output from these regressions, where Column (1) is the month level version

of Column (3) from Table III in the main text and Column (2) corresponds to Column (1)

from Table IV.

       These results show that no months outside our window of interest are significant

in either dataset, but also that the main driver of the significance we see in the second

trimester is from month five before the month of birth in both datasets. Thus, within the

time frame we first posited, we find evidence that vitamin D may be particularly

important during roughly weeks 10-18. As an example of how to interpret this

magnitude, the Study I result predicts that doubling the total hours of sunlight during this

window alone would reduce the mean incidence of asthma by about 4.8%.




                                                                                         29
Table A.2. Month level regressions.


                                             (1)                          (2)
      Dependent variable:                  Asthma                       Asthma

         Study number                         I                            II
 Log Sunlight                             -0.00260                      0.01184
 Month 1                                  (0.00530)                    (0.01122)

 Log Sunlight                              0.00005                      -0.00371
 Month 2                                  (0.00430)                     (0.01042)

 Log Sunlight                              0.00239                       0.00910
 Month 3                                  (0.00410)                     (0.00768)

 Log Sunlight                             -0.00057                      -0.00785
 Month 4                                  (0.00314)                     (0.00460)

 Log Sunlight                             -0.00794***                  -0.01579***
 Month 5                                  (0.00329)                    (0.00557)

 Log Sunlight                             -0.00570                      -0.00687
 Month 6                                  (0.00269)                     (0.00632)

 Log Sunlight                             -0.00100                      -0.00507
 Month 7                                  (0.00384)                     (0.00662)

 Log Sunlight                             -0.00221                      -0.01298
 Month 8                                  (0.00404)                     (0.01005)

 Log Sunlight                              0.00527                      0.01785
 Month 9                                  (0.00483)                    (0.01207)

 Location of Birth*Month of                   x                            x
 Birth Fixed Effects
 Year of Birth Fixed Effects                  x                            x
 Race Controls                                x
 Gender                                       x
                N                          264,524                       3,036
                R2                          0.0108                       0.7629

Notes: Here we repeat our main analysis at the finer month level to see if we can narrow
down when during pregnancy vitamin D may be most important. Coefficients are
reported for each study’s respective measurement of sunlight exposure, where, for
example, “Log Sunlight Month 9” refers to the sunlight present nine months prior to the
birth month. In both datasets, we see no months outside our window of interest are
significant and specifically Month 5 is highly significant in both (p=0.0048, 0.0011,
respectively). Column (2) is run on birth years 1999-2009.



                                                                                       30
4. Sunlight and Time Spent Outdoors



For our analysis to provide evidence between a possible connection between maternal

vitamin D levels and asthma incidence, it is critical that the variation in sunlight we are

considering correlates with actual vitamin D levels in pregnant women. In other words,

fixing the location and time of year, if the weather one year is particularly sunny, do the

people there tend to have higher vitamin D levels? Given that seasonal variation in

vitamin D levels is well documented, the answer to this question may seem clear, but

note that it is a slightly different variation in sunlight that we are exploiting.

         Even if exposure to sunlight leads to vitamin D production, our hypothesis

relating sunny weather in utero to asthma protection would fail if sunnier days led

people, for example, to get less exposure to the sun, say by spending most of their time

inside with air conditioning. To rule out this possibility, we investigate whether fixing

the location and time of year, more sunlight leads individuals to spend more time inside

using data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS).27

         The ATUS, which began in 2003, asks individuals for a specific day to diary all

of the activities that they did that day, and identifies the state of residence. Since the

satellite sunlight data used in Study II overlaps the time period of the ATUS (i.e. 2003-

2009) and is granular to the day level, we can investigate whether individuals spend

relatively more time on outdoor activities on relatively sunnier day.




27
  If individuals still spend the same amount of time outside, and there is more sunlight during the hours
they are outside, they would still be getting more vitamin D. Hence, even obtaining no effects of increased
sunlight on time outside may not discredit our first stage.


                                                                                                          31
         Table A.3 shows the results from the regression of the total number of minutes

spend on outdoor activities28 on the log of average sunlight intensity on the reference day.



Table A.3. Time spent outdoors.


                              (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)
Dependent variable:      Time spent on          Time spent on         Time spent on         Time spent on
                        outdoor activities     outdoor activities    outdoor activities    outdoor activities


Log Average                  4.3997***              4.3670***             2.0065***             2.0513***
Sunlight Intensity          (0.03582)              (0.03550)             (0.03874)             (0.03769)
for Reference Day

Reference Day of                                       x                     x                      x
the Week Fixed
Effect
Year and State-Day-                                                          x                      x
of-Year Fixed
Effects
Demographic                                                                                         x
controls

         N                    98,558                98,558                98,558                 98,558
         R2                   0.0040                0.0063                0.2451                 0.2537

Notes: Regression output of time spent on outdoor activities on average sunlight for the
population-weighted state centroid on the reference day. The results indicate that greater
sunlight results in more time spent outdoors (p<10-6 for all). All regressions are done with
robust standard errors clustered at the state level.


         Column (2) adds fixed effects for the days of the week (e.g., Saturday), since

individuals generally have more time for leisure on the weekends. Column (3), analogous

to the main results above, adds day of year – state fixed effects (e.g. July 9 in Kansas) to

control for time invariant local tastes and cultures. Finally, Column (4) adds demographic


28
  Activities that are coded as “outdoor” include playing baseball, biking, boating, climbing, spelunking,
caving, participating in equestrian sports, fishing, playing football, golfing, hiking, playing hockey,
hunting, playing racquet sports, participating in rodeo competitions, rollerblading, playing rugby, running,
skiing, ice skating, snowboarding, playing soccer, softball, playing volleyball, walking, and participating in
water sports.


                                                                                                            32
controls. The coefficient in Column (4) can be interpreted as follows. A sunny day might

have three times the average sunlight intensity from a cloudy day, or a one log-point

increase. Across the population, the average effect is to spend 2 more minutes on

outdoor activities. But given that 90% of the population spends 0 minutes on outdoor

activities, the size of the effect on those who spend time outdoors could be scaled up to

approximately 20 minutes, which is a more plausible intensive margin. This shows that

individuals are reacting to increased sunlight by spending more time outdoors, suggesting

that the first stage of our identification strategy is sound.29




29
  A Tobit regression, which accounts for the censored individuals (i.e. those who spend no time outside),
confirms this back-of-the-envelope calculation and returns a coefficient (using outdoor time and sunlight
intensity demeaned at the day-state level) of 22.6*** (3.05), which is approximately 10 times (i.e. 1/(1-
90%)) the 2.05 coefficient in Column (4).


                                                                                                        33
5. Sunlight and Smoking, Pollution


In this section, we explore whether our variation in sunlight might actually be picking up

two factors other than vitamin D which may be affecting asthma rates.



Smoking: One could imagine various stories by which the variation in sunlight we are

exploiting correlates with smoking rates. For example, since a sunny day can reduce

stress and gives many individuals more options for leisure and amusement, one might

expect it to reduce smoking rates. On the other hand, individuals now mostly smoke

outdoors (as opposed to in their workplaces or homes), and so a less sunny day could

result in reduced smoking. If we believe smoking could impact fetal lung development

and therefore asthma rates, then our observed sunlight coefficient may just be picking up

an effect from smoking behavior.

         The ATUS, used above, also asked about the number of minutes per day spent

smoking.30 This variable can be used to test the relative impact of sunlight on smoking,

using the same econometric framework as above. Table A.4 shows the results of this

analysis.




30
  The ATUS has a single code for “Tobacco and drug use.” We are assuming here that since tobacco use
rates are much higher than drug use rates and that smoking is still the primary method of tobacco use this
variable can safety used to represent time spent smoking.


                                                                                                         34
Table A.4. Study II, Smoking results.

                               (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)
Dependent variable:       Time spent on          Time spent on         Time spent on         Time spent on
                            smoking                smoking               smoking               smoking


Log Average                  -0.04423              -0.04390               -0.05950              -0.05889
Sunlight Intensity           (0.04540)             (0.04567)              (0.08338)             (0.08253)
for Reference Day

Reference Day of                                       x                      x                     x
the Week Fixed
Effect
Year and State-Day-                                                           x                     x
of-Year Fixed
Effects
Demographic                                                                                         x
controls

         N                    98,558                98,558                 98,558                98,558
         R2                   0.0000                0.0006                 0.4061                0.4073

Notes: Regression output of time spent on smoking and drug use on average sunlight for
the population-weighted state centroid on the reference day. The results indicate no
relationship between greater sunlight and time spent on smoking / drug use (p>0.1 for
all). All regressions are done with robust standard errors clustered at the state level.



         The coefficients are extremely small in magnitude and are statistically

insignificant. A one log-point increase would increase the mean amount of time spent

smoking by only a few seconds, which is even less than one cigarette. With the standard

errors in Column (4), we can rule out at the 5% level any effect bigger than 13 fewer

seconds ((-0.05 -0.08*2)*60) or 6 more seconds spent smoking on an unusually sunny

day.31


31
  One might be concerned that the linear model used here is mis-specified, since the vast majority of
individuals in the sample (98.5%) spend 0 minutes on tobacco or drug use. Using a Tobit regression (as
above) of using smoking time on sunlight intensity, both demeaned at the day-state level, gives a
coefficient of -1.78 (1.67). While this is larger in magnitude, is it is still far from being statistically
significant.


                                                                                                              35
Pollution: One may be also be concerned about a potential correlation between sunlight

and pollution levels. The study cited in the main text specifically refers to carbon

monoxide (CO), which in a separate literature has consistently been shown to be a

pollutant with adverse effects on child health (Neidell 2004; Currie, Neidell, and

Schmieder, 2009; Schlenker, Walker 2011).

        To show that our results are robust to this potential issue, we apply the regression

framework of Study II to pollution data,32 and also to a combined regression that

incorporates both pollution and sunlight data. The analysis below uses measured CO

level (in parts per million), averaged over each calendar month and year. As with the

satellite sunlight data, each county is matched with the pollution monitor that is the

closest to its population weighted centroid.

        The log of a three month moving average level of CO is somewhat negatively

correlated with sunlight (-0.2). This adds plausibility to the concern described above,

since higher in utero sunlight levels, which should reduce asthma rates, would be

coincident with lower in utero CO levels, which could also reduce asthma rates.

        In Table A.5, Column (1) repeats that main results for Study II from above for

comparison. Column (2) replaces the log of average sunlight in each trimester with the

log of the average CO level in each trimester. Finally, Column (3) includes both sets of

independent variables to see how much CO levels reduce the magnitude and significance

of this paper’s main finding.


32
  Daily pollution data from the EPA is publically available at
http://aqsdr1.epa.gov/aqsweb/aqstmp/airdata/download_files.html (see Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder,
2009 and Sanders, 2012)



                                                                                                       36
Table A.5. Study II, Carbon Monoxide results.


                                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)
      Dependent variable:         Asthma               Asthma               Asthma

     Log of Average               0.0114                                     0.0118
     Sunlight intensity 3rd      (0.0244)                                   (0.0241)
     Trimester

     Log Average Sunlight        -0.0319***                                -0.0287***
     intensity 2nd               (0.0098)                                  (0.0092)
     Trimester

     Log Average Sunlight         0.0205                                     0.0254
     intensity 1st Trimester     (0.0197)                                   (0.0174)

     Log Average CO level                               0.0092               0.0094
     3rd Trimester                                     (0.0090)             (0.0088)

     Log Average CO level                              -0.0010              -0.0005
     2nd Trimester                                     (0.0072)             (0.0072)

     Log Average CO level                               0.0056               0.0051
     1st Trimester                                     (0.0067)             (0.0067)

     County of                       x                    x                    x
     Birth*Month of Birth
     Fixed Effects
     Year of Birth Fixed             x                    x                    x
     Effects

           Birth years          1999-2009             1999-2009            1999-2009
                N                 3,036                 3,036                3,036
               R2                 0.7624                0.7628               0.7633



Notes: Here we repeat the analysis done earlier for Study II. Column (1) contains the
same main result as above. Column (2) repeats above analysis using instead the log of
the average CO level. Column (3) runs a “horse race” including both sets of independent
variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level. The p-value for the
second trimester sunlight coefficient in Column (3) is 0.005, versus 0.004 in Column (1).

.
       Column (3) shows the results of including both in utero CO level and sunlight

levels. The second trimester sunlight result is still extremely statistically significant, but

is now about 10% smaller in magnitude. While this is consistent with a hypothesis that in

utero CO levels do have an effect on asthma, and that this effect is somewhat correlated


                                                                                           37
with the effect of sunlight, it does not diminish the robustness of the main result of this

paper. The effect of sunlight is not simply proxying for effects of pollution, but rather

represents its own substantial result.




                                                                                        38
6. Robustness checks



In this section, we detail several robustness checks mentioned in the main text. First, we

re-run our analysis for both studies with a linear independent variable instead of a log

transformed one. Second, for both studies, we first add an additional pregnancy’s worth

of trimesters prior to conception to our regression to confirm that sunlight in those

periods does not relate to asthma incidence. Third, we then add another pregnancy’s

worth of trimesters post-birth to confirm that those as well are not related to our

dependent variable of interest. The second trimester variable retains its significance in all

of these regressions in both datasets.



Finally, for Study I we repeat our analysis using two dummy variables which we do not

hypothesize are related to sunshine exposure (i.e., low birth weight, defined as weighing

less than 5.5 pounds at birth, and whether or not someone’s father graduated high school)

to show that we find no evidence that sunlight has an effect on these outcomes. We note

that the NHIS unfortunately had fewer data points on these last two measurements, but

we chose them since other NHIS variables describe post-birth characteristics which may

be endogenous. Data limitations prevent us from looking at these two variables for Study

II, so instead we use the share of white and share of males in each birth month-year-

county cohort as dependent variables. We find no evidence that sunlight has an effect on

these outcomes.




                                                                                          39
Table A.6. Regression output from linear specification, Study I

                                             (1)                      (2)
               Dependent variable:         Asthma                   Asthma

             Independent variable is:        Log                     Linear


             Log Hours of Sun              0.00140                 0.0000088
             3rd Trimester                (0.00711)               (0.00001104)

             Log Hours of Sun             -0.01653***              -0.0000238**
             2nd Trimester                (0.00596)               (0.00000927)

             Log Hours of Sun              0.00360                 0.0000014
             1st Trimester                (0.00717)               (0.00001131)

             State of Birth*Month of          x                        x
             Birth Fixed Effects
             Year of Birth Fixed              x                        x
             Effects
             Race controls                    x                        x
             Gender                           x                        x
                         N                 264,533                  264,533
                         R2                0.01073                  0.01073

Notes: Column (1) contains the main analysis from Study I, whereas Column (2) repeats
the analysis with linear sunlight terms instead of log transformed ones (for the second
trimester terms, p= 0.0079 and 0.0133, respectively). Robust standard errors clustered at
the state level.




                                                                                       40
Table A.7. Regression output from linear specification, Study II


                                           (1)                       (2)
             Dependent variable:         Asthma                    Asthma

            Independent variable is        Log                     Linear

           Average Sunlight               0.0114               0.0000765
           intensity 3rd Trimester       (0.0244)              (0.000116)

           Average Sunlight              -0.0319***            -0.000180***
           intensity 2nd Trimester       (0.0098)             (0.0000549)

           Average Sunlight               0.0205               0.0000991
           intensity 1st Trimester       (0.0197)             (0.0000962)

           County of Birth*Month            x                        x
           of Birth Fixed Effects
           Year of Birth Fixed              x                        x
           Effects

                  Birth years           1999-2009              1999-2009
                       N                  3,036                  3,036
                      R2                  0.7624                 0.7624



Notes: Column (1) contains the main analysis from Study II, whereas Column (2) repeats
the analysis with linear sunlight terms instead of log transformed ones. The second
trimester variable is highly significant in both, with p=0.004 and 0.004, respectively.
Robust standard errors clustered at the county level.




                                                                                    41
Table A.8. Regression output from robustness checks, Study I.

                                    (1)                  (2)                 (3)                   (4)
      Dependent variable:         Asthma               Asthma          Low Birth Weight        Dad HS Grad

 Log Hours of Sun                 0.00140              0.00190             -0.00020              0.01302
 3rd Trimester                   (0.00684)            (0.00684)            (0.03254)            (0.03217)

 Log Hours of Sun                -0.01676***         -0.016434**            0.00618              0.03763
 2nd Trimester                   (0.00612)           (0.00631)             (0.02509)            (0.03993)

 Log Hours of Sun                 0.00336              0.00482             -0.01258              0.03136
 1st Trimester                   (0.00736)            (0.00737)            (0.02854)            (0.04427)

 Log Hours of Sun                 0.001289             0.00281
 1st Trimester, Pre-conception   (0.00656)            (0.00638)

 Log Hours of Sun                -0.000556             -0.00007
 2nd Trimester, Pre-conception   (0.00659)            (0.00656)

 Log Hours of Sun                 0.00147              0.00196
 3rd Trimester, Pre-conception   (0.00658)            (0.00666)

 Log Hours of Sun                                     -0.00650
 1st Trimester, Post-birth                            (0.00547)

 Log Hours of Sun                                     -0.00887
 2nd Trimester, Post-birth                            (0.00814)

 Log Hours of Sun                                      0.00160
 3rd Trimester, Post-birth                            (0.00716)

 State of Birth*Month of Birth       x                   x                     x                    x
 Fixed Effects
 Year of Birth Fixed Effects         x                   x                     x                    x
 Race Controls                       x                   x                     x                    x
 Gender                              x                   x                     x                    x
               N                  264,394             264,252               18,787                19,646
               R2                 0.0108              0.0108                0.0416                0.0512

Notes: Regression output from robustness checks. Here we provide evidence that the sunlight
specifically during the late pseudoglandular and canalicular stages is important by showing that the
sunlight levels both before and after the pregnancy are insignificant, while our main coefficient of
interest retains its significance (p=0.0086, 0.0121). We also repeat our analysis on low birth weight
and whether or not the individual’s father was a high school graduate, variables which are not
hypothesized to be related to vitamin D in utero to verify that we see no effect. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                                  42
Table A.9. Regression output from robustness checks, Study II.
                               (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)
    Dependent variable:      Asthma           Asthma         Asthma       Share of births   Share of births   Share of births   Share of births
                                                                              male              male               white            white
 Log Average Sunlight        -0.00902        -0.00389        0.00258        -0.00125          -0.00203           -0.00837         -0.00459
 intensity 3rd Trimester     (0.02607)       (0.02645)      (0.02809)       (0.0119)          (0.0207)          (0.0.0136)        (0.0198)

 Log Average Sunlight       -0.04995***      -0.04830***    -0.04102***      -0.0264*          -0.0171           -0.0127           -0.0151
 intensity 2nd Trimester    (0.01249)        (0.01265)      (0.01451)        (0.0131)          (0.0149)         (0.00901)         (0.00147)

 Log Average Sunlight        0.00332          -0.00452       0.00094         0.00338           0.00738            -0.0237           -0.0149
 intensity 1st Trimester    (0.01942)        (0.02131)      (0.02115)        (0.0112)          (0.0146)          (0.0124)          (0.0175)

 Log Average Sunlight                         0.01989        0.02319
 intensity 1st Trimester,                    (0.02259)      (0.02374)
 Pre-conception

 Log Average Sunlight                         0.00137        0.01002
 intensity 2nd Trimester,                    (0.02064)      (0.00252)
 Pre-conception

 Log Average Sunlight                        -0.02983        -0.02067
 intensity 3rd Trimester,                    (0.02349)      (0.02473)
 Pre-conception

 Log Average Sunlight                                        0.03150
 intensity 1st Trimester,                                   (0.02285)
 Post-birth

 Log Average Sunlight                                        0.01637
 intensity 2nd Trimester,                                   (0.01518)
 Post-birth

 Log Average Sunlight                                        0.00974
 intensity 3rd Trimester,                                   (0.01721)
 Post-birth

 Birth Years                2000-2008       2000-2008       2000-2008       1999-2009        1999-2004         1999-2009         1999-2004
 County of Birth*Month of       x                x                 x            x                 x                 x                 x
 Birth Fixed Effects
 Year of Birth Fixed            x                x                 x            x                 x                 x                 x
 Effects
             N               2,484            2,484              2,484        3,036             1,656             3,036             1,656
             R2              0.7718           0.7723             0.7727       0.1061            0.1804            0.9702            0.9751
                                                                                                                                                  43
Notes: Here, we repeat the analysis done earlier for Study II. Whereas our
results in the main text included individuals born in 1999-2009, in order to
trace out additional sunlight data, we must restrict our sample to births in
2000-2008 here. Hence, the first column repeats the original analysis on this
smaller sample. In all of the asthma regressions, the second trimester variable
retains its significance, with p=0.001, 0.001, and 0.010, respectively. For
placebo regressions from this dataset, we run on the share of male and white
births in each birth month-county-year cohort (Columns 4-7). None of the
coefficients are significant at the 5% level, with p=0.055, 0.264, 0.171, and
0.316 respectively. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level.




                                                                                  44
References:

Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. "Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis." The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (2011), 153-172.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Mårten Palme. "Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy:
Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 124(4) (2009), 1729-1772.

Barnett, Sarah Beth L., and Tursynbek A. Nurmagambetov. "Costs of asthma in the
United States: 2002-2007." Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 127(1) (2011),
145-152.

Belderbos, Mirjam E., et al. "Cord blood vitamin D deficiency is associated with
respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis." Pediatrics, 127(6) (2011): e1513-e1520.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Vellesen Løken, and Christopher Neilson. "Early life health
interventions and academic achievement." American Economic Review, 103(5) (2013),
1862-1891.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. "From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(1) (2007), 409-439.

Bleakley, Hoyt. "Disease and development: evidence from hookworm eradication in the
American South." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1) (2007), 73-117.

Bodnar, Lisa M., et al. "High prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency in black and white
pregnant women residing in the northern United States and their neonates." Journal of
Nutrition, 137(2) (2007), 447-452.

Bossé, Yohan, Karim Maghni, and Thomas J. Hudson. "1α, 25-Dihydroxy-vitamin D3
stimulation of bronchial smooth muscle cells induces autocrine, contractility, and
remodeling processes." Physiological Genomics, 29(2) (2007), 161-168.

Bound, John, and David A. Jaeger. "Do compulsory school attendance laws alone explain
the association between quarter of birth and earnings?" Research in Labor Economics, 19
(2001), 83-108.

Brun, P., et al. "Vitamin D-dependent calcium-binding proteins (CaBPs) in human
fetuses: comparative distribution of 9K CaBP mRNA and 28K CaBP during
development." Pediatric Research, 21(4) (1987), 362-367.

Buckles, Kasey S., and Daniel M. Hungerman. "Season of birth and later outcomes: Old
questions, new answers." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3) (2013), 711-724.




                                                                                         45
Burri, Peter H. "Fetal and postnatal development of the lung." Annual Review of
Physiology, 46(1) (1984), 617-628.

Camargo, Carlos A., et al. "Maternal intake of vitamin D during pregnancy and risk of
recurrent wheeze in children at 3 y of age." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 85(3)
(2007), 788-795.

Castro, Mario, et al. “Effect of Vitamin D3 on Asthma Treatment Failures in Adults With
Symptomatic Asthma and Lower Vitamin D Levels The VIDA Randomized Clinical
Trial.” Journal of the American Medical Association 311(20) (2014), 2083-2091

Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan Skinner. “Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth
in Health Care.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3) (2012), 645–680

Chen, Tai C. "Photobiology of vitamin D." In Vitamin D Ed. MF Holick. Humana press
(1999) 17-37.

Cruz, Alvaro A., et al. Global surveillance, prevention and control of chronic
respiratory diseases: a comprehensive approach. Eds. Jean Bousquet, and N. G.
Khaltaev. (Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007).

Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. "Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We
Learn from California's Recent Experience?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3)
(2005), 1003-1030.

Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes F. Schmieder. "Air pollution and infant
health: Lessons from New Jersey." Journal of Health Economics 28(3) (2009), 688-703.

Currie, Janet, and Hannes Schwandt. "Within-mother analysis of seasonal patterns in
health at birth." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(30) (2013),
12265-12270.

Devereux, Graham, et al. "Maternal vitamin D intake during pregnancy and early
childhood wheezing." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 85(3) (2007), 853-859.

Disanto, Giulio, et al. “Month of Birth and Thymic Output.” Journal of the American
Medical Association, Neurology, 10(4) (2013), 527-528.

Erkkola, M., et al. "Maternal vitamin D intake during pregnancy is inversely associated
with asthma and allergic rhinitis in 5‐year‐old children." Clinical & Experimental Allergy,
39(6) (2009), 875-882.

Fletcher, Jason M., Jeremy C. Green, and Matthew J. Neidell. "Long term effects of
childhood asthma on adult health." Journal of Health Economics, 29(3) (2010), 377-387.

Gale, Catharine R., et al. "Maternal vitamin D status during pregnancy and child
outcomes." European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 62(1) (2007), 68-77.


                                                                                        46
Gaultier, C., et al. "Lung mechanics in rachitic rats." American Review of Respiratory
Disease, 130(6) (1984), 1108-1110.

Gilliland, Frank D., Yu-Fen Li, and John M. Peters. "Effects of maternal smoking during
pregnancy and environmental tobacco smoke on asthma and wheezing in children."
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 163(2) (2001), 429-436.

Ginde, Adit A., Mark C. Liu, and Carlos A. Camargo. "Demographic differences and
trends of vitamin D insufficiency in the US population, 1988-2004." Archives of Internal
Medicine, 169(6) (2009), 626-632.

Glasgow, J. F., and P. S. Thomas. "Rachitic respiratory distress in small preterm infants."
Archives of Disease in Childhood, 52(4) (1977), 268-273.

Heaney, Robert P., et al. "Human serum 25-hydroxycholecalciferol response to extended
oral dosing with cholecalciferol." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 77(1) (2003),
204-210.

Heckman, James J. "Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged
children." Science 312,5782 (2006), 1900-1902.

------, "The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability formation."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33) (2007): 13250-13255.

Holick, Michael F. "Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention of
autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease." The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 80(6) (2004), 1678S-1688S.

------, "Vitamin D deficiency." New England Journal of Medicine, 357(3) (2007), 266-
281.

Holick, Michael F., and Michele Garabedian. "Vitamin D: photobiology, metabolism,
mechanism of action, and clinical applications." Primer on the metabolic bone diseases
and disorders of mineral metabolism. 6th ed. Washington, DC: American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research, (2006), 106-14..

Holmes, Valerie A., et al. "Vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency in pregnant women: a
longitudinal study." British Journal of Nutrition, 102(06) (2009), 876-881.

Jensen, Robert. "Agricultural volatility and investments in children." American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, (2000), 399-404.

Johnson, Donna D., et al. "Vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency is common during
pregnancy." American Journal of Perinatology, 28(01) (2011), 007-012.




                                                                                         47
Kassowitz, M."Tetanie and autointoxication in kindersalter." Wien Med Presse, 38(97)
(1897), 139-141.

Kho, Alvin T., et al. "Vitamin D related genes in lung development and asthma
pathogenesis." BMC Medical Genomics, 6(1) (2013), 47.

Lunghi, Barbara, et al. "1, 25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits proliferation of IMR-90
human fibroblasts and stimulates pyruvate kinase activity in confluent-phase cells."
Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, 115(2) (1995), 141-148.

Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang. "Under the weather: Health, schooling, and economic
consequences of early-life rainfall." American Economic Review, (2009), 1006-1026.

Milet, M., et al. "The Burden of Asthma in California: A Surveillance Report."
Richmond, CA: California Department of Health Services, Environmental Health
Investigations Branch (2007).

Miyake, Y., et al. "Dairy food, calcium and vitamin D intake in pregnancy, and wheeze
and eczema in infants." European Respiratory Journal, 35(6) (2010), 1228-1234.

Mortimer, Kathleen, et al. "Air pollution and pulmonary function in asthmatic children:
effects of prenatal and lifetime exposures." Epidemiology, 19(4) (2008), 550-557.

National Center for Environmental Health, www.cdc.gov/Asthma/nhis/default.htm; last
updated 6 March, 2014; accessed 10 August, 2014.

Neidell, Matthew J. "Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of
outdoor air quality on childhood asthma." Journal of Health Economics, 23(6) (2004),
1209-1236.

Oster, Emily. "Witchcraft, weather and economic growth in renaissance Europe." Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18(1) (2004), 215-228.

Perez, R.; Ineichen, P.; Moore, K.; Kmiecikm, M.; Chain, C.; George, R.; and Vignola, F.
“A New Operational Satellite-to-Irradiance Model.” Solar Energy, 73(5) (2002):307–317.

Phokela, Sarabjit S., et al. "Regulation of human pulmonary surfactant protein gene
expression by 1α, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3." American Journal of Physiology-Lung
Cellular and Molecular Physiology, 289(4) (2005), L617-L626.

Sanders, Nicholas J. "What doesn’t kill you makes you weaker prenatal pollution
exposure and educational outcomes." Journal of Human Resources, 47(3) (2012): 826-
850.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and W. Reed Walker. Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous
health. NBER Working Paper No. w17684, 2011.



                                                                                          48
Stick, Stephen M., et al. "Effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy and a family
history of asthma on respiratory function in newborn infants." The Lancet, 348,9034
(1996), 1060-1064.

Stio, M., et al. "Vitamin D receptor in IMR‐90 human fibroblasts and antiproliferative
effect of 1, 25‐dihydroxyvitamin D3." IUBMB Life, 43(6) (1997), 1173-1181.

Vieth, R., et al. “Wintertime vitamin D insufficiency is common in young Canadian
women, and their vitamin D intake does not prevent it.” European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition. 55: 1091-1097.

Weiss, Scott T., and Augusto A. Litonjua. "The in utero effects of maternal vitamin D
deficiency: how it results in asthma and other chronic diseases." American Journal of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 183(10) (2011), 1286-1287.




                                                                                         49
