NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CLIMATE AND CONFLICT
Marshall Burke
Solomon M. Hsiang
Edward Miguel
Working Paper 20598
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20598
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics, Doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115430.
We thank Tamma Carleton for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marshall Burke, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Climate and Conflict
Marshall Burke, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel
NBER Working Paper No. 20598
October 2014
JEL No. I3,O1,P48,Q51,Q54
ABSTRACT
Until recently, neither climate nor conflict have been core areas of inquiry within economics, but there
has been an explosion of research on both topics in the past decade, with a particularly large bodyof
research emerging at their intersection. In this review, we survey this literature on the interlinkages
between climate and conflict, by necessity drawing from both economics and other disciplines given
the inherent interdisciplinarity of research in this field. We consider many types of human conflict
in the review, including both interpersonal conflict — such as domestic violence, road rage, assault,
murder, and rape — and intergroup conflict — including riots, ethnic violence, land invasions,
gangviolence, civil war and other forms of political instability, such as coups. We discuss the key
methodologicalissues in estimating causal relationships in this area, and largely focus on "natural
experiments" thatexploit variation in climate variables over time, helping to address omitted variable
bias concerns.After harmonizing statistical specifications and standardizing estimated effect sizes
within each conflictcategory, we carry out a hierarchical meta-analysis that allows us to estimate
the mean effect of climatevariation on conflict outcomes as well as to quantify the degree of variability
in this effect size acrossstudies. Looking across 55 studies, we find that deviations from moderate
temperatures and precipitationpatterns systematically increase the risk of conflict, often substantially,
with average effects that are highly statistically significant. We find that contemporaneous temperature
has the largest average effect by far, with each 1σ increase toward warmer temperatures increasing
the frequency of contemporaneous interpersonal conflict by 2.4% and of intergroup conflict by 11.3%,
but that the 2-period cumulative effect of rainfall on intergroup conflict is also substantial (3.5%/σ).
We also quantify heterogeneity in these effect estimates across settings that is likely important. We
conclude by highlighting remaining challenges in this field and the approaches we expect will be most
effective at solving them, including identifying mechanisms that link climate to conflict, measuring
the ability of societies to adapt to climate changes, and understanding the likely impacts of future
global warming.
Marshall Burke
Center on Food Security and Environment
Stanford University
Stanford CA 94305
mburke@stanford.edu
Solomon M. Hsiang
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
shsiang@berkeley.edu

Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

The goal of this article is to survey and synthesize the rapidly expanding econometric literature
that studies the links between climate and conflict. Until the past decade, neither climate nor
conflict have been core areas of inquiry within economics as a whole, and the same holds even
for development economics, where their study is arguably most natural. As recently as 2007,
when one of the authors carried out a survey of sixty-three development economics course syllabi
(at both the undergraduate and graduate levels) in leading U.S. universities, only a handful of
courses mentioned either conflict or climate, and leading development economics textbooks did
not contain these words in their subject index.1 However, both of these topics have moved
center stage over the past decade and are now widely taught and researched within economics
and throughout the broader social science research community. This shift is at least partly
a result of greater popular awareness of the critical role that climate might play in driving
economic outcomes, and in particular rising public concern about climate change. Similarly,
the violent aftermath of the Arab Spring revolutions, and the broader fact that conflict remains
widespread in most low and middle income regions, have made it clear to many observers that
economic development, political change and violent conflict are inextricably linked, and that
armed conflict is not going away any time soon.
In this paper, we focus on over 50 quantitative papers that examine the link between climate and conflict using modern econometric methods that make credible attempts to draw
causal inferences from data. Illustrating just how new research interest on these topics is within
economics, the median year of publication among the studies we consider is 2012. While the
quantitative literature on this topic is very recent, researchers working in other disciplines —
including archaeology, criminology, geography, history, political science, and psychology — have
long debated the extent to which climatic changes are responsible for conflict, violence or political instability (see for example, Huntington (1917); Levy (1995); Homer-Dixon (1999); Anderson
et al. (2000); Davis (2001); DeMenocal (2001); Kuper and Kröpelin (2006); Grove (2007); Scheffran et al. (2012); Gleditsch (2012)), and historians have connected prolonged periods of extreme
climate with the collapse of major human civilizations (see Buckley et al. (2010); Cullen et al.
(2000); Diamond (2005); Fagan (2000); Haug et al. (2003); Yancheva et al. (2007)). Numerous
pathways linking the climate to these outcomes have been proposed. For example, climatic
changes may alter the supply of natural resources and lead to disagreement over their allocation, or climatic conditions may shape the relative appeal of using violence versus cooperation
to achieve an objective. Now, improvements in data availability, computing, and statistical
methods have prompted an explosion of quantitative analyses seeking to test these theories and
quantify the strength of these previously proposed linkages. A central goal of this piece is to
make sense of this diverse and growing body of literature, and to chart a productive path forward
for future research.
In this article, we use the terms climate and conflict and to describe broad classes of variables,
and it is worth clarifying our use of these key terms up front.
1 See

Blattman and Miguel (2010) for details on the survey.

2

Climate We use climate to refer to observations of climatic variables: temperature, rainfall,
and water availability, as well as climate indices that proxy for these measures, such the El
Niño-Southern Oscillation index or the Palmer Drought Severity Index. These variables may be
averaged over longer or shorter observational periods. Some authors argue that short averaging
periods (e.g., annual) only describe the “weather” or “climate variability” and thus have little to
say about the impact of “climate.” We do not agree with this view. Societies experience climatic
variables in continuous time and respond to both short-lived and long-term changes, making the
frequency of short-lived events an economically-relevant feature of the climate. For example, if
hot temperatures increase the likelihood of riots in a city – even if hot temperatures are only
experienced for a few hours – then this is important for understanding climate impacts because
the frequency of these momentary events may change if the distribution of daily temperatures
changes.
Conflict We use the term conflict to describe events where regular patterns of dispute resolution fail. These events are usually violent in nature (although they need not be in all cases),
they may involve individuals or groups, they may be organized or disorganized, and they may
be personally, politically or otherwise motivated. While most existing empirical studies examine only one type of conflict at a time, in this review we examine this comprehensive set of
outcomes because different types of conflict are potentially related and that their responses to
climate might exhibit some commonalities. Our hope is that evaluating these phenomena together might help us better understand each individually.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Secton 2 presents the existing evidence linking
climate to conflict, and is the core of the paper. We begin the section by discussing the key
methodological issues in estimating causal relationships in this area, and then survey the existing
evidence across different types of conflict with particular attention to those studies capable of
making credible causal claims. After collecting and standardizing estimated effect sizes across
papers, we carry out a hierarchical Bayesian meta-analysis that both allows us to estimate the
mean effect of climate variation on conflict outcomes and also quantifies the degree of variability
in this effect size across studies. Section 3 lays out the leading theoretical mechanisms linking
extreme conflict to conflict — including both economic theories and non-economic explanations,
such as those from psychology — evaluates the limited body of empirical evidence regarding
the importance of these channels and recommends methods for identifying causal pathways in
future work. Section 4 discusses remaining challenges in this field, including data limitations,
the challenge of understanding whether societies effectively adapt to climatic conditions, and
the need to better understand the likely impacts of future global climate change. Section 5
concludes.

3

2

Evidence linking climate to conflict

Climatic conditions never cause conflict alone, but changes in climate can alter the conditions
under which certain social interactions occur and thus have the potential to change the likelihood
that conflict results. The situation is similar to the rise in car accident rates during rainy days.
Car accidents themselves are almost always due to some form of driver or mechanical error;
however, heavy rainfall may increase the probability of a critical error or the risk that a small
error has cascading effects that in turn generate a crash (perhaps the car begins to fishtail, setting
off a multi-car accident). Without the possibility of driver or mechanical errors, rainfall would
have no effect on car accident rates, but without rainfall, there would still be some accidents.
Similarly, climatic conditions are neither necessary nor sufficient for conflicts to occur, but
changes in climatic conditions could have measurable impact on the probability and intensity of
conflict, holding other conflict-related factors fixed. The central empirical challenge addressed
by the literature to date has been to quantify this effect.

2.1

The Empirical Problem

In an ideal experiment, we would observe two identical populations or societies, change the
climate of one, and observe whether this “treatment” leads to more or less conflict relative to the
“control” conditions. Because the climate cannot (yet) be experimentally manipulated, research
has relied on natural experiments where plausibly exogenous variation in climatic variables
generates changes in conflict risk that can be measured by an econometrician. The central
challenge in this context is to identify plausibly homogenous populations, only some of which are
naturally treated with a climatic event, that one can reasonably believe would behave similarly
had neither been subject to a climate treatment (Freedman (1991); Holland (1986)).
2.1.1

Cross-sectional approaches

One approach to the above problem would be to assume that populations or societies inhabiting
different locations are identical to one another in all respects except their climate, usually after
regression adjustment for observable economic, social and political correlates of conflict. For
example, Buhaug (2010a) compares the rate of civil war across different countries in Africa. It
seems implausible that the conditions needed for causal inference are met in this setting: there
are many ways in which populations and societies differ from one another (i.e., culture, history,
etc.), many of them unobserved or hard to measure, so we cannot infer whether a climatic
“treatment” has a causal effect or not (Angrist and Pischke (2008); Wooldridge (2002)). In the
above example, the cross-sectional analysis by Buhaug (2010a) compares average rates of civil
conflict in South Africa and Nigeria (among many comparisons), attributing observed differences
to the different climates of these countries – despite the fact that there are many other relevant
ways in which these countries differ. Hsiang and Meng (2014) revisit this example and explicitly
test the assumption that no important omitted variables are missing from the analysis. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, they strongly reject the assumption that baseline conflict rates in these countries
are comparable, suggesting that they are unlikely to be valid counterfactuals for one another.

4

We take the critique by Hsiang and Meng (2014) seriously and argue that in general, the handful
of covariates such as national per capita income or political indices that are commonly used in
cross-sectional regression analyses are insufficient to credibly account for the numerous ways in
which populations and societies differ from one another. Because the full suite of determinants
of conflict are unknown and unmeasured, it is likely impossible that any cross-sectional study
can explicitly account for all important differences. For this reason, we do not draw causal
inferences on the relationship between climate and conflict from cross-sectional analyses in this
article, and instead rely on panel data approaches.
2.1.2

Identification in time series

Rather than presuming that all confounders are accounted for in a cross-sectional regression,
the bulk of recent studies estimate the effect of climate on conflict by using time-series variation
for identification, usually in a panel data context. In this research design, a single population
serves as both the “control” population – e.g. just before a change in climatic conditions– and
the “treatment” population – e.g. just after a change in climatic conditions. Inferences are
thus based on how a fixed population responds to different climatic conditions which vary over
time. Here the assumptions necessary for causal inference are more likely to be met, since the
structure, history and geography of comparison populations are nearly identical. Therefore, we
follow Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013a) and restrict our attention in this review on studies
that use variation over time in a given location to study the climate/conflict relationship.
As pointed out by Hsiang and Burke (2013), the central shortcoming of this approach is
the frequency-identification tradeoff that emerges because populations and societies evolve at a
much faster rate than many low-frequency climatic changes of interest. For example, if we are
interested in the effect of a climate change that takes one hundred years to manifest, then the
“control” and “treatment” populations in our sample must necessarily be roughly one hundred
years apart on average. However, human populations may change dramatically over one hundred
years, violating the assumption that the “control” and “treatment” populations are largely
comparable. This generates a direct tension between our ability to credibly identify causal
effects of climate and our ability to examine slow-moving climatic changes. Stated generally, for
an outcome Yt observed at time t, conditional on contemporaneous climatic conditions Ct , the
estimate for the effect of a change after a time interval ∆t is
β̂ = E[Yt+∆t |Ct+∆t ] − E[Yt |Ct ].

(1)

This estimate approaches the true parameter of interest
β = E[Yt |Ct+∆t ] − E[Yt |Ct ]

(2)

so long as Yt is comparable to Yt+∆t conditional on C (and possibly other covariates). This is
1
the identifying assumption of this research design. However, as the frequency ∆t
of the climatic
variation of interest becomes lower (climate changes become more gradual) ∆t becomes larger
and the assumption that Yt and Yt+∆t are comparable becomes increasingly difficult to justify.
5

This tradeoff between the temporal frequencies over which climate effects can be identified and
those that we may wish to understand is arguably the central drawback of this approach.

2.2

Econometric specification

The time-series or panel analyses that we focus on use versions of the general model:
conf lict variableit = β × climate variableit + µi + θt + it

(3)

where locations are indexed by i, observational periods are indexed by t, β is the parameter
of interest and  is the error. This modern panel data approach was first introduced (to the
best of our knowledge) to the conflict literature by Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004).
If different locations in a sample exhibit different average levels of conflict – because of any
number of cultural, historical, political, economic, geographic or institutional differences between
the locations – this will be accounted for by the location-specific fixed-effects µi . Time fixed
effects θt flexibly account for other time-trending variables such as economic growth or gradual
demographic changes that could be correlated with both climate and conflict. In some cases in
the existing literature, the θt parameters may be replaced by a generic trend (eg. θ̄ × t) which is
possibly nonlinear and is either common to all locations or may be a vector of location-specific
trends (eg. θ̄i × t). In many cases, Eq. 3 also includes in the covariates the climate variable
of interest lagged, as well as possibly controls for “nuisance” climate variables (e.g. rainfall,
if temperature is the variable of interest) that are treated as controls because they may be
correlated with the climate variable of interest (Auffhammer et al. (2013)).
We first present conclusions from the literature as initially presented by authors in their
preferred regression specification. These models may have different structure imposed on their
trends, different climate controls and different lags of climate variables. However, all of them
include location-specific fixed-effects since that is central to the credibility of the result, and is
the methodological selection criteria we employ for inclusion in this review.
These author-preferred results are useful to highlight because individual authors are likely to
have detailed knowledge about the contexts they study, and thus it is reasonable to believe that
they would be more likely to choose an appropriate econometric model based on this insight,
i.e., recognizing which climate variables are most influential or which time controls are most
important. However, differences in authors’ econometric modeling approaches present some
difficulties when comparing results across studies. It is possible that authors selectively focus on
their “strongest” results in terms of coefficient magnitude or statistical significance, introducing
bias. For these reasons, we also present a second set of empirical results where we use a single
standardized specification including both contemporaneous and lagged terms for all available
climate variables. In cases where the authors did not present such a specification in their paper,
we obtain the original data wherever possible and re-analyze the results using this approach or
we contacted authors and received updated analyses from them in line with our specification. In
all, we carried out a re-analysis for 29 studies out of the 56 total studies include in this review.2
2 We

obtained data and performed re-analysis ourselves on 24 studies, and for 5 other studies the authors were

6

2.2.1

Lag structure, displacement, and persistence

In cases where authors present a distributed-lag model or when we re-analyze a dataset, the
general form of the estimation equation is:
conf lict variableit = β0 × climate variableit + β1 × climate variablei,t−1 + µi + θt + it (4)
where β1 is the effect of the prior period’s climate (t − 1) on conflict in the present period (t),
and β0 is the contemporaneous effect. β1 might be nonzero for three reasons. First, climatic
events might induce conflicts to be displaced in time, for instance delaying a conflict that will
eventually occur anyway or accelerating the emergence of a conflict that would have otherwise
occurred in the future. In either case, β0 and β1 would have opposite signs but be equal in
magnitude, and the net effect of climatic event – the sum of β0 and β1 – would be zero. If
there is an increase in the number of contemporaneous conflicts in addition to a displacement of
conflicts forward in time (i.e. partial displacement), then the lagged effect will be negative but
the cumulative effect will remain positive (Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2014)). In the presence
of either full or partial displacement, estimating (3) instead of (4) will overstate the effect of
climate on conflict.
However, it is also possible that climate events could have persistent or delayed effects on
conflict. Suppose that conflicts in rural regions are more likely when agricultural productivity is
low (an oft-cited mechanism, discussed in detail below). Because agricultural growing seasons
are long and often span calendar years, a climatic event early in the growing season might affect
the harvest in the next calendar year, which could result in a zero coefficient on β0 and a nonzero β1 . Similarly, bad shocks can persist: a bad agricultural harvest in one year could lower
the resources available to invest in the next years crop, lowering productivity in that year as
well. In this setting, β0 and β1 would have the same sign.
If any of these dynamics are at play, then estimating (4) and summing contemporaneous and
lagged effects will likely provide a more complete picture of the climate/conflict relationship than
estimating (3) alone. Therefore, when presenting our second set of results using the standardized
statistical model, we compute the cumulative effect of each climate variable by summing the
effect of current and lagged climate conditions. We focus on this cumulative effect because
our primary interest is whether climatic effects cause a net change in conflict rates over time,
but inspection of individual lags also allows us to study whether climate events merely displace
conflict into the future or whether climate events have delayed or persistent effects.
2.2.2

Nonlinear responses

Some studies assume a linear relationship between climatic factors and conflict risk, while others
assume a nonlinear relationship. Taken as a whole, the evidence suggests that over a sufficiently
large range of temperatures and rainfall levels, both temperature and precipitation are likely
to have a nonlinear relationship with conflict. However, this curvature is not apparent in every
study, probably because the range of temperatures or rainfall levels observed within a given
kind enough to perform the re-analysis for us and share the results.

7

sample is limited. Thus, most studies report only linear relationships that should be interpreted
as local linearizations of a possibly curved global response function.
Some historical studies that examine temperate locations during cold epochs find that abrupt
cooling from an already cold baseline temperature may lead to conflict. Yet, as we detail below,
modern studies occurring during the current relatively warm epoch (1950-present) overwhelming
obtain the result that warmer temperatures lead to more conflict. Taken together, this collection
of locally linear relationships suggests a global U-shaped relationship between temperature and
conflict–with most modern societies now on the warm, upward-sloping portion of the response
curve.
In studies of rainfall effects, not all studies use the same parametrization of rainfall as an
explanatory variable, making the determination between linear and non-linear responses more
difficult. In a few cases where a wide range of rainfall levels are observed, such as the study by
Hidalgo et al. (2010) examining the effect of rainfall on land invasions in Brazil, there is a clear
nonlinear effect of rainfall on conflict. In an effort to make findings from these particular studies
comparable to studies with linearized effects (the majority of studies), we follow the approach
of Hidalgo et al. (2010) and use the absolute value of rainfall deviations from the mean as the
independent variable, effectively linearizing the response function to rainfall on both sides of a
U-shaped relationship.
2.2.3

“Bad” control

Some studies expand Equation 3 and Equation 4 to explicitly “control” for potential confounding
factors, such as average national income. For example, Buhaug (2010a) altered the analysis of
a temperature-war association studied in Burke et al. (2009) to include indices for political
exclusion and average income. While well intentioned, this approach may introduce bias in the
coefficients describing the effect of climate on conflict because these controls are endogenously
determined and may themselves be affected by climate variation. This can cause the “signal” in
the climate variable of interest to be inappropriately absorbed by the “control” variable and/or
the estimate to be biased because societies differ in unobserved ways that become artificially
correlated with climate when the “control” variable is included. This approach is commonly
termed “bad control” (Angrist and Pischke (2008)), and is a particular difficulty in this setting
because climatic variables may affect so many of the socioeconomic factors commonly included
as control variables - things like crop production, infant mortality, population (via migration or
mortality), and even political regime type. To the extent that these outcome variables are used
as covariates, studies might draw mistaken conclusions about the relationship between climate
and conflict. A detailed discussion of this issue specific to the climate-conflict context is in
Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013a). In what follows, we modify estimates that rely on this
method by excluding “bad controls” in our re-analysis.
2.2.4

Reduced form estimates vs. instrumental variables approaches

We focus on the reduced form relationship between climatic variables and conflict variables.
Many studies follow the influential early analysis by Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004)
8

where rainfall was used as an instrumental variable for economic growth when examining the
effect of growth on civil conflict. However, with an increasing number of studies showing that
climatic events can affect a variety of socio-economic outcomes (see Dell, Jones, and Olken
(2013) for a review), the key identifying assumption in the instrumental variables approach
– in this case that climate only affects conflict through a particular intermediary variable –
becomes increasingly hard to justify. Climatic events affect many factors that may in turn
affect conflict, such as agricultural income (Schlenker and Lobell (2010)), human health (Burke,
Gong, and Jones (2014)), and residential mobility (Bohra-Mishra, Oppenheimer, and Hsiang
(2014)), among many others. Given these difficulties, we instead focus in this review on the
total effect of climatic events on conflict as described by the reduced form. We interpret the
reduced form as the net effect of climate on conflict operating through numerous potential
channels. Formally, we conceptualize this total effect as
d conf lict variable X ∂ conf lict variable
∂ pathwayi
=
·
d climate variable
∂ pathwayi
∂ climate variable
i

(5)

where pathwayi is some variable characterizing an intermediary mechanism, such as income
or human aggression. We focus on this total effect as a natural starting point because it is a
quantity that can be reliably measured, but we will turn to a discussion of potential mechanisms
and the extent of evidence supporting specific channels in a later section. In our view, identifying
these channels is a central task for future research.

2.3

What we know so far

Econometric studies have examined different conflict outcomes that span the full spectrum of
scales of human organization. For example, Figure 1 displays results from four different studies
that analyze nested spatial scales: Tanzanian villages (Miguel (2005)), 1◦ grid-squares of East
Africa (O’Loughlin et al. (2012)), countries in Sub-Saharan (Burke et al. (2009)), and the global
tropics (Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2011)). The top panels display the nested structure of the
spatial units analyzed, while the corresponding bottom panels display the conditional probability
of conflict at that unit of analysis. These “watercolor regression” plots use the darkness of color
saturation to display the probability that the conditional expectation function passes through a
given point, out to the 95% confidence interval, using a bootstrapped distribution of estimates
(Hsiang (2012)).
At all scales, while there is some commonality in how conflict rates respond to climatic
events, we observe enough systematic differences that we categorize conflicts into two classes
that we subsequently evaluate separately: (1) interpersonal conflict, and (2) intergroup conflict.
Interpersonal conflicts are conflicts between individuals, which includes various acts commonly
described as crime, such as assault, rape and robbery, as well other types of conflict that may
not necessarily be criminal, such as violence in sporting events, road rage and violent acts by
police. Intergroup conflicts are conflicts between collections of individuals, such as organized
political violence, civil conflicts, wars, riots and land invasions.
In earlier work (Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013a)), we described a third class of conflict

9

that we termed “institutional breakdown and population collapse.” These events, such as the
disintegration of Chinese dynasties and the collapse of Icelandic populations, are certainly of
interest to economists; however, most of the quantitative analysis we draw on to understand these
events is undertaken by archeologists, paleoclimatologists and historians who do not analyze
these data in the econometric framework described above. For this reason, we have omitted
these studies from this review, although we do think there are important economic insights to
be gleaned from these studies and we encourage economists to analyze these events in future
research, especially as new panel data become available.
In new work, Gonzalez et al. (2014) describe a fourth class of violent conflict that may also
respond to climatic events: intrapersonal conflict. Using the econometric framework above,
Gonzalez et al. (2014) demonstrate that suicides in Mexico are positively correlated with local
temperature. However, because this is the only study of the subject to employ this econometric
approach (to our knowledge), we do not review this fourth class here either, although we do
discuss this study in the context of other classes of conflicts that it analyzes (including both
interpersonal and intergroup violence). We hope that future work will establish whether a effect
of climate on suicide and other forms of intrapersonal violence is present in other contexts.
2.3.1

Interpersonal conflict

Experimental studies in psychology have long observed that individuals are more likely to behave
violently towards one another if ambient temperatures are higher (Rohles (1967), Kenrick and
Macfarlane (1986), Vrij, der Steen, and Koppelaar (1994)). This behavior might contribute
to results of natural experiments that use versions of Equation 3, where it is generally found
that crimes between individuals—particularly violent crimes such as assault, murder, rape,
and domestic violence—tend to increase at higher temperatures in Australia (Auliciems and
DiBartolo (1995)), India (Blakeslee and Fishman (2014), Iyer and Topalova (2014)), Mexico
(Gonzalez et al. (2014)), the Philippines (Wetherley (2014)), Tanzania (Burke, Hsiang, and
Miguel (2014)), and the United States (Anderson et al. (2000); Anderson, Bushman, and Groom
(1997); Bushman, Wang, and Anderson (2005); Card and Dahl (2011); Cohn and Rotton (1997);
Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti (2007); Mares (2013); Ranson (2014); Rotton and Cohn (2000)).
Table 1 presents a detailed listing of these studies.
Ranson (2014) is among the most detailed of these analyses. Conducted using U.S. data, Ranson separately documents a non-linear effect of temperature on property crime, with property
crimes increasing up until about 70◦ F, and documents a remarkably linear effect of temperature
on violent crimes, such as murder. Remarkably, the effect of temperature on crime in the United
States has remained virtually unchanged since 1960 and is relatively uniform across the country. Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti (2007) document that there is some temporal displacement of
crimes in the United States, with high temperatures elevating crimes in the contemporaneous
week but then lowering crimes in later weeks, although the combined effect is significantly positive. Larrick et al. (2011) document that the probability of violent retaliation in sporting events
increases on hot days and Vrij, der Steen, and Koppelaar (1994) find that police officers are
more likely to draw and fire their weapon at an assailant during a training simulation conducted

10

at hot temperature.
In low-income settings, extreme rainfall events that adversely affect agricultural income (too
much or too little rain) are also associated with higher rates of personal violence and property
crime (Blakeslee and Fishman (2014); Iyer and Topalova (2014); Mehlum, Miguel, and Torvik
(2006); Miguel (2005); Sekhri and Storeygard (2012)). Analysis of U.S. data suggests that
rainfall does not have substantial effects on crime in this primarily non-agricultural economic
setting (Ranson (2014)).
Wetherley (2014) is the only study, to our knowledge, to estimate the effect of climatic
disasters on crime. Wetherley (2014) finds that a year after Filipino communities are exposed to
strong typhoon winds, property crime rises. This lagged structure mirrors the lagged effect of
typhoons on household income and consumption in the Philippines (Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang
(2012)).
2.3.2

Intergroup conflict

Historical analyses of temperate or cold locations have found that anomalously cold events
during cold epochs are associated with episodes of political instability in dynastic China and
feudal Europe (Tol and Wagner (2010); Zhang et al. (2007, 2006, 2011)) as well as inter-ethnic
violence in Europe (Anderson, Johnson, and Koyama (2013)). Drying events—periods of low
rainfall—have also triggered political instability in historical Egypt (Chaney (2013)), Europe
(Lee et al. (2013)), and China (Jia (2013); Kung and Ma (2012)), and have fueled transboundary
invasions of nomadic populations in historical China (Bai and Kung (2010)).
In analyses of the modern period (1950-present), a relatively warm epoch by historical standards, high temperatures elevate the risk of many forms of intergroup conflict, both political
violence and other forms of collective violence (Burke et al. (2009); Caruso, Petrarca, and Ricciuti (2014); Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012); Gonzalez et al. (2014); Hsiang, Meng, and Cane
(2011); Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013b); Maystadt, Calderone, and You (2014); Maystadt
and Ecker (2014); O’Loughlin et al. (2012)). In all cases, these effects are observed primarily
in low and middle income settings where populations are exposed to warm or hot temperatures
on average. This linear effect is conspicuously similar in sign and structure to the response
of interpersonal conflict to temperature, and it can be observed at scales ranging from gang
violence (Gonzalez et al. (2014)) to the risk of civil conflicts throughout the entire global tropics
(Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2011)).
Also in the modern period, studies find that low or declining rainfall increases the risk of
communal conflict, such as Hindu-Muslim riots in India (Bohlken and Sergenti (2010); Sarsons
(2011)) or land invasions in Brazil (Hidalgo et al. (2010)), as well as organized political conflict
(Cervellati, Sunde, and Valmori (2011); Couttenier and Soubeyran (2013); Fetzer (2014); Fjelde
and von Uexkull (2012); Harari and La Ferrara (2013); Hendrix and Salehyan (2012); Hsiang,
Meng, and Cane (2011); Levy et al. (2005); Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004); O’Loughlin
et al. (2012)), leadership changes (Burke (2012); Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012)), and coups (Kim
(2014)). In some settings where a large range of rainfall levels are observed, it is also found that
exceptionally high levels of rainfall increase rates of communal conflict relative to average rainfall

11

conditions (Hendrix and Salehyan (2012); Hidalgo et al. (2010); Ralston (2013)), suggesting a
global response function that is probably U-shaped. Again, these effects are observable primarily
in low and middle income settings where the economic impacts of climatic variation are likely
to be substantial due to their importance to local agricultural production. Table 1 contains a
detailed listing of these studies.

2.4

Comparing and combining results from modern samples

Broadly speaking, the econometric literature surveyed above suggests that different classes of
conflict, in different contexts and at different scales of analysis, share the general feature that
their likelihood of occurring is influenced by climatic events. This qualitative statement, while
conceptually intriguing, is alone unsatisfying because there remain many differences between
studies, making it difficult to determine what, if anything, can be said about a more general
quantitative relationship between climate and conflict. Furthermore, there is substantially more
uncertainty in the results of some studies due to the nature of their data, making it imperative that point estimates from individual studies are not over-interpreted and that statistical
uncertainty is accounted for when assessing the extent of agreement between studies (Hsiang
et al. (2013c); Hsiang and Meng (2014)). Finally, the strength of statistical conclusions that
we can draw from the literature as a whole may be substantially stronger than the strength of
conclusions from individual studies because the larger body of literature draws on far more data
than individual studies—so long as there is a reasonable way to combine these varied sources
of data. For these three reasons, we standardize effect sizes (and in some cases statistical models) as described below so that results from different studies may be compared to one another
more systematically. We then implement a meta-analysis to synthesize existing results into
more general findings. Importantly, the meta-analytic technique we employ does not assume
that all effect sizes are identical, as they certainly are not, but instead tries to identify whether
there is a common component in the results while simultaneously characterizing the degree of
heterogeneity in treatment effects across studies.
2.4.1

Standardizing and comparing effect sizes

To compare quantitative results across studies of modern data, we computed standardized effect
sizes for those studies where it was possible to do so. Standardization is essential for an applesto-apples comparison of results across studies for two reasons.
First, most studies report changes in the probability of conflict, but different types of conflict (within both classes of conflict, interpersonal and intergroup) exhibit different baseline
frequencies. For example, a 0.1 change in probability for a conflict that occurs with a baseline
probability of 0.3 has a very different interpretation (a 33% increase in risk) than the same
change in probability for a type of conflict that occurs with a baseline probability of 0.01 (a
1,000% increase in risk). Hsiang and Meng (2014) point out that in prior research on Africa,
comparing probability changes for civil conflict incidence and civil war outbreak is an applesto-oranges comparison since they have baseline probabilities of 0.25 and 0.012, respectively.
To adjust for baseline probabilities, we convert marginal changes in probabilities to marginal
12

changes in relative risk, normalizing probability by the average risk of conflict in the observed
sample.
Second, most studies report changes in climate variables in physical units, such as degrees of
temperature or millimeters of rainfall, but different locations around the world exhibit different
within-location baseline variances in these measures, which is further exacerbated by differences
in the areal extent that is averaged over to compute exposure levels. For example, a 1◦ C
temperature change is a relatively small change for average weekly temperature in a U.S. county,
however it is an enormous change for annual average temperature in an African country. To
adjust for these large differences in baseline climate variance, we convert all physical measures of
climate into standardized measures based on the within-location standard deviation in climate.
Thus, for a coefficient reporting the marginal change in probability of conflict caused by a 1
physical unit change in climate, we convert to standardized units
βstandardized = βreported ·

σ(climate)
avg(Pr(conf lict))

(6)

which is the change in the relative risk of conflict for each standard deviation change in climate
variables, and where σ(climate) is the within-location standard deviation in the climate variable.
We focus on computing this effect for studies using modern data (1950-present).
We plot these standardized β’s for each author’s preferred model and variables in Figures 2-3,
displaying interpersonal and intergroup conflict respectively. Temperature effects are shown as
red, rainfall effects as blue (and the smaller number of studies focusing on El Niño, drought and
disasters are in maroon, orange and grey, respectively). The utility in distinguishing between
these two classes of conflict is immediately apparent, as the overall magnitude and precision of
estimates for these two classes appear quite different. The reported effect of climate on interpersonal conflict (Figure 2) has generally smaller effects, with point estimates in the single digits,
and most effects are precisely estimated and statistically significant individually. The reported
effect of climate on intergroup conflict (Figure 3) tends to be larger, with standardized values
spanning 0-40%/σ, and with each individual estimate exhibiting larger confidence intervals. The
greater precision of interpersonal estimates is in part due to the very large number of interpersonal conflicts that are observed in data (i.e., there are many more murders than civil wars),
and the large and high resolution data sets (in both spatial and temporal dimensions) used
to study these effects, such as the FBI Uniform Crime Reports (Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti
(2007); Ranson (2014)). Overall, we observe visually that once effect sizes are standardized and
conflicts are separated by class, there appears to be considerable consistency across studies on
the reported relative influence of climate on conflict.
One concern with these results, raised in Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013a), is that there
may be some selectivity by authors in which results they present and how their results are
framed in their analysis. For example, not all studies examine both the effects of temperature
and rainfall (or they use some transformation of these variables to describe drought or water
availability) and not all studies account for the potential effect of climate variables in prior
periods. These modeling decisions are sometimes based on data availability and in many cases

13

represented best practices at the time the study was conducted. However, there is growing
awareness that climate variables such as temperature and rainfall may be highly correlated
with one another contemporaneously and autocorrelated over time (Auffhammer et al. (2013)),
indicating that estimates constructed without multiple climate variables and lags may be biased
due to omitted variables. Furthermore, some authors may focus (consciously or not) on the effect
of climate variables that are most statistically significant, so summarizing authors’ preferred
results may introduce some selection bias into parameter estimates.
To address this issue, we compute standardized estimates for the cumulative (contemporaneous + lagged) temperature and rainfall effects for all studies where it was possible to do so, and
report both the temperature and rainfall coefficients instead of only focusing on the authors’
preferred choice. This approach substantially reduces the number of studies we can include in
the analysis – we do not have access to the data needed to compute cumulative effects and their
standard errors for many studies shown in Figures 2-3 – but it also substantially reduces the
“degrees of freedom” authors have over which particular results are displayed.
Results from this more refined analysis are shown in Figures 4-5. In the case of interpersonal
conflict (Figure 4), results suggest that the effects of cumulative temperature and rainfall are
highly consistent, with temperature having effects clustered tightly around the 2%/σ median
estimate and rainfall having close to a zero effect. Results for intergroup conflict (Figure 5)
become similarly clarified with this refinement, with temperature having a strong cumulative
effect (median = 18%/σ) and slightly smaller estimates appearing for rainfall (median = 11%/σ),
although as before these estimates are less precise than for interpersonal conflict.
2.4.2

Identifying mean effects and heterogeneity through meta-analysis

Ideally we would like to systematically characterize the extent to which there is a link between
climate and conflict that is general across societies. However, in light of the discussion above,
it is clear that different types of conflict in distinct contexts respond to climate events heterogeneously, even within a class of conflict. Thus, any attempt at summarizing results from
the literature must take into account these differences, even if the goal is to identify common
features of the response. To achieve this, we adopt the method proposed in Gelman et al. (2004)
and employ a hierarchical Bayesian approach to meta-analysis of this literature. This approach
recognizes that the true effects underlying different parameter estimates may indeed be distinct
from one another, and is designed to characterize the extent of this cross-study heterogeneity as
well as any common component across studies. The magnitude and precision of this common
component represents the generalizable conclusions we might draw from this growing literature.
In each study j, we compute the standardized effect β̂j and standard error for that estimate
σ̂j , using the regression models described above. Following Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013a)
we assume that there is some common component to these results µ but that there might also
be heterogeneity in how different populations are affected by the climate. That is, we allow for
the fact that the cross-study differences that we observe might not be driven only by sampling
variability, i.e. that even if each study were executed with infinite data we would not expect
them to obtain the exact same parameter estimate. This situation is well suited for a random

14

effects framework where we assume that the “true” βj that generates the data in each study
can be thought of as being drawn from a distribution of all possible samples and studies where:
βj ∼ N (µ, τ 2 )

(7)

and where µ and τ are unobserved “hyperparameters” that determine the central tendency and
dispersion of findings in the literature. µ is the generalizable component describing the mean
response to changes in climate. τ describes the extent of heterogeneity across contexts in these
responses. If τ is much larger than µ, then differences between results are much larger than their
commonalities. We point out here that if µ is large, this may be of theoretical or policy interest
regardless of whether τ is large or not, and if τ is large it suggests there are substantial differences
between studies that may be worth modeling explicitly. For instance, rainfall may have distinct
effects on conflict across settings with differential economic dependence on agriculture. Our
objective is to estimate both µ and τ . Specifically, we estimate these values separately for the
effects of both current and lagged temperature and rainfall, separately for both interpersonal
and intergroup conflict.
Under a uniform prior, the conditional posterior for µ is
µ|τ, y ∼ N (µ̂, Vµ )
where

1
j σ̂j2 +τ 2 β̂j

(8)

P

µ̂ = P

1
j σ̂j2 +τ 2

Vµ−1 =

,

X
j

σ̂j2

1
+ τ2

(9)

where τ is computed to have larger values if the between-study differences in β̂j are large
relative to the within-study standard error estimates σ̂j (the standard errors normally reported
for individual regression results). When differences in estimates across studies are large relative
to uncertainty in parameter estimates within studies, then studies are treated nearly uniformly
when estimating an average effect. Meanwhile, if τ is close to zero then it is more likely that
the true βj are drawn from a narrow distribution and sampling variability drives most of the
variation in the estimates β̂j . In this case, the weight on each study approaches its precision σ̂12
j
and estimates with large uncertainty are down-weighted. In the limit that τ → 0, this estimate
approaches the optimal composite parameter estimate for the case where each study examines
different subsamples of the same population, which is only exactly true when τ = 0.
Intuitively, if estimated treatment effects in all studies are near one another and have relatively wide and overlapping confidence intervals, then most variation is likely due to sampling
variation and the value of τ (the degree of treatment effect heterogeneity across studies) is
likely to be close to zero. Alternatively, if there is extensive variation in the estimated average
treatment effects but each effect is estimated quite precisely, then τ will be relatively large and
there is likely to be considerable heterogeneity in treatment effects across studies, since sampling
variation alone is unlikely to be able to explain this pattern of results. Casual observation of
Figures 2-5 suggests a climate-conflict literature somewhere in between: there is substantial
overlap in confidence intervals, but also substantial variation in the estimated effects with some
15

confidence intervals that do not overlap.
Using a uniform prior, we apply Bayes’ Rule to update our estimates of µ, τ and the βi ’s
for estimates of interpersonal violence and intergroup conflict separately. We then use 10,000
simulations to characterize the posterior distributions of each of these variables3 .
Meta-analysis of authors’ preferred results We first present the posterior mean and
confidence interval for the common component µ using each author’s preferred climate measure
and model. These values are shown for interpersonal conflict and intergroup conflict as the white
circle with whiskers in the grey panels of Figures 2-3, respectively. The probability distribution
in these panels displays the posterior distribution for βi ’s, i.e., the distribution of effects we
would expect to obtain if we were to implement a new study. Pooling authors’ preferred results,
we estimate that for each 1σ change in climate towards hotter, drier, or more extreme rainfall
conditions, interpersonal conflict rises 2% and intergroup conflict rises 11%. Both of these
estimates are highly statistically significant (P-value < 0.01; see Table 2).
Cumulative effects for all climate variables We then consider our re-analyzed results
that account for both potential lagged effects of climate on conflicts, including possible forward
displacement in time. The white marker with whiskers and the black probability distribution in
Figures 4-5 display these results for interpersonal and intergroup conflict, respectively, pooling
all climate variables regardless of whether an author emphasized a particular climate variable
in their analysis. Computing cumulative effects, we find that on average interpersonal conflict
rises 1.2% and intergroup conflict increases 4.5% for each 1σ change in climate towards more
adverse conditions (see “All Estimates” panel in Figures 4-5), with both effects being highly
significant (P-value < 0.01). This suggests that on average, climatic shifts have a net effect on
conflict rates and do not only displace conflicts forwards or backwards in time.
Results broken down by climate variable Because our re-analysis treats climate variables
identically, we look separately at the cumulative effects of temperature and precipitation. (For
this exercise, we classify variables that are not simply direct temperature or rainfall exposure as
whichever atmospheric variable is actually used to define exposure—i.e., exposure to drought in
Brückner and Ciccone (2011) is coded as rainfall and exposure to El Niño-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) in Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2011) is coded as temperature.) The rightmost gray panels
in Figures 4-5 display results for temperature and rainfall separately for both classes of conflict,
with results also presented in Table 2. For interpersonal conflict, temperature and rainfall have
clearly distinguishable cumulative effects, with the 2.1%/σ effect of temperature roughly 7 times
larger than the 0.3%/σ effect of rainfall, although this small effect of rainfall is still statistically
different from zero (P-value < 0.05).
For intergroup conflict, higher temperature has a much larger average effect and also greater
dispersion across study estimates, with each 1σ increase in temperature increasing intergroup
conflict 11.3% on average (P-value < 0.01). Notably, the posterior distribution of βi is negative
3 Details of our approach to hierarchical Bayesian meta-analysis closely follow Gelman et al. (2004), to which
we refer readers for further technical details.

16

for one-tenth of values, suggesting that cross-study heterogeneity is large enough to generate
negative estimates in individual studies even when the common component µ is positive and
well-separated from zero. The common component of rainfall effects on intergroup conflict are
also positive but smaller, at 3.5%/σ and are also statistically significant (P-value < 0.05). The
greater cross-study dispersion in temperature effects relative to rainfall effects are described by
the hyperparameter τ , which is 14.4%/σ for the cumulative temperature effect and 3.1%/σ for
rainfall (Table 2). Uncertainty over τ is also larger for temperature, suggesting that the extent
of cross study differences are perhaps more difficult to characterize. This appears largely due
to the combination of dispersed point estimates, each of which has relatively large uncertainty
(Figure 5), making it challenging to determine if cross-study differences represent meaningful
differences in context or if they are mostly due to sampling variability.
Thus, while there is strong evidence of important differences between studies, there is simultaneously strong evidence of some underlying commonality between studies, namely a link
between more extreme climate and conflict. There remains considerable heterogeneity in the
response to climate across studies that should be recognized, and understanding the sources of
this variation is an important area for future inquiry.
Results broken down by timing of effects The above results suggest that temperature and
rainfall have a discernible cumulative effect on conflict. However, it is also useful to decompose
the common component of cumulative effects into a common component for each time period
(current and lagged) because understanding the timing of these average effects provides insight
into mechanisms that might be driving the cumulative result. Thus, we compute a separate
value for µ for both classes of conflict, for both climate variables, and for both lags—effectively
characterizing multi-dimensional impulse-response functions that are the generalizable component for the effect of climate on conflict4 . These results are shown in Figure 6 and presented in
Table 2.
We find substantial and statistically significant effects of contemporaneous temperature on
both interpersonal and intergroup conflict, with lags that are smaller and not significantly different than zero. The 11.3%/σ effect of contemporaneous temperature on intergroup conflict is
roughly four times larger than the 2.8%/σ lagged temperature effect; however, both are positive,
suggesting that on average, the temperature effect of climate on conflict is not due to displacement alone. Similarly, the 2.4%/σ effect of contemporaneous temperature on interpersonal
conflict is much larger than the −0.23%/σ lagged effect, which suggests that roughly one-tenth
of the observed effect is attributable to temporal displacement.
The effect of rainfall on intergroup conflict is smaller than the effect of temperature but it
remains statistically significant, although interestingly there is roughly the same sized effect for
both contemporaneous and lagged rainfall, which may not be surprising in agrarian settings
where lagged rainfall is a key input into current harvests and thus local economic conditions.
The effects of both current and lagged rainfall on interpersonal conflict are small, although
4 Here

we can add back in a few studies that were omitted in the cumulative effects calculations – studies that
report both contemporaneous and lagged effects but for which we do not have access to the data to calculate the
cumulative effect and its standard error. The number of studies contributing to each estimate is shown in the
last column in Table 2.

17

the contemporaneous 0.6%/σ effect of rainfall is highly statistically significant and the lagged
effect of −0.2%/σ suggests that roughly one-third of this effect is attributable to temporal
displacement.
2.4.3

Publication bias

Evidence increasingly suggests that many empirical social science literatures exhibit some form
of publication bias (Brodeur et al. (2013); Gerber and Malhotra (2008a,b)), with a common form
of bias arising from the research community’s reluctance to investigate or publish null results.
This is generally thought to manifest in two ways in a literature. First, authors may never release
their data or findings if they obtain a null result early on in their investigation. This is known
as the “file drawer” problem because these researchers return their findings to a proverbial file
drawer where no other member of the research community observes them (Rosenthal (1979)).
This source of publication bias is difficult to combat because it is generally difficult or impossible
to observe what researchers investigate but do not report (see Franco, Malhotra, and Simonovits
(2014) for a discussion of how this is sometimes possible in practice). However, we think this issue
is generally less likely to be problematic in the climate-conflict literature because many papers
have been published reporting associations that are not statistically significant (Buhaug (2010a);
Couttenier and Soubeyran (2013); Theisen, Holtermann, and Buhaug (2011)). In particular,
these analyses are often framed as interesting precisely because they present an alternative
finding on a controversial topic and can accrue substantial scholarly and media attention as a
result. Thus, we believe that the high profile and large number of previous positive results in
this literature create strong incentives to not withhold null results or negative results.
A second potential source of publication bias is that authors may conduct multiple statistical
tests in their analysis, for example varying climate variables, conflict variables, or subsamples,
and report only their strongest findings. These findings may not be representative of the data,
and furthermore they may exhibit spurious correlations because statistical uncertainty is generally not corrected for the multiple testing. Implicit norms in the research community sometimes
can address this issue, in the form of journal referees often requiring that authors demonstrate a
single result multiple ways, for example by using different sources of variation, placebo tests, and
cross-partial effects (eg. Burke et al. (2009); Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2011); Dell, Jones, and
Olken (2012)). The logic is that a single test may prove spuriously significant if repeated enough
times on different variables, but it is dramatically less likely for multiple, orthogonal tests of a
single result to be spuriously significant. Nonetheless, many findings are published with a single
hypothesis test, exposing this literature to this second potential source of bias. To the extent
that this form of bias is driven by authors selecting a preferred specification, temporal lag, or
climate variable, our re-analysis of results should in principle correct for this bias—implying
that Figures 4-6 are likely to be less biased than the authors’ preferred specifications.
Nevertheless, we look for evidence of publication bias across our full sample of studies (i.e.
whether or not we have their replication data) by examining whether the statistical strength of
individual studies reflects their sample size. Following Card and Krueger (1995) and Disdier and
Head (2008), standard sampling theory suggests that the t-stat on a coefficient estimate should

18

be proportional to the degrees of freedom in the study. In particular, with the null hypothesis
H0 = 0, vector of independent variable observations X, vector of residuals ε, degrees of freedom
n − k, and again indexing studies by j:
q

β̂j Xj0 Xj

nj − kj ×  q
ε0j εj


β̂j
t(β̂j ) =
=
σ̂j

√

β̂j
√0
εj εj
√

nj −kj

=

Xj0 Xj

p

(10)

Taking logs, we see that there should be unit elasticity between the log of the t-stat and the
log of the square root of the degrees of freedom. We use this insight to look for evidence of
publication bias in the literature we analyze. If there is a true relationship between climate and
human conflict, then we expect the statistical power of studies to increase with their sample
size (and thus with their degrees of freedom). However, if there is no true relationship, and
instead authors are just searching through data until they find data that allows them to reject
a null hypothesis at 95% confidence, then large sample sizes should provide no benefit in terms
of statistical power. Thus, if publication bias is a major problem in this literature, we predict
√
that log(t(β̂j )) should not increase with log( n − k). For example, in Card and Krueger (1995),
the authors found a negative relationship between t-stats and degrees of freedom, which they
interpreted as strong evidence of publication bias.
Figure 7 shows the plotted relationship between the log of the t-statistic and the log of the
square root of the degrees of freedom, for the 40 estimates for which we are able to calculate
standardized effects (we use author-reported statistics here because those are the values that
authors, editors and reviewers would consider at the time of release/publication). The unit
elasticity is given by the 45-degree line, and OLS estimates of the relationship for the full
sample and for the temperature- and precipitation-focused studies are given by the dashed
lines. We strongly reject a slope of zero for both the full sample and the temperature subsample
(p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively), and marginally reject a zero slope for the precipitation
estimates (p < 0.10). And although we can also reject a 1-to-1 relationship for each sample,
studies with larger sample sizes on average do have larger t-statistics in the climate and conflict
literature we survey, suggesting that authors with large samples are not simply searching through
specifications or data mining to find significant effects at exactly 95% confidence. We note that
for both samples, the upward relationship stands in sharp contrast to the results in Card and
Krueger (1995), with the negative slope they estimate. Our estimates are more similar to that of
Disdier and Head (2008), who interpret their results as ruling out any large role for publication
bias in the trade literature that they survey.

3

Understanding the mechanism

Reduced form evidence in the literature indicates a causal effect of climatic events on multiple
forms of conflict (Figure 6). As described by Equation 5, this reduced form effect is the sum
effect of all potential pathways. Thus, taken alone, these reduced form effects say little about
what mechanisms play a role in generating this response. Understanding what mechanisms drive

19

observed patterns is not essential for all applications of these results: for example, under some
assumption the social impact of climate change can be estimated using just these reduced form
results (as discussed below), and law enforcement or humanitarian organizations can use climate
forecasts for planning purposes without understanding all the underlying mechanisms. However,
many scientific questions and policy interventions do require an understanding of the mechanisms
linking conflict to climate. For instance, a more detailed understanding of the processes involved
is necessary for implementing policies to reduce conflict risk in hot periods. Here we present
a simple framework to describe several mechanisms that researchers have highlighted, describe
the evidence to date on hypothesized pathways, and conclude that studying mechanisms should
be a central task for future research.

3.1

Framework

We employ the theoretical model developed in Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2009) to illustrate
potential channels. In this model, two agents decide whether to engage in costly conflict and
redistribution when bargaining fails. We opt not to present a full solution to the model here but
instead focus on using the framework to provide an illustration of key ideas (we refer readers
to the original paper for solution details). We follow Gonzalez et al. (2014) by enriching the
basic model with additional mechanisms that have been proposed but were not in the original
analysis.
Consider two agents that cannot commit to not attacking one another in an infinite number
of periods, indexed by t. Each agent has assets with productivity θt that produces θt l output
when combined with l units of labor (Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2009) set l = 1). We enrich
the model to account for a population nt (not all of which must be laborers) that consume this
output for a per capita per period consumption of θnttl under non-conflict conditions. If one of
the agents attacks the other first, then it gains a first-strike advantage and captures all of the
opponent’s output and assets with probability Pt > 0.5. Such an attack costs both the aggressor
and defender a fraction c > 0 of output. If both agents choose to attack simultaneously, they
each win with probability 0.5. Following Gonzalez et al. (2014), an attacker experiences a nonrival psychological consumption value of violence γt ; if the attacker dislikes being violent, then
γt < 0 and if the attacker derives positive utility from violence γt > 0.
Following the original formulation, if an agent loses the conflict, then she is removed from the
game. If there is no attack in the current period, then each agent expects a peaceful continuation
value V P , which is the discounted per capita utility of expected future consumption from the
agent’s initial assets and which captures expectations about future values of all parameters.
Similarly, if an attacker wins, then they have a continuation value of victory V V which is the
per capita expected utility from consumption of both their initial assets and the assets that they
capture from their opponent. δ is the per period discount rate.
Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2009) show that the condition for no-conflict is (modified for

20

the new terms nt and γt ):
θt l
θt l
+ δV P > Pt (2 (1 − c) + δV V ) + γt
nt
nt
| {z } |
{z
}

value of peace

(11)

value of attacking

In words, an agent finds it privately beneficial not to attack if the per capita value of consuming
all output with initial assets plus discounted expected utility under peace δV P exceeds the
expected utility of consumption from both the agent’s original assets and captured assets, less
expenditures on the conflict, plus the expected continuation value Pt δV P and the consumption
value of violence γt , which is experienced with certainty.
Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2009) only apply this result to intergroup conflicts, particularly focusing on organized political violence. But interpreted heuristically, Equation 11 can be
generalized to describe both interpersonal and intergroup conflicts. In interpersonal conflicts,
l = nt = 1 and V V contains information on an agent’s expectation that they will be apprehended
and punished for the attack. In purely violent crimes that involve no intention to transfer wealth
between individuals, such as some murders, assaults, and rapes, then we consider θt = 0 and γt
provides the primary motivation for the attacker.
Following Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2009), we can rearrange Equation 11 so that the
condition for no conflict becomes
θt l
(1 − 2Pt (1 − c)) − γt > δ[Pt V V − V P ]
nt

(12)

where the left side of the inequality is the marginal value of peace in the current period weighed
against the discounted marginal expected utility from attacking on the right side. For expositional purposes, we assume that initially this inequality is satisfied and thus there is no conflict.
From that baseline, we can then consider how marginal changes in parameter values driven by
climate might cause this inequality to be violated, and we do this in the next subsection.

3.2

Indirect evidence

Among economists, the majority of attention has focused on the potential for climatic conditions
to adversely affect economic productivity θt and associated living standards. In the framework
above, a temporary reduction in productivity reduces the current opportunity cost of conflict
more than it alters the value of victory because the productivity loss is temporary. Miguel,
Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) hypothesize that adverse rainfall conditions could increase the
risk of African countries because these changes temporarily lowered agricultural productivity,
and many studies since have argued or alluded to a similar mechanism (Brückner and Ciccone
(2011); Burke et al. (2009); Burke (2012); Burke and Leigh (2010); Dell (2012); Jia (2013); Kim
(2014); Maystadt and Ecker (2014); Miguel (2005)). It is now increasingly well documented
that climatic events similar in structure to those that increase conflict risk (hot and dry, or very
wet) also reduce productivity in agriculture (Hidalgo et al. (2010); Hsiang, Meng, and Cane
(2011); Lobell, Schlenker, and Costa-Roberts (2011); Schlenker and Lobell (2010); Schlenker

21

and Roberts (2009); Welch et al. (2010)) as well as nonagricultural incomes (Barrios, Bertinelli,
and Strobl (2010); Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012); Graff Zivin and Neidell (2013); Hsiang (2010);
Jones and Olken (2010)), making this a plausible assertion. Further, there is some evidence
that positive income shocks reduce the likelihood of certain types of conflict (Berman, Shapiro,
and Felter (2011); Dube and Vargas (2012); Iyengar, Monten, and Hanson (2011)), although
there are also findings that suggest a limited or opposite effect of income on conflict risk (Arezki
and Brueckner (2104); Berman, Felter, and Shapiro (2011); Crost, Felter, and Johnston (2014);
Dube and Vargas (2012)). However, even if it were true that income affected conflict risk, and
climate affects income, these two facts on their own are insufficient to prove that climate affect
conflict mainly through income, following our discussion in Section 2 on the appropriate use of
instrumental variables approaches.
An alternative approach to looking for an income channel is to demonstrate that the pattern
in which climate affects income is similar to the pattern for how the climate affects conflict.
For example, Hidalgo et al. (2010) match functional forms by demonstrating that the nonlinear
inverted-U shaped relationship between agricultural income and rainfall in Brazilian municipalities is almost a mirror reflection of the U-shaped relationship between land-invasion risk and
rainfall in the same municipalities. In a different example, Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2011)
match patterns of heterogenous responses to climate for both income and conflict, showing that
both income and conflict are correlated with the timing of ENSO only in the tropics and not
at higher latitudes. In other examples, studies match the timing of climatic events that affect
conflict with the timing of climatic events that are thought to be economically important. For
example, Fetzer (2014) and Blakeslee and Fishman (2014) both show that monsoon rainfall
affects conflict in India more than non-monsoon rainfall, and Caruso, Petrarca, and Ricciuti
(2014) find that high minimum nighttime temperatures that are known to adversely affect rice
yields (e.g. Welch et al. (2010)) predict the risk of conflict in Indonesia. Taken together, these
exercises provide suggestive evidence that an economic productivity channel is likely to play a
meaningful role. However, they are not conclusive since many other economic and social factors may simultaneously be affected by climatic conditions and thus exhibit similar patterns
(Dell, Jones, and Olken (2013)), and it could still be the case that climatic conditions affected
productivity because they affect conflict.
Less focus has been paid to the potential role of population density changes, although some
existing evidence suggests this pathway might play a role. In Equation 12, if climatic conditions
cause the total population nt to rise without generating a similar rise in the productive labor
force l, this increases the chance that conflict will result. This could occur, for example, if
climatic events induced migration of rural populations into urban centers where labor markets
are unable to fully absorb this influx, at least in the short to medium run, causing per capita
income θnttl to decline. At present, some evidence exists implicating climatic events as inducing
migration of rural populations to urban centers (Barrios, Bertinelli, and Strobl (2006); BohraMishra, Oppenheimer, and Hsiang (2014); Feng, Oppenheimer, and Schlenker (2012); Feng,
Krueger, and Oppenheimer (2010); Marchiori, Maystadt, and Schumacher (2012)), although
there is as yet limited work linking these patters to the onset of conflict.

22

Some authors have suggested that climatic conditions could alter the risk of conflict because
they alter the probability that an aggressor is successful. In the context of Equation 12, a
climate-induced increase in the probability of a successful attack Pt raises the likelihood of conflict because the expected value of attacking is higher. This idea is presented in the literature in
two different ways. The first interpretation is strictly logistical, i.e., climatic conditions might
alter the physical environment in such a way that attacking is easier or has a greater chance
of success. For example Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) discuss whether rainfall and
floods adversely affect roads that are used to transport troops in large scale political violence,
and Meier, Bond, and Bond (2007) and Ralston (2013) argue that high seasonal rainfall causes
greater growth of vegetation that is used as cover for cattle raids in East Africa, giving aggressors
a strategic advantage. The second interpretation is that climatic conditions might compromise
an opponent’s strength, increasing the likelihood that an attack is successful. This argument
is usually framed as a change in “state capacity” if an incumbent government becomes militarily weaker because it has fewer economic resource to draw on, via taxation, when climatic
events cause the economy to contract. In support of this notion, several analyses find that
incumbent leaders face a greater risk of being removed from power following adverse climatic
events (Brückner and Ciccone (2011); Burke (2012); Burke and Leigh (2010); Chaney (2013);
Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012); Kim (2014)) and Shapiro et al. (2014) demonstrates that climatic
events may increase voter turnout and incite aggressive demands of government services. These
findings are interpreted by some authors as evidence that the climatic change weakened these
leaders’ power, causing Pt (for challengers) and the risk of conflict to rise. We interpret these
results as consistent with this hypothesis, although these empirical observations are not generally in disagreement with other explanations and there is no clear way to rule out alternative
mechanisms in these cases, and in fact several of these authors also argue that changes in θt
contribute to their findings.
Finally, climate might affect the risk of conflict because it alters the psychological rewards
(or costs) of employing violence, described as γt in Equation 12. If individuals normally have a
distaste for violence, perhaps because of cultural norms or innate preferences, then γt < 0. In
contrast, if γt > 0 then an agent derives some positive utility from the act of violence itself. If
climatic conditions influence γt by increasing the utility (or decreasing the psychological cost)
of acting violently then these changes may increase the likelihood that Equation 12 is violated
and conflict occurs. Studies of interpersonal violence provide the strongest suggestive evidence
that a psychological mechanism is playing a role, especially in high frequency settings where
there is no plausible economic or state capacity explanation linking climate to violence over very
short time periods. For example, Auliciems and DiBartolo (1995) and Card and Dahl (2011)
find that reports of domestic violence increase on hot days in Australia and the United States
respectively, Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti (2007) and Ranson (2014) find that assaults, rapes,
and murders increase during hot weeks and months (respectively) in the United States, and
Kenrick and Macfarlane (1986) find that individuals exhibit road rage with greater likelihood
on hot days in a field experiment. Although detailed statistics were not reported, an early
study by Rohles (1967) reported that when laboratory subjects were placed in a hot room, they

23

exhibited higher rates of arguing and fighting (and even an attempted knifing in one instance)
relative to a cooler treatment condition.
Gonzalez et al. (2014) make the case that changes in γt may contribute to multiple classes
of conflict in the same setting by demonstrating that elevated rates of drug cartel related killing
(intergroup violence), “regular” homicide (interpersonal violence), and suicide (intrapersonal violence) in Mexico all respond to higher temperatures with similar patterns that appear unrelated
to economic conditions. In support of this notion, some results suggest mechanisms through
which changes in personal tastes for violence might escalate interpersonal conflicts into intergroup conflicts. For example, Larrick et al. (2011) demonstrates that during sporting events,
individuals’ willingness to retaliate violently against earlier violent acts committed on the field
increases on hot days, and Vrij, der Steen, and Koppelaar (1994) find that police are more willing
to use threatening behavior and violence for self-defense during training exercises in a laboratory
when they are subject to high temperatures. If high temperatures reduce individuals’ normal
inhibitions against violence in response to a threat (or in retaliation to violence), then relatively
small disputes between individuals might more readily escalate into costly confrontations, for
instance in the case of the Mexican drug cartel violence studied in Gonzalez et al. (2014).
The above examples identify the effects of relatively short-lived changes in climatic conditions
on conflict. However, findings by Prediger, Vollan, and Herrmann (2014) suggest that sustained
exposure to adverse climates might also affect the likelihood of conflict through a psychological
mechanism: they find that pastoralists in Namibia subject to multi-year real-world environmental scarcity are more willing to inflict harm on others in a “joy-of-destruction” laboratory game
relative to comparable neighboring pastoralists that had not been subject to similar sustained
scarcity.
While these patterns are strongly suggestive of the importance of psychological mechanisms,
to our knowledge there is still no consensus within the psychology literature on which fundamental neurophysiological channels underpin the purported link between temperature and
violence. Neural structures react to ambient temperature changes in order to regulate internal body temperature (Benzinger (1970)), but precisely which neural structures are involved in
this process is poorly understood (Ray et al. (2011); Shaun Morrison (2008)). The most robust evidence lies in the role of serotonin, a neurotransmitter that facilitates body temperature
regulation and is associated with aggressive behavior (Gianpaolo Basso (2000); Todd Moore
(2002)). Evidence suggests that as ambient temperature rises, serotonin levels are depressed
in order to regulate body temperature, and this decreased neurotransmission then leads to aggressive behavior. However, similar neurotransmitters, neuromodulators and hormones, such
as testosterone, norepinephrine, cortiocotropoin releasing hormone and cholesterol, may also
link temperature to violent behavior, but these pathways are understudied (Dongju Seo (2008);
Richard Davidson (2000)).

3.3

Path forward: testing by eliminating pathways

The results above provide varying degrees of support for different pathways that may play a
role in linking climatic events to conflicts. However, any single result alone is generally unable

24

to definitively rule out alternative hypotheses. The central issue is that climatic conditions
often affect so many aspects of an economy and society, and thus that simply matching patterns
in the climate-response of both conflict and intermediary variables cannot logically reject all
possible alternative explanations. In our view, some of the studies above that argue psychological
pathways (via γt ) play some role in contributing to interpersonal conflict are among the most
convincing because economic conditions and most other plausible alternative mechanisms usually
do not respond to the climatic conditions at the time-scale analyzed. For instance, abnormal
violence committed by wealthy athletes during a professional sporting event on an exceptionally
hot day (Larrick et al. (2011)) is difficult to attribute to the economic or other impacts of
that hot day. Similarly, the effect of climate on weekly crime rates (e.g. Jacob, Lefgren, and
Moretti (2007)) seems unlikely to be explained by economic factors, although there is some new
evidence that the economic impacts of hot days may sometimes manifest quickly (eg. Deryugina
and Hsiang (2014)).
We believe a fruitful path forward is to conduct direct tests of individual hypotheses (e.g.,
income effects) by eliminating other potential pathways and observing whether the linkage between climate and conflict persists. For example, to test the role of income effects in driving
conflict, it would be useful to exploit an exogenous sources of variation that decoupled income
from climate and assess whether climatic events continue to contribute to conflict risk. It is
important that the potential pathway being tested is eliminated by exogenous events that are
not affected by the climate nor correlated with unobserved heterogeneity between populations.
A small number of studies have begun to employ this strategy. Sarsons (2011) engages
this conceptual approach, demonstrating that wage rates in Indian localities with dams are
less correlated with rainfall than districts without dams, but localities with dams continue to
exhibit correlations between rainfall and Hindu-Muslim riots at similar rates, suggesting that
income alone is unlikely to be the key pathway linking climate to conflict in this context. We
think this study is an early step in the right direction, but it is ultimately inconclusive because
districts with dams may not be comparable to districts without dams in important dimensions,
and because real local income and living standards may also be affected by local prices, hours
worked, and the return to capital investments, all of which might be affected by rainfall and are
not captured in wage rates.
Adopting a related approach, also in India, both Fetzer (2014) and Iyer and Topalova (2014)
examine whether the roll-out of the large-scale Indian National Rural Employment Guarantee
(NREGA) is associated with a change in the link between rainfall and conflict. The intuition
is that NREGA creates a “floor” under household income for the rural poor, so the rollout of
NREGA should in principle weaken the link between climate and conflict by dampening income
changes. Iyer and Topalova (2014) estimate that NREGA had little effect on rainfall’s impact
on interpersonal conflict while Fetzer (2014) estimates that there is a substantial negative effect
on rainfall-induced insurgencies. The contrasting results of these two studies is perhaps because
they focus on different outcome variables and measure climate variables differently. There also
remain some unresolved issues regarding the non-random placement of NREGA, especially the
possibility that its roll-out correlates with other time-varying local economic, political or social

25

trends. Nonetheless, we believe these two studies represent important examples of the type
of empirical approach that can more conclusively identify — or rule out — the underlying
mechanisms linking climate to conflict. Further work in this vein is likely to yield important
insights.

4

Discussion

In this section, we briefly discuss three further questions that could usefully motivate future
research. First, what econometric and data challenges are potentially biasing current empirical
estimates of the link between climate and conflict? Second, how relevant are existing results for
the long-run when societies have time to adapt to their climate? Third, and closely related, how
do these results inform estimates of the future economic and social costs of climate change?

4.1

Some remaining empirical challenges

Various technical, economic, and data issues remain debated in the literature. One issue is
that there may be serial correlation in both climate variables and conflict variables that is not
fully accounted for by de-trending, and which has the potential to lead to incorrect inference
if P-values are not appropriately adjusted (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004)). For
example, O’Loughlin et al. (2012), Lee et al. (2013), Tol and Wagner (2010), Zhang et al.
(2006), Zhang et al. (2007), and Zhang et al. (2011) apply low-pass filters to their data prior to
running regressions. The objective of this filtering is to allow the authors to examine gradual,
low-frequency climatic changes, but this procedure induces strong serial correlation in residuals
that needs to be accounted for.
A recent development in the literature is to use increasingly high resolution spatial data for
large parts of the world, often using a Cartesian grid to define units of observation (e.g., Harari
and La Ferrara (2013); Maystadt, Calderone, and You (2014); O’Loughlin et al. (2012); Theisen,
Holtermann, and Buhaug (2011)). This approach is designed to allow researchers to observe
spatially fine-grained structures in the response of conflict to climate. For example, Harari
and La Ferrara (2013) are able obtain estimates for the average spatio-temporal lag structure
in the response across African “pixels”. However, an important unresolved concern with this
approach in general is that the underlying climate data used by these studies may not actually
be as finely resolved as the grid density might suggest, often relying on the interpolation of
observations or lower resolution weather models (see Auffhammer et al. (2013)). This issue is
particularly pronounced in remote regions where government data collection presence may be
minimal, the same types of regions where conflict may be more likely to occur.
Figure 8, reproduced from Hsiang et al. (2013c), illustrates this point. The left panel overlays the spatial distribution and completeness of rainfall observations with a map of civil war
onset locations studied in Theisen, Holtermann, and Buhaug (2011). The right panel displays
the completeness of these records at the conflict locations of interest. Note that most conflict
locations of interest have zero rainfall observations during the period of study, and no location of
interest has a complete record—implying that most of the statistical analysis relies on interpo26

lated data. Thus, we caution that research using high resolution gridded data may overstate the
quality of information actually contained in the dataset. To our knowledge, the extent of this
error has not been formally characterized and its impact on regression estimates is not known.
To the extent that these errors are classical in the most high resolution data–or at least mean
zero in expectation–it is likely that average measurement error is smaller for more aggregated
variables (e.g., average temperature in an entire country) because positive and negative errors
will partially cancel each other out. Future work could usefully attempt to characterize the
extent and importance of this issue.
Finally, climatic events may have different spatial extent and it remains unknown whether
spatial structure in climatic events matters. Different types of conflict have been shown to
respond to climatic events with different spatial and temporal scales (Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel
(2013a)), for example recall Figure 1. Yet it is unknown if the spatial extent of a climatic anomaly
has a causal effect on the likelihood that the event triggers conflict. In cases where societies
sometimes cope with climatic disturbances through trade or migration, the spatial scale of an
event could plausibly determine whether these strategies are viable options for mitigating this
risk.

4.2

Adaptation to Climate

The extent to which populations might adapt to climatic conditions, thereby dampening the
effect of climate on conflict, remains widely debated. As discussed earlier, econometric concerns
regarding unobservable heterogeneity across space motivates panel data research designs that
exploit local time-series variation in climatic conditions. This approach allows insight into
climate’s effect on when conflict occurs in a location, but it does not allow us to infer whether
climatic conditions influence where conflict will occur on average. If societies successfully and
fully adapt to their average conditions in the long run, then no society would exhibit conflicts
that are attributable to their average climate, but perturbations from that average may still
cause conflicts. However, if societies do not adapt effectively even in the long run, the same
mechanisms that generate conflicts from temporary climate changes may also permanently alter
conflict rates if a society is exposed to a permanently different climate.
The ideal thought experiment in this context is to relocate an entire population from a cold
climate, such as Norway, to a hot climate, such as Nigeria, and observe whether rates of conflict
adjust to be nearer to the rates originally observed in Nigeria. The frequency-identification
tradeoff discussed previously, as well as geographical constraints, makes empirical study of this
problem fundamentally difficult. Nonetheless, determining if populations can and do adapt to
climate is central to assessing whether the effects identified through the panel data approach
we describe in Section 2 above can be interpreted as having explanatory power both in the
cross-section and into the distant future.
Two distinct approaches have been used to understand if populations adapt to climatic
events after being exposed to particular climatic conditions for substantial lengths of time,
and although both are useful neither provides entirely definitive answers. The first approach
exploits high-frequency climatic events and identifies heterogeneous effects for populations in

27

different climates. The underlying idea is that if populations have adapted to a particular
climate (i.e., a hot climate), then they might become less vulnerable to short term changes in
climate (i.e., hotter than average temperatures). For example, Ranson (2014) and Rotton and
Cohn (2000) test whether hot days in hotter U.S. locations, such as Dallas, produce similar
impacts on interpersonal conflict as hot days in cooler locations, such as Minneapolis, and finds
that impacts are in fact similar. This result cannot prove that communities do not adapt to
long-term climate conditions, since the identifying variation is all short-term; however, it does
suggest that long term exposure need not always lead to more effective short-term adaptation.
The second approach to understanding adaptation examines long term climatic variation
directly. For example, Bai and Kung (2010) and Anderson, Johnson, and Koyama (2013) look at
the effect of decade-long average climate on conflict in China and Europe, respectively. Changes
in decadal averages requires that climatic events are sustained over time, and thus these analyses
describe how societies cope with long-term shifts in climate. Data are a major challenge with
this approach: large samples with multiple decade-long observational periods are required, so
the data must by necessity stretch far backward in time. For instance, Bai and Kung (2010)
are able to examine decades between 220-1839 AD, but these type of data are obviously lacking
for most settings. Nevertheless, these studies generally find that sustained shifts in climate are
associated with changes in various forms of conflict, indicating that populations do not fully
adapt to decade-long climatic changes. Yet because these analyses stretch so far back in time, it
is not clear whether the societies studied provide valid comparisons for modern societies. Hsiang
and Burke (2013) point out that these historical societies might be reasonable proxies for some
populations today because their average per capita income is similar to average income in many
low income countries today, but the technological frontier and possible trading partners available
to modern low income economies are clearly very different from those faced centuries ago.
A related approach, which has not yet been widely implemented in the literature but which
we believe holds promise, is to study how gradual trends in conflict and gradual trends in climate
are correlated over time across locations. This “long difference” empirical approach is employed
in Burke and Emerick (2013) to demonstrate that the effects of climate changes on agriculture
in the U.S. over the course of multiple decades mirror estimates derived from the high-frequency
annual time series approach in Equation 3.
To demonstrate how this approach can be applied to the study of conflict, we implement a
new analysis here using pixel-level data on a comprehensive measure of local conflict in East
Africa (1991-2009) from O’Loughlin et al. (2012). We first compute gradual trends in conflict
for each pixel and gradual trends in temperature for each pixel by differencing average values
between the period 1991-1995 and the period 2005-2009. Trends in local temperature are shown
in the left panel of Figure 9, and range from pixels with no warming to pixels with more than
2◦ C warming. We then regress the change in local conflict on the change in local climate
at the pixel level. In the right panel of Figure 9 we compare the point estimate from this
long difference regression with the point estimate obtained using the high frequency panel data
approach in Equation 3. Similar to Burke and Emerick (2013), this long difference estimate is
nearly identical to the annual panel estimate, suggesting that these communities do not exhibit

28

effective adaptation to climate change over this 20 year period. We also display the point
estimate when we use even longer difference periods of 1991-1999 and 2001-2009, and find that
the estimated effect actually becomes somewhat larger in magnitude (rather than smaller, which
would be the case if there were partial adaptation over time), although we note that the effect
is less precisely estimated and not statistically different from the other two estimates.
The pattern in Figure 9 indicates that, at least in the context of local conflict in East Africa,
short run changes in climate are closely related to the effect of longer term and more gradual
shifts in climate. To our knowledge, no study has characterized the degree of adaptation to
climate in terms of conflict outcomes in this way. Further analyses using a similar empirical
approach will help provide important insight into whether, when, and how societies can adapt
to gradual climatic changes in other contexts, and such studies are a top priority for future
research. Given the quantitatively large effect of current climate on conflict, it appears that
future adaptation will need to be dramatic if it is to offset the potentially large adverse effect
of future climate on conflict.

4.3

Implications for Global Climate Change

The above evidence makes a prima facie case that future anthropogenic climate change could
worsen conflict outcomes across the globe in comparison to a future with no climatic changes,
given the large expected increase in global surface temperatures and the likely increase in the
variability of precipitation across many regions over coming decades (Field (2012); Stocker et al.
(2013)). Recalling our finding that a 1σ rise in a location’s temperature is associated with
an average 2.1% net increase in the rate of interpersonal conflict and a 11.3% increase in the
rate of intergroup conflict, and assuming that future societies will respond to climatic shifts
in ways similar to current societies, one can calibrate the potential effect of anthropogenic
global warming by rescaling expected temperature changes according to each location’s historical
variability. Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013a) rescale expected warming by 2050, computed
as the ensemble mean for 21 climate models running the A1B emissions scenario (which is
now thought to be conservative regarding future carbon emissions), in terms of location-specific
standard deviations (Meehl et al. (2007)). Almost all inhabited locations are projected to warm
by at least 2σ, with the largest increases exceeding 4σ in tropical regions that are already warm
and also currently experience relatively low inter-annual temperature variability. These large
predicted climatological changes, combined with the quantitatively large effect of climate on
conflict – particularly intergroup conflict – suggest that amplified rates of human conflict could
represent a large and critical impact of anthropogenic climate change.
The magnitude of these back-of-the-envelope estimates provides some intuition for the potential change in conflict one might expect, but policy design requires more careful projections
of potential impacts. Burke et al. (2014) point out that projections of potential impacts should
account for uncertainty in the structure and magnitude of warming that will be observed under a given policy, in addition to statistical uncertainty in the parameter estimates relating
historical climate to conflict. This approach is adopted in two studies that make probabilistic
projections for changes in the rate of future conflict attributable to climate change. Burke et al.

29

(2009) use their estimates (which are slightly larger than the mean estimated conflict impact
µ generated in the meta-analysis above) to project the incidence of civil wars and associated
battle-related deaths in Africa under a “business as usual” scenario5 . Accounting for uncertainty
in the global climate response, Burke et al. (2009) estimate that warming will increase armed
conflict incidence by 54% in the coming decades (95% CI of 6%-119% increase). If future civil
conflicts remain as deadly as those that took place recently, then they project that this increase
in conflict would result in 393,000 additional battle deaths by 2030.
Houser et al. (forthcoming) conduct a meta-analysis of the nonlinear responses for violent
crime and property crime to the distribution of daily temperatures in the United States. Then
using the posterior response function, they project future changes in crime attributable to three
warming scenarios6 using the distribution of 400 model-derived climate projections for each
county in each scenario. Figure 10 is reproduced using results from Houser et al. (forthcoming)
and demonstrates the spatial distribution and probability distribution of nationally aggregated
changes to violent crime rates. Ceteris paribus, Houser et al. (forthcoming) estimate that nationally averaged crime rates will rise 1.7-5.4% (median: 3%) by end of century under a “business as
usual” warming scenario. Applying valuations to specific types of crime from a meta-analysis by
Heaton (2010), Houser et al. (forthcoming) estimate that these additional interpersonal conflicts
would have a social cost of roughly $5-20 billion if they occurred in today’s economy, a loss near
but slightly less than their median projection for economic costs incurred through agricultural
impacts. The bottom line is that the adverse impact of global climate change on both conflict
outcomes themselves, and on resulting economic outcomes, may be large.
These projections for changes in conflict due to climate change capture only the partial effect
of climate, and the overall trend in conflict will also certainly be affected by non-climate factors.
For example, if crime rates are expected to decline in the future because of (say) improved
enforcement technologies and rising incomes, then the projected positive impact of future global
warming on crime in the U.S. must be considered together with these other effects. It is clearly
possible that overall conflict rates will decline in the future, even if warming causes an upward
trend in conflict relative to a counterfactual with no warming. Any projected impact of climate
change must be considered along with these other trends.

5

Conclusion

In this article, we survey and summarize the new and rapidly expanding economic literature
on the links between climate and conflict. The question of the linkage between climate and
conflict has been widely and inconclusively debated in other disciplines for many years, mainly
using qualitative or case study methods. Findings from the growing body of rigorous research in
economics, as well as from political science and other disciplines that use modern econometric
analytical approaches, indicate that adverse climatic events increase the risk of violence and
5 Burke et al. (2009) use the A1B scenario for models in CMIP3, a multi-model dataset compiled from climate
model output contributed by major modeling centers between 2005 and 2006.
6 Houser et al. (forthcoming) use the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) from CMIP5, so their
“business as usual” scenario is RCP8.5.

30

conflict, at both the interpersonal level and the intergroup level, in societies around the world
and throughout history.
The median effect of a 1σ change in climate variables is a 14% change in the risk of intergroup
conflict and a 4% change in interpersonal violence, across the studies that we review where it is
possible to calculate standardized effects. In our separate meta-analyses of the contemporaneous
and lagged effects of temperature and rainfall, we find that contemporaneous temperature has
the largest average effect by far (intergroup conflict: 2.4%/σ, interpersonal conflict: 11.3%/σ)
but that the cumulative effect of rainfall on intergroup conflict is also substantive (3.5%/σ).
If future responses to climate are similar to these past responses, then anthropogenic climate
change has the potential to substantially increase global violent crime, civil conflict and political
instability, relative to a world without climate change. This finding of course does not imply,
nor do we conclude, that climate is the sole or even the primary driving force behind human
conflict. However, we do conclude that large variations in climate can have large impacts on the
incidence of conflict and violence across a variety of contexts.
We identify many open research questions and productive avenues for future investigation
in this literature. Achieving a better understanding of the mechanisms — both economic and
non-economic, including possible psychological channels — underlying the link between extreme
climate and conflict is arguably the most important and fruitful direction for future work. In this
emphasis on research regarding mechanisms, we echo the conclusion in Dell, Jones & Olken’s
recent review of existing research on the links between climate and economic performance, in
which conflict may play an important role (Dell, Jones, and Olken (2013)).
It seems likely that climatic changes influence conflict through multiple pathways that may
differ between contexts. There is considerable suggestive evidence that economic factors are
important mechanisms, especially in low income settings where extreme climate often quite
directly affects economic conditions through agriculture. The strong link between temporary
high temperatures and short-run increases in crime in wealthier societies provides evidence that
non-economic factors, perhaps working through individual psychology, are also important. In
other settings, the combination and interaction of economic, social, political, and psychological
factors might be critical.
To place the state of the existing body of research on climate and conflict in perspective, it is
worth recalling that statistical analyses identified the smoking of tobacco as a proximate cause
of lung cancer by the 1930’s (Witschi (2001)), although the research community was unable
to provide a detailed account of the mechanisms explaining the linkage until decades later. So
although future research will be critical in pinpointing precisely why and how climate affects human conflict across different settings, disregarding the potential effect of anthropogenic climate
change on human conflict in the interim is, in our view, a dangerously misguided interpretation
of the available evidence.
The lack of a single, simple causal pathway linking climate and conflict does not imply that
there is a lack of evidence that a causal relationship exists, but it does urge caution when
applying these econometric estimates to either policy prescriptions or to future global warming
scenarios. Nonetheless, identifying key causal pathways is a research objective that holds great

31

promise, as the policies and institutions necessary to reduce conflict can only be designed if
we understand why conflicts arise in particular contexts. The success of such institutions will
be increasingly important in the coming decades as changes in climatic conditions amplify the
risk of human conflicts, and as the need for effective adaptation to climate becomes increasingly
important.

References
Anderson, C.A, K.B Anderson, N Dorr, K.M DeNeve, and M Flanagan. 2000. “Temperature
and aggression.” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 32:63–133.
Anderson, C.A, B.J Bushman, and R.W Groom. 1997. “Hot years and serious and deadly
assault: Empirical tests of the heat hypothesis.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
73 (6):1213.
Anderson, R Warren, Noel D Johnson, and Mark Koyama. 2013. “From the Persecuting to the
Protective State? Jewish Expulsions and Weather Shocks from 1100 to 1800.” Working paper
URL http://ssrn.com/abstract=2212323.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press.
Anttila-Hughes, Jesse K. and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2012. “Destruction, Disinvestment, and
Death: Economic and Human Losses Following Environmental Disaster.” Working paper
URL http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract_id=2220501.
Arezki, R and M Brueckner. 2104. “Effects of International Food Price Shocks on Political
Institutions in Low-Income Countries: Evidence from and International Food Net-Export
Price Index.” World Development 61:142–153.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2013. “Using
Weather Data and Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate Change.” Review
of Environmental Economics and Policy 7 (2).
Auliciems, A and L DiBartolo. 1995. “Domestic violence in a subtropical environment: police
calls and weather in Brisbane.” International Journal of Biometeorology 39 (1):34–39.
Bai, Y and J.K Kung. 2010. “Climate Shocks and Sino-nomadic Conflict.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics (0).
Barrios, S, L Bertinelli, and E Strobl. 2006. “Climatic change and rural–urban migration: The
case of Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Urban Economics 60 (3):357–371.
———. 2010. “Trends in rainfall and economic growth in Africa: A neglected cause of the
African growth tragedy.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2):350–366.
Bellemare, M. Forthcoming. “Rising Food Prices, Food Price Volatility and Social Unrest.”
AJAE .
Benzinger, T. H. 1970. “Peripheral Cold Reception and Central Warm Reception, Sensory
Mechanisms of Behavioural and Automatic Thermostasis.” In Physiological and Behavioural
Temperature Regulation, edited by J. A. J. Stolwijk A. P. Gagge, J. F. Hardy. Thomas.
Bergholt, D and P Lujala. 2012. “Climate-related natural disasters, economic growth, and armed
civil conflict.” Journal of Peace Research 49 (1):147–162.
Berman, E, J H Felter, and J N Shapiro. 2011. “Do Working Men Rebel? Inusrgency and
Unemployment in Afghanistan, Iraq and the Philippines.” Journal of Conflict Resolution
55 (4):496–528.
Berman, E, J.N Shapiro, and J.H Felter. 2011. “Can hearts and minds be bought? the economics
of counterinsurgency in Iraq.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (4):766.

32

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should
We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics
119 (1):249–275.
Blakeslee, D and R Fishman. 2014. “Weather Shocks, Crime, and Agriculture: Evidence from
India.” Working paper .
Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel. 2010. “Civil War.” Journal of Economic Literature
.
Bohlken, A. T and E. J Sergenti. 2010. “Economic growth and ethnic violence: An empirical
investigation of Hindu-Muslim riots in India.” Journal of Peace Research 47 (5):589–600.
Bohra-Mishra, Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer, and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014. “Nonlinear
permanent migration responses to climatic variations but minimal response to disasters.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (27):9780–9785.
Brodeur, Abel, Mathias Lé, Marc Sangnier, and Yanos Zylberberg. 2013. “Star wars: The
empirics strike back.” Tech. rep., Discussion Paper Series, Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der
Arbeit.
Brückner, M and A Ciccone. 2011. “Rain and the democratic window of opportunity.” Econometrica 79 (3):923–947.
Buckley, B.M, K.J Anchukaitis, D Penny, R Fletcher, E.R Cook, M Sano, L.C Nam, A Wichienkeeo, T.T Minh, and T.M Hong. 2010. “Climate as a contributing factor in the demise of
Angkor, Cambodia.” PNAS 107 (15):6748.
Buhaug, H. 2010a. “Climate not to blame for African civil wars.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences .
———. 2010b. “Reply to Burke et al.: Bias and climate war research.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107 (51):E186–E187.
Buhaug, H, H Hegre, and H Strand. 2010. “Sensitivity analysis of climate variability and civil
war.” PRIO working paper URL http://www.prio.no/CSCW/Research-and-Publications/
Publication/?oid=193994.
Burke, M. B, E Miguel, S Satyanath, J. A Dykema, and D. B Lobell. 2010a. “Climate robustly
linked to African civil war.” PNAS 107 (51):E185–E185.
———. 2010b. “Reply to Sutton et al.: Relationship between temperature and conflict is
robust.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (25):E103–E103.
Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker Satyanath. 2010c.
“Climate and civil war: is the relationship robust?” NBER working paper 16440 URL
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16440.
Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David B Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker Satyanath. 2014.
“Incorporating Climate Uncertainty into Estimates of Climate Change Impacts.” Review of
Economics and Statistics (0).
Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick. 2013. “Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence from US
Agriculture.” Working paper URL http://ssrn.com/abstract=2144928.
Burke, Marshall, Erick Gong, and Kelly Jones. 2014. “Income shocks and HIV in Africa.” The
Economic Journal .
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2014. “Temperature and Witchkilling.” Working paper .
Burke, M.B., E. Miguel, S. Satyanath, J.A. Dykema, and D.B. Lobell. 2009. “Warming increases the risk of civil war in Africa.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
106 (49):20670.
Burke, Paul J. 2012. “Economic Growth and Political Survival.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 12 (1).
33

Burke, Paul J and Andrew Leigh. 2010. “Do Output Contractions Trigger Democratic Change?”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4):124–157.
Bushman, B.J, M.C Wang, and C.A Anderson. 2005. “Is the curve relating temperature to
aggression linear or curvilinear? A response to Bell (2005) and to Cohn and Rotton (2005).”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .
Card, David and Gordon B Dahl. 2011. “Family Violence and Football: The Effect of
Unexpected Emotional Cues on Violent Behavior.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
126 (1):103–143.
Card, David and Alan B Krueger. 1995. “Time-series minimum-wage studies: a meta-analysis.”
The American Economic Review 85 (2):238–243.
Caruso, R, I Petrarca, and R Ricciuti. 2014. “Climate Change, Rice Crops and Violence:
Evidence from Indonesia.” CESifo Working Paper (4665).
Cervellati, Matteo, Uwe Sunde, and Simona Valmori. 2011. “Disease Environment and Civil
Conflicts.” IZA DP No. 5614 URL http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1806415.
Chaney, E. 2013. “Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion and Political Influence.”
Econometrica URL http://scholar.harvard.edu/chaney/files/nile.pdf.
Chassang, S. and G. Padro-i-Miquel. 2009. “Economic shocks and civil war.” Quarterly Journal
of Political Science 4 (3):211–228.
Ciccone, Antonio. 2011. “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: A Comment.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3:1–14.
Cohn, Ellen and James Rotton. 1997. “Assault as a function of time and temperature:
A moderator-variable time-series analysis.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
72 (6):1322.
Couttenier, Mathieu and Raphael Soubeyran. 2013. “Drought and Civil War in Sub-Saharan
Africa.” Economic Journal .
Crost, B, J H Felter, and P Johnston. 2014. “Conditional Cash Transfers, Civil Conflict and
Insurgent Influence: Experimental Evidence from the Philippines.” HiCN Working Paper
(174).
Cullen, H, P Demenocal, S Hemming, G Hemming, F Brown, T Guilderson, and F Sirocko.
2000. “Climate change and the collapse of the Akkadian empire: Evidence from the deep
sea.” Geology 28 (4):379.
Davis, Mike. 2001. Late Victorian holocausts: El Niño famines and the making of the third
world. Verso Books.
Dell, Melissa. 2012. “Path dependence in development: Evidence from the Mexican Revolution.”
Working paper .
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Climate Change and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics .
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F Jones, and Benjamin A Olken. 2013. “What do we learn from the
weather? The new climate-economy literature.” Tech. rep., Journal of Economic Literature.
DeMenocal, P.B. 2001. “Cultural responses to climate change during the late Holocene.” Science
292 (5517):667–673.
Deryugina, Tatyana and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014. “Does the environment still matter? Temperature and income in the United States.” Working paper .
Diamond, Jared. 2005. Collapse: How societies choose to fail or succeed. Penguin.
Disdier, Anne-Célia and Keith Head. 2008. “The puzzling persistence of the distance effect on
bilateral trade.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (1):37–48.
34

Dongju Seo, Patrick Kennealy, Christopher Patrick. 2008. “Role of Serotonin and Dopamine
System Interactions in the Neurobiology of Impulsive Aggression and its Comorbidity with
Other Clinical Disorders.” Aggression and Violent Behavior 13 (5):383–395.
Dube, O and J Vargas. 2012. “Commodity price shocks and civil conflict: Evidence from
Colombia.” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming .
Fagan, Brian M. 2000. The Little Ice Age: how climate made history, 1300-1850. Basic Books.
Feng, S., M. Oppenheimer, and W. Schlenker. 2012. “Climate Change, Crop Yields, and Internal
Migration in the United States.” .
Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer. 2010. “Linkages among climate
change, crop yields and Mexico-US cross-border migration.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107 (32):14257–14262.
Fetzer, T. 2014. “Can Workfare Programs Moderate Violence? Evidence from India.” Working
paper .
Field, Christopher B. 2012. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance
climate change adaptation: Special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press.
Fjelde, H. and N. von Uexkull. 2012. “Climate triggers: Rainfall anomalies, vulnerability and
communal conflict in sub-Saharan Africa.” Political Geography .
Franco, Annie, Neil Malhotra, and Gabor Simonovits. 2014. “Publication Bias in the Social
Sciences: Unlocking the File Drawer.” Science 345 (6203):1502–1505.
Freedman, D.A. 1991. “Statistical models and shoe leather.” Sociological methodology 21:291–
313.
Gelman, Andrew, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, and Donald B Rubin. 2004. Bayesian data
analysis. Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Gerber, Alan and Neil Malhotra. 2008a. “Do statistical reporting standards affect what is
published? Publication bias in two leading political science journals.” Quarterly Journal of
Political Science 3 (3):313–326.
Gerber, Alan S and Neil Malhotra. 2008b. “Publication bias in empirical sociological research:
Do arbitrary significance levels distort published results?” Sociological Methods & Research .
Gianpaolo Basso, Mario Guazzelli Karen Jaffe Pietro Pietrini, Jordan Grafman. 2000. “Neural
Correlates of Imaginal Aggressive Behavior Assessed by Positron Emission Tomography in
Healthy Subjects.” American Journal of Psychiatry 11:1772–1781.
Gleditsch, N. 2012. “Whither the weather? Climate change and conflict.” Journal of Peace
Research .
Gonzalez, Felipe, C. Baysan, M. Burke, S. Hsiang, and E. Miguel. 2014. “Economic and noneconomic factors in violence: Evidence from drug-cartels, suicides, and climate in Mexico.”
Working paper .
Graff Zivin, Joshua and M Neidell. 2013. “Temperature and the Allocation of Time: Implications
for Climate Change.” Journal of Labor Economics .
Grove, R. 2007. “The Great El Niño of 1789-93 and its Global Consequences: Reconstructing an
an Extreme Climate Event in World Environmental History.” The Medieval History Journal
.
Harari, Mariaflavia and Eliana La Ferrara. 2013. “Conflict, Climate and Cells: A disaggregated
analysis.” Working paper URL http://www-2.iies.su.se/Nobel2012/Papers/LaFerrara_
Harari.pdf.
Haug, G.H, D Günther, L.C Peterson, D.M Sigman, K.A Hughen, and B Aeschlimann. 2003.
“Climate and the collapse of Maya civilization.” Science 299 (5613):1731.
Heaton, Paul. 2010. Hidden in Plain Sight. RAND Corporation.
35

Hendrix, C. S and I Salehyan. 2012. “Climate change, rainfall, and social conflict in Africa.”
Journal of Peace Research 49 (1):35–50.
Hidalgo, F.D, S Naidu, S Nichter, and N Richardson. 2010. “Economic determinants of land
invasions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (3):505–523.
Holland, Paul W. 1986. “Statistics and Causal Inference.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 81:945–960.
Homer-Dixon, Thomas F. 1999. Environment, Scarcity and Violence. Princeton University
Press.
Houser, Trevor, Robert Kopp, Solomon M. Hsiang, Michael Delgado, Amir Jina, Kate Larsen,
Michael Mastrandrea, Shashank Mohan, Robert Muir-Wood, DJ Rasmussen, James Rising,
and Paul Wilson. forthcoming. American Climate Prospectus: Economic Risks in the United
States. Columbia University Press.
Hsiang, S.M., K.C. Meng, and M.A. Cane. 2011. “Civil conflicts are associated with the global
climate.” Nature 476 (7361):438–441.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. “Temperatures and Cyclones strongly associated with economic
production in the Caribbean and Central America.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 107 (35):15367–15372.
———. 2012. “Visually-Weighted Regression.” Working paper URL http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2265501.
Hsiang, Solomon M. and Marshall Burke. 2013. “Climate, conflict, and social stability: what
does the evidence say?” Climatic Change .
Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. 2013a. “Quantifying the Influence
of Climate on Human Conflict.” Science .
———. 2013b. “Reconciling Temperature-conflict Results in Kenya.” CEGA Working Paper
32 .
———. 2014. “Reconciling climate-conflict meta-analyses: reply to Buhaug et al.” Climatic
Change .
Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, Edward Miguel, Mark A. Cane, and Kyle C. Meng. 2013c.
“Analysis of Statistical Power Reconciles Climate-Conflict Results in Africa.” working paper
.
Hsiang, Solomon M. and Kyle C. Meng. 2014. “Reconciling disagreement over climate–conflict
results in Africa.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .
Huntington, Ellsworth. 1917. “Climatic change and agricultural exhaustion as elements in the
fall of Rome.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 31 (2):173–208.
Iyengar, R, J Monten, and M Hanson. 2011. “Building Peace: The Impace of Aid on the Labor
Market for Insurgents.” Working paper .
Iyer, L and P Topalova. 2014. “Poverty and Crime: Evidence from Rainfall and Trade Shocks
in India.” Working paper .
Jacob, B, L Lefgren, and E Moretti. 2007. “The dynamics of criminal behavior: Evidence from
weather shocks.” The Journal of Human Resources .
Jia, Ruixue. 2013. “Weather Shocks, Sweet Potatoes and Peasant Revolts in Historical China.”
Economic Journal, forthcoming .
Jones, Benjamin and Benjamin Olken. 2010. “Climate shocks and exports.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 100:454–459.
Kenrick, D. T and S. W Macfarlane. 1986. “Ambient Temperature and Horn Honking: A Field
Study of the Heat/Aggression Relationship.” Environment and Behavior 18 (2):179–191.

36

Kim, N. K. 2014. “Revisiting Economic Shocks and Coups.” Journal of Conflict Resolution
:1–29.
Kung, James Kai-sing and Chicheng Ma. 2012. “Can Cultural Norms Reduce Conflicts? Confucianism and Peasant Rebellions in Qing China.” Working paper URL http://ahec2012.
org/papers/S6B-2_Kai-singKung_Ma.pdf.
Kuper, R and S Kröpelin. 2006. “Climate-controlled Holocene occupation in the Sahara: motor
of Africa’s evolution.” Science 313 (5788):803.
Larrick, Richard P., Thomas A. Timmerman, Andrew M. Carton, and Jason Abrevaya. 2011.
“Temper, Temperature, and Temptation: Heat-Related Retaliation in Baseball.” Psychological Science 22:423–428.
Lee, Harry F, David D Zhang, Peter Brecke, and Jie Fei. 2013. “Positive correlation between
the North Atlantic Oscillation and violent conflicts in Europe.” Climate Research 56:1–10.
Levy, M.A, C Thorkelson, C Vörösmarty, E Douglas, M Humphreys, and N Hampshire. 2005.
“Freshwater availability anomalies and outbreak of internal war: Results from a global spatial
time series analysis.” International workshop on ‘Human Security and Climate Change’,
Holmen, Norway URL http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/pdf/waterconflict.pdf.
Levy, Mark A. 1995. “Is the Environment a National Security Issue?” International Security
20:35–62.
Lobell, David B., Wolfram Schlenker, and Justin Costa-Roberts. 2011. “Climate Trends and
Global Crop Production Since 1980.” Science 333 (6042):616–620.
Marchiori, L, J.F Maystadt, and I Schumacher. 2012. “The impact of weather anomalies on
migration in sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management .
Mares, Dennis. 2013. “Climate change and levels of violence in socially disadvantaged neighborhood groups.” Journal of Urban Health :1–16.
Maystadt, J, M Calderone, and L You. 2014. “Local Warming and Violent Conflict in North
and South Sudan.” Journal of Economic Geography (335).
Maystadt, J and O Ecker. 2014. “Extreme Weather and Civil War in Somalia: Does Drought
Fuel Conflict in Somalia through Livestock Price Shocks?” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics .
Meehl, Gerald A., Curt Covey, Thomas Delworth, Mojib Latif, Bryant McAvaney, John F. B.,
Mitchell, Ronald J. Stouffer, and Karl E. Taylor. 2007. “The WCRP CMIP3 Multimodel
Dataset: A New Era in Climate Change Research.” Bulletin of the American Meterological
Society 88:1383–1394.
Mehlum, H, E Miguel, and R Torvik. 2006. “Poverty and crime in 19th century Germany.”
Journal of Urban Economics 59 (3):370–388.
Meier, Patrick, Doug Bond, and Joe Bond. 2007. “Environmental influences on pastoral conflict
in the Horn of Africa.” Political Geography 26:716–735.
Miguel, E. 2005. “Poverty and witch killing.” Review of Economic Studies 72 (4):1153–1172.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti. 2004. “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
Instrumental Variables Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (4):725–753.
Miguel, Edward and Shanker Satyanath. 2011. “Re-examining Economic Shocks and Civil
Conflict.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3:1–6.
O’Loughlin, J, F Witmer, A Linke, A Laing, A Gettelman, and J Dudhia. 2012. “Climate
variability and conflict risk in East Africa, 1990–2009.” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA .
Prediger, Sebastian, Bj orn Vollan, and Benedikt Herrmann. 2014. “Resource scarcity and
antisocial behavior.” Journal of Public Economics 119 (1):1–9.

37

Ralston, Laura Rosalind. 2013. Essays on conflict, cooperation and economic development.
Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Ranson, Matthew. 2014. “Crime, weather, and climate change.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 67 (3):274–302.
Ray, Russell S, Andrea E Corcoran, Rachael D Brust, Jun Chul Kim, George B Richerson,
Eugene Nattie, and Susan M Dymecki. 2011. “Impaired respiratory and body temperature
control upon acute serotonergic neuron inhibition.” Science 333 (6042):637–642.
Richard Davidson, Christine Larson, Katherine Putnam. 2000. “Dysfunction in the Neural
Circuitry of Emotion Regulation: A Possible Prelude to Violence.” Science 289.
Rohles, Frederick H. 1967. “Environmental psychology - bucket of worms.” Psychology today
1 (2):54–63.
Rosenthal, Robert. 1979. “The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results.” Psychological
bulletin 86 (3):638.
Rotton, James and Ellen Cohn. 2000. “Violence is a curvilinear function of temperature in
Dallas: A replication.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 78 (6):1074.
Salehyan, Idean and Cullen Hendrix. 2012. “Climate Shocks and Political Violence.” Annual
Convention of the International Studies Association :1–33.
Sarsons, H. 2011. “Rainfall and Conflict.” Harvard working paper URL http://www.econ.
yale.edu/conference/neudc11/papers/paper_199.pdf.
Scheffran, Jürgen, Michael Brzoska, Hans Günter Brauch and Peter Michael Link, and Janpeter
Schilling, editors. 2012. Climate Change, Human Security and Violent Conflict: Challenges
for Societal Stability, vol. 8. Springer Verlag.
Schlenker, W and D Lobell. 2010. “Robust negative impacts of climate change on African
agriculture.” Environmental Research Letters .
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 106 (37):15594–15598.
Sekhri, Sheetal and Adam Storeygard. 2012. “Dowry Deaths: Consumption Smoothing in
Response to Climate Variability in India.” Working paper .
Shapiro, J N, C Fair, P Kuhn, and N Malhotra. 2014. “Economic Shocks and Civic Engagement:
Evidence from the 2010-11 Pakistani Floods.” Working paper .
Shaun Morrison, Christopher Madden, Kazuhiro Nakamura. 2008. “Central Control of Thermogenesis in Mammals.” Experimental Physiology 93:773–797.
Stocker, Thomas F, Dahe Qin, Gian-Kasper Plattner, Melinda Tignor, Simon K Allen, Judith
Boschung, Alexander Nauels, Yu Xia, Vincent Bex, Pauline M Midgley et al. 2013. Climate
Change 2013. The Physical Science Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Sutton, A. E, J Dohn, K Loyd, A Tredennick, G Bucini, A Solorzano, L Prihodko, and N. P
Hanan. 2010. “Does warming increase the risk of civil war in Africa?” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107 (25):E102–E102.
Theisen, O.M, H Holtermann, and H Buhaug. 2011. “Climate wars? Assessing the claim that
drought breeds conflict.” International Security 36 (3):79–106.
Todd Moore, Angel Scarpa, Adrian Raine. 2002. “A Meta-Analysis of Serotonin Metabolite
5-HIAA and Antisocial Behavior.” Aggressive Behavior 28:299–316.
Tol, R.S.J and S Wagner. 2010. “Climate change and violent conflict in Europe over the last
millennium.” Climatic Change .
38

Vrij, A, J Van der Steen, and L Koppelaar. 1994. “Aggression of police officers as a function of
temperature: An experiment with the Fire Arms Training System.” Journal of Community
& Applied Social Psychology 4 (5):365–370.
Welch, Jarrod R., Jeffrey R. Vincent, Maximilian Auffhammer, Piedad F. Moya, Achim Dobermann, and David Dawe. 2010. “Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia exhibit large but
opposing sensitivities to minimum and maximum temperatures.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences .
Wetherley, E. 2014. “Typhoons and Temperature Impact Crime Rates: Evidence from the
Philippines.” USF Scholarship Repository, Master’s Theses (88).
Witschi, Hanspeter. 2001. “A Short History of Lung Cancer.” Toxicological Sciences 64 (1):4–6.
Wooldridge, J.M. 2002. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. The MIT press.
Yancheva, Gergana, Norbert R Nowaczyk, Jens Mingram, Peter Dulski, Georg Schettler, Jörg
F W Negendank, Jiaqi Liu, Daniel M Sigman, Larry C Peterson, and Gerald H Haug.
2007. “Influence of the intertropical convergence zone on the East Asian monsoon.” Nature 445 (7123):74.
Zhang, P Brecke, H Lee, and Y He. 2007. “Global climate change, war, and population decline
in recent human history.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .
Zhang, D, C Jim, G Lin, Y He, J Wang, and H Lee. 2006. “Climatic change, wars and dynastic
cycles in China over the last millennium.” Climatic Change .
Zhang, D.D, H.F Lee, C Wang, B Li, Q Pei, J Zhang, and Y An. 2011. “The causality analysis
of climate change and large-scale human crisis.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108 (42):17296–17301.

39

40

80

−2

0

2

Data: Miguel (REStud, 2005)

−40

0

40

0

2

Pixel Temperature Anomaly (ºC)

−2

50

Data: O’Laughlin et al (PNAS, 2012)

Local violence
(East Africa)

Witch murder
(Tanzanian villages)

30
Longitude

34.8

East Africa

Longitude

Village Extreme Rainfall Deviation (σ)

34

0

20

Longitude

40

0

1

Data: Burke et al (PNAS, 2009)

Civil war incidence
(Sub−Saharan Africa)

0

Country Temperature Anomaly (ºC)

−1

−40

0

40

80

−20

20

Sub−Saharan Africa

−40

0

40

80

−40

0

40

0

100

0

1

2

Data: Hsiang et al (Nature, 2011)

Civil conflict onset
(Global tropics)

Longitude

ENSO Temperature Anomaly (ºC)

−1

−100

Global Tropics

Figure 1: Climate and conflict across spatial scales. Evidence that climate influences the risk of modern human conflict: murder in Tanzanian
villages increases with more extreme rainfall, local violence in 1◦ grid cells increases with temperature, civil war in African countries increases
with temperature, and civil conflict risk in the tropics increases with sea-surface temperature. Top row illustrates nested spatial scales of
analysis, bottom row displays estimated effects. Both dependent and independent variables have had location effects and trends removed, so all
samples have a mean of zero. We reanalyze relationships between climate and conflict outcomes and display them as nonparametric “watercolor
regressions”, where the color intensity of 95% CIs depicts the likelihood that the true conditional expectation function passes through a given
value; darker is more likely. (Hsiang, 2012). The white line in each panel denotes the conditional mean.

−40

0

40

80

−3.8

Tanzanian villages

Latitude
Monthly risk (%)

−3

Latitude
Annual risk (%)

Latitude

Annual risk (%)

Latitude
Annual risk (%)

41

21%

Auliciems and DiBartolo 1995
domestic violence
Australia

Sekhri and Storeygard 2013
murder
India

Wetherley 2014
personal crime rate
Philippines

Sekhri and Storeygard 2013
domestic violence
India

Gonzalez et al 2014
homicide rate
Mexico

Larrick and Timmerman 2011
retaliation in sports
USA

Ranson 2012
rape
USA

Jacob Lefgren Moretti 2007
violent crime incidence
USA

Blakeslee and Fishman 2014
total crime
India

Ranson 2012
assault
USA

Card and Dahl 2011
domestic violence
United States

Iyer and Topalova 2014
total crimes
India

Jacob Lefgren Moretti 2007
propery crime incidence
USA

Ranson 2012
murder
USA

% change per 1σ change in climate

21%

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

−

0

4

8

12

Figure 2: Estimates for the effect of climatic events on the risk of interpersonal violence using authors’ preferred specifications. Each marker
represents the estimated effect of a 1σ increase in a climate variable, expressed as a percentage change in the conflict variable relative to its mean,
and whiskers the 95% confidence interval. Colors indicate temperature (red) or rainfall loss (blue). Dashed line is the median estimate, and the
solid black line the precision-weighted mean with its 95% confidence interval shown in grey. The panels on the right show the precision-weighted
mean effect (circle) and the distribution of study results (gray ticks); probability distributions are the posterior for the expected distribution of
an additional study (solid black line). See text for details on the individual studies and on the calculation of mean effects and their distribution.

0

4

8

16%

Wetherley 2014
property crime rate
Philippines

12

Miguel 2005
murder
Tanzania

42
−20

−10

0

10

20

30

40

50
76%
97%

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

−

−
−

−20

−10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 3: Estimates for the effect of climatic events on the risk of intergroup conflict using authors’ preferred specifications. Colors and setup
are as in Figure 2, with three additional colors indicating drought (orange), ENSO (brown), or storms (grey).

% change per 1σ change in climate

Theisen Holtermann Buhaug 2011
civil conflict outbreak
SSA
Bergholt and Lujala 2012
civil conflict outbreak
global
Buhaug 2010
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Dell Jones Olken 2012
civil conflict outbreak
global
Caruso Petrarca Ricciuti 2014
civil conflict incidence
Indonesia
Couttenier and Soubeyran 2014
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Burke 2012
leadership exit
global
Harari and La Ferrara 2012
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Fjelde and von Uexkull 2012
communal conflict
SSA
Miguel Satyanath Sergenti 2004
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Levy et al 2005
civil conflict outbreak
global
Hidalgo Naidu Nichter Richardson 2010
land invasions outbreak
Brazil
Burke et al 2009
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Hendrix and Selahyan 2012
riots and political violence
SSA
Hsiang Meng Cane 2011
civil conflict outbreak
global
Fetzer 2013
civil conflict incidence
India
Kim 2014
coup probability
global
Gonzalez et al 2014
gang homicide rate
Mexico
Calderone Maystadt You 2013
civil conflict incidence
Sudan
Burke and Leigh 2010
institutional change
global
O'Loughlin et al 2012
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Dell Jones Olken 2012
irregular leader exit
global
Maystadt and Ecker 2014
civil conflict incidence
Somalia
Bohlken and Sergenti 2010
riots
India
Hsiang Burke Miguel 2013
intergroup violence outbreak
Kenya
Bruckner and Ciccone 2011
institutional change
SSA

43

−2

0

2

4
29%

−
−
−
−

−
−
−
−
−
−

−
−

−
−

−
−

−
−

−

−

−2

0

2

4

Figure 4: Reanalysis of interpersonal conflict estimates. Colors are as in Figures 2 and 3. Point estimates are the cumulative effect from a
two period distributed lag model, with effect size distributions now given for temperature and precipitation separately at right. Solid blue and
red horizontal lines give precision-weighted mean effects for precipitation and temperature, respectively, and dotted lines the corresponding
medians.

% change per 1σ change in climate

Ranson 2012
murder
USA
Ranson 2012
rape
USA
Jacob Lefgren Moretti 2007
propery crime incidence
USA
Ranson 2012
assault
USA
Jacob Lefgren Moretti 2007
violent crime incidence
USA
Gonzalez et al 2014
homicide rate
Mexico
Miguel 2005
murder
Tanzania
Jacob Lefgren Moretti 2007
propery crime incidence
USA
Ranson 2012
murder
USA
Jacob Lefgren Moretti 2007
violent crime incidence
USA
Ranson 2012
assault
USA
Gonzalez et al 2014
homicide rate
Mexico
Ranson 2012
rape
USA

All estimates
Temperature
estimates
Precipitation
estimates

44
−20

−10

0

10

20

30

40

50
79%
97%

−
−
−
−
−
−
−

−
−
−
−
−
−
−

−
−
−
−

−
−
−

−
−
−

−

−
−
−

−
−
−
−

−
−
−
−

−

−20

−10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 5: Reanalysis of intergroup conflict estimates. Colors are as in Figures 2 and 3. Point estimates are the cumulative effect from a two
period distributed lag model, with effect size distributions now given for temperature and precipitation separately at right. Solid blue and red
lines give precision-weighted mean effects for precipitation and temperature, respectively, and dotted lines the corresponding medians.

% change per 1σ change in climate

O'Loughlin et al 2012
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Theisen Holtermann Buhaug 2011
civil conflict outbreak
SSA
Gonzalez et al 2014
gang homicide rate
Mexico
Burke et al 2009
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Burke 2012
leadership exit
global
Fjelde and von Uexkull 2012
communal conflict
SSA
Dell Jones Olken 2012
irregular leader exit
global
Dell Jones Olken 2012
civil conflict outbreak
global
Hidalgo Naidu Nichter Richardson 2010
land invasions outbreak
Brazil
Miguel Satyanath Sergenti 2004
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Buhaug 2010
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Burke and Leigh 2010
institutional change
global
Hendrix and Selahyan 2012
riots and political violence
SSA
Levy et al 2005
civil conflict outbreak
global
Hsiang Burke Miguel 2013
intergroup violence outbreak
Kenya
Bruckner and Ciccone 2011
institutional change
SSA
Bohlken and Sergenti 2010
riots
India
Buhaug 2010
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Dell Jones Olken 2012
civil conflict outbreak
global
Burke 2012
leadership exit
global
Hsiang Meng Cane 2011
civil conflict outbreak
global
Couttenier and Soubeyran 2014
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Burke et al 2009
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Gonzalez et al 2014
gang homicide rate
Mexico
Burke and Leigh 2010
institutional change
global
Hsiang Burke Miguel 2013
intergroup violence outbreak
Kenya
Dell Jones Olken 2012
irregular leader exit
global
O'Loughlin et al 2012
civil conflict incidence
SSA
Bergholt and Lujala 2012
civil conflict outbreak
global

All estimates
Temperature
estimates
Precipitation
estimates

45

0

5

10

15

0 lag

(N=19)

(N=14)

1 lag

(N=19)

(N=14)

combined
effect

(N=17)

(N=11)

−2

0

2

4

6

0 lag

(N=9)

(N=8)

1 lag

(N=9)

(N=8)

Interpersonal conflict

combined
effect

(N=7)

(N=6)

Figure 6: Summary of meta-analysis for studies with distributed lag structure. Estimated precision-weighted mean effects and 95% confidence
intervals for intergroup (left panel) and interpersonal conflict (right panel), for both contemporaneous and one period lagged temperature (red,
left offset) and precipitation (blue, right offset). “Combined” effects equal the sum of the contemporaneous (0 lag) and one period lagged effects
for studies where the calculation was possible. The number of studies contributing to each estimate is given in parentheses.

% change per 1σ change in climate

Intergroup conflict
% change per 1σ change in climate

8

log t−stat

6

4

.36

2

0
p) =
(tem
OLS

.32

ll) = 0
OLS (a

ll) = 0.16

OLS (rainfa

0
0

2

4

6

8

log sqrt degrees of freedom

Figure 7: Relationship between log of t-statistic and log of the square root of the degreesof-freedom, using author reported t-statistics. Circles represent studies focusing on rainfall,
triangles studies focusing on temperature. OLS estimates of the slope of the relationships for
all estimates, temperature only estimates, and rainfall only estimates are given by the dotted
lines. Solid 45◦ line indicates the slope of 1 that theory predicts would occur in the absence of
any publication bias.

46

47

20

40

60

80
100

0

10

20

30

40

0

Zero conflict locations
have a complete
rainfall record

20
40
60
80
Percent of sample with rain gauge observations

44 conflict locations
have zero rainfall
observations in the
sample

Number of locations exhibiting "conflict"

100

Figure 8: An example of data quality constraints, reproduced from Hsiang et al. (2013c). The quality of rainfall data used by Theisen,
Holtermann, and Buhaug (2011) is limited in locations where they code civil war. Left: The fraction of months in the sample when a pixel
reports any rainfall observations. Missing data is interpolated. Each conflict is coded as occurring in a 0.5◦ × 0.5◦ pixel at the center of a red
circle. Right: The fraction of months in the sample when any rainfall data is recorded at a conflict location.

0

Site of “conflict”

Percent of 1960-2004 sample with rain gauge observations

48

30

35

40

1

2

45

50

temp. change (C)

|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||

0

0

50

100

150

Panel
1991-2009
(N = 91,656)

Long diff.
(2005-09)-(1991-95)
(N = 4,824)

Long diff.
(2000-09)-(1991-99)
(N = 4,824)

Short vs long run response

Figure 9: New calculations using data from O’Loughlin et al. (2012) to demonstrate how adaptation to longer run changes in temperature can
be studied. Left panel: multi-decadal change in average temperature (◦ C) across East Africa. Right panel: comparing panel estimates of how
conflict responds to temperature using an annual panel approach (as in Equation 3) and using a “long differences” estimate that compares
trends in conflict at each location with trends in temperature (from left panel).

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

Change in temperature (C),
2005-09 minus 1991-95
% change in conﬂict per 1C increase

49

1.5

2

3

4

5 5.5

−0.5
0

0

0.4

0.3

0.6

1

1.1

1.2

1.4

2.1

2.5

3

3

4

4.5

Change in national violent crime rate (%)

2

1.9

5

5.4

6

7

Figure 10: Projections of violent crime rates attributable to anthropogenic climate change in the United States under the “Business as usual”
Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 (modified from Houser et al. (forthcoming)). Projections are compiled from resampling 40
climate models (weighted to reconstruct the probability distribution of global climate sensitivities, see Houser et al. (forthcoming)), 10 artificial
weather realizations, and nonparametric response-function estimates from a USA-specific meta-analysis. Maps on left depict county-specific
median projections. Probability distributions on right depict the evolution of the national violent crime rate for the same periods (multiple
modes are due to climate model differences). National rates are constructed by weighting county changes by the current distribution of violent
crimes across counties. Labeled critical values are 5-95th centiles (outer), 16.7-83.3 centiles (inner two-thirds of probability mass), and median
(black).

0 0.5 1

Change in county violent crime rate
(%, median estimate)

2020-2039

2040-2059

2080-2099

1.7

“Business as usual”
(Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5)

1950–1997
1992
1971–2000
1995–2006
1987–1988
1971–2010
1995–2001
1985–1985
1952–2009
1990–2009
1992–2002
1990–2007
1835–1861
1960–2009
1994–1995
2002–2007
1993–1993
1990–2008

Card and Dahl 2011*†
Cohn and Rotton 1997b
Iyer and Topalova 2014*b

Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti 2007*× †

Kenrick and Macfarlane 1986‡
Larrick et al. 2011*†
Mares 2013
Miguel 2005*× †
Gonzalez et al. 2014*× †
Mehlum, Miguel, and Torvik 2006

Ranson 2014*× †
Rotton and Cohn 2000b
Sekhri and Storeygard 2012*

Vrij, der Steen, and Koppelaar 1994‡
Wetherley 2014*

Sample
Period

Anderson et al. 2000a
Auliciems and DiBartolo 1995*
Blakeslee and Fishman 2014*

Interpersonal conflict (N =18)

Study

Netherlands
Philippines

USA
USA
India

USA
USA
USA
Tanzania
Mexico
Germany

USA

USA
USA
India

USA
Australia
India

Sample
Region

hours
annual

month
hours
annual

day
day
month
annual
month
annual

week

day
hours
annual

annual
week
annual

Time
Unit

site
province

county
municipality
municipality

site
site
municipality
municipality
province
province

municipality

municipality
municipality
district

country
municipality
district

Spatial
Unit#

temp
rain

temp
temp
rain

temp
temp
temp
rain
temp
rain

temp

temp
temp
rain

temp
temp
rain

Independent
Variable

violent crime
domestic violence
violent &
property crime
domestic violence
violent crime
violent &
property crime
violent &
property crime
road rage
violent retaliation
violent crime
murder
murder & suicide
violent &
property crime
violent crime
violent crime
murder &
domestic violence
police use of force
violent &
property crime

Dependent
Variable

Y
Y

Y(Y)
Y
Y

Y
Y (Y)
Y
Y(N)
Y(Y)
Y

Y(Y)

Y(Y)
Y
Y

Y
Y
N

Reject
β=0

Table 1: Unique quantitative studies testing for a relationship between climate and conflict, violence or political instability

Sample
Period

1100–1800
220–1839
1990–2011
1980–2007
1982–1995
1980–2004
1979–2002
1963–2001
1981–2002
1963–2007
1997–2009
1990-2003
1960–2005
641–1438
1957–2005
1950–2003
2000-2006
1990–2008
1990–2007
1960–2010
1991–2007
1988–2004
1950–2004
1989–2004

Anderson, Johnson, and Koyama 2013
Bai and Kung 2010
Bellemare Forthcoming
Bergholt and Lujala 2012**+ †
Bohlken and Sergenti 2010**+ †
Brückner and Ciccone 2011**+ †
Buhaug 2010a**+ †
Burke 2012**+ †
Burke et al. 2009**+ †c
Burke and Leigh 2010**+ †
Maystadt, Calderone, and You 2014**
Caruso, Petrarca, and Ricciuti 2014**
Cervellati, Sunde, and Valmori 2011
Chaney 2013
Couttenier and Soubeyran 2013**+ †
Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012**+ †

Fetzer 2014**
Fjelde and von Uexkull 2012**+ †
Gonzalez et al. 2014**+ †
Harari and La Ferrara 2013**
Hendrix and Salehyan 2012**+ †
Hidalgo et al. 2010**+ †
Hsiang, Meng, and Cane 2011**+ †
Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel 2013b**+ †

Intergroup conflict and institutional change (N =38)

Study

India
SSA
Mexico
Africa
SSA
Brazil
Global
Kenya

Europe
China
Global
Global
India
SSA
SSA
Global
SSA
Global
Sudan
Indonesia
Global
Egypt
SSA
Global

Sample
Region

quarter
annual
month
annual
annual
annual
annual
annual

decade
decade
month
annual
annual
annual
annual
annual
annual
annual
quarter
month
annual
annual
annual
annual

Time
Unit

district
province
state
pixel (1◦ )
country
municipality
world
pixel (0.25◦ )

municipality
country
country
country
province
country
country
country
country
country
pixel (0.5◦ )
province
country
country
country
country

Spatial
Unit

Table 1: (continued)

rain
rain
temp
drought
rain
rain
ENSO⊕
temp

temp
rain
natural disaster
flood/storm
rain
rain
temp
rain/temp
temp
rain/temp
temp
temp
drought
Nile floods
PDSI
temp

Independent
Variable

minority expulsion
nomadic invasion
social unrest
civil conflict
ethnic riot
institutional change
civil conflict
leadership exit
civil conflict
institutional change
civil conflict
civil conflict
civil conflict
political instability
civil conflict
political instability &
civil conflict
civil conflict
communal conflict
drug cartel murder
civil conflict
social conflict
land invasions
civil conflict
intergroup &
political conflict

Dependent
Variable

Y
Y(N )
Y(Y)
Y
Y(Y)
Y(Y)
Y(Y)
Y(Y)

Y
Y
Y
N(N)
(N)
N(N )
N(N)
N(N )
Y(Y)
N(Y)
Y
N
Y
Y
N(N)
Y(Y)

Reject
β=0

Sample
Period

1470–1900
1960–2005
1651–1910
1400–1999
1975–2002
1997–2009
1979–1999
1990–2009
1979–2006
1970–1995
1960–2004
1500–1900
1000–1911
1400–1900

China
Global
China
Europe
Global
Somalia
SSA
E. Africa
Global
India
Africa
Europe
China
N. Hem.

Sample
Region

annual
annual
annual
decade
annual
month
annual
month
annual
annual
annual
decade
decade
century

Time
Unit

drought/flood
rain
rain
NAO⊗
rain
temp
rain
temp
rain
rain
rain
temp
temp
temp

Independent
Variable

peasant rebellion
coup
peasant rebellion
armed conflict
civil conflict
civil conflict
civil war
civil conflict
civil conflict
ethnic riots
civil conflict
transboundary conflict
civil conflict
transboundary &
civil conflict

Dependent
Variable

56 total studies (24 reanalyzed):

province
country
district
region
pixel (2.5◦ )
province
country
pixel (1◦ )
country
municipality
pixel (0.5◦ )
region
country
region

Spatial
Unit

46 (44)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y(N )
Y
Y(Y)
Y
Y
Y
N(N)
Y
Y
Y

Reject
β=0

“Reject β = 0” is Y if the authors reject an effect size of zero at the 95% confidence level; our corresponding reanalysis results are in parentheses. The last line
indicates the number of studies rejecting a zero effect, with the number in paretheses incorporating our reanalyzed results. # Province refers to the first and
district to the second subnational administrative units for all nations.  The effect size in the study is statistically significant at the 10% level but not at the 5%
level. * Shown in Fig. 2. ** Shown in Fig. 3. × Shown in Fig. 4. + Shown in Fig. 5. † Reanalyzed using the common statistical model containing location
and time fixed effects. ‡ Actual experiment. a Also see Anderson, Bushman, and Groom (1997). b Also see discussion in Bushman, Wang, and Anderson (2005). c
SSA is Sub-Saharan Africa. Also see discussion in Buhaug (2010a,b); Buhaug, Hegre, and Strand (2010); Burke et al. (2010a,b,c); Sutton et al. (2010). d Also see
discussion in Ciccone (2011); Miguel and Satyanath (2011). e Also see Hsiang et al. (2013c). f Also see Zhang et al. (2011). PDSI is the Palmer Drought Severity
Index. ⊕ ENSO is the El Niño-Southern Oscillation. ⊗ NAO is the North Atlantic Oscillation.

Jia 2013
Kim 2014**
Kung and Ma 2012
Lee et al. 2013
Levy et al. 2005**+ †
Maystadt and Ecker 2014**
Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti 2004**+ †d
O’Loughlin et al. 2012**+ †
Salehyan and Hendrix 2012
Sarsons 2011
Theisen, Holtermann, and Buhaug 2011**+ †e
Tol and Wagner 2010
Zhang et al. 2006
Zhang et al. 2007f

Intergroup conflict and institutional change (continued)

Study

Table 1: (continued)

Table 2: Meta-analysis Results. “Author preferred” estimates correspond to those shown in Figures
2 and 3. All other estimates correspond to estimates from a model with both contemporaneous and
lagged effects, with the “combined” estimates equalling the sum of the two effects and corresponding
to the effects displayed in Figures 4 and 5; we include all studies for which it was possible to compute
these estimates. The first two columns gives the precision weighted mean and its standard error for
the sample of studies. The third column gives the estimated between-study standard deviation, as
derived from a Bayesian hierarchical model. The last column gives the number of studies used in
each estimate.
Effect Type

Median

Mean
µ

Standard Error
SE(µ)

Cross-Study Std. Dev
τ

N

13.81
14.75
7.85
17.74
1.90
4.24
10.95

11.04
11.33
2.84
11.33
1.90
2.28
3.54

1.22
1.90
2.34
2.96
1.08
1.00
1.20

8.46
6.29
10.64
14.44
3.84
2.09
3.05

26
14
14
11
19
19
17

4.07
3.37
-0.20
2.14
1.16
0.01
0.04

2.31
2.38
-0.23
2.08
0.59
-0.21
0.28

0.11
0.12
0.07
0.14
0.08
0.09
0.13

1.35
1.83
0.52
1.26
0.78
0.31
0.91

16
8
8
6
9
9
7

Intergroup conflict
Author preferred
Temperature, contemporaneous
Temperature, lagged
Temperature, combined
Precipitation, contemporaneous
Precipitation, lagged
Precipitation, combined
Interpersonal conflict
Author preferred
Temperature, contemporaneous
Temperature, lagged
Temperature, combined
Precipitation, contemporaneous
Precipitation, lagged
Precipitation, combined

