                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 . . . AND THE CROSS-SECTION OF EXPECTED RETURNS

                                       Campbell R. Harvey
                                           Yan Liu
                                          Heqing Zhu

                                       Working Paper 20592
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20592


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




We appreciate the comments of Viral Acharya, Jawad Addoum, Tobias Adrian, Andrew Ang, Ravi
Bansal, Mehmet Beceren, Itzhak Ben-David, Bernard Black, Jules van Binsbergen, Oliver Boguth,
Tim Bollerslev, Alon Brav, Ian Dew-Becker, Robert Dittmar, Jennifer Conrad, Michael Cooper, Andres
Donangelo, Wayne Ferson, Simon Gervais, Bing Han, John Hand, Andrew Karolyi, Abby Yeon Kyeong
Kim, Lars-Alexander Kuehn, Sophia Li, Harry Markowitz, Kyle Matoba, David McLean, Marcelo
Ochoa, Peter Park, Lubos Pastor, Andrew Patton, Lasse Heje Pedersen, Tapio Pekkala, Jeff Pontiff,
Ryan Pratt, Alexandru Rosoiu, Tim Simin, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, Ivo Welch, Basil Williams,
Yuhang Xing, Josef Zechner and Xiaofei Zhao as well as seminar participants at the 2014 New Frontiers
in Finance Conference at Vanderbilt University, the 2014 Inquire Europe-UK meeting in Vienna, the
2014 WFA meetings, and seminars at Duke University, University of Utah, and Penn State university.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Campbell R. Harvey, Yan Liu, and Heqing Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
. . . and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns
Campbell R. Harvey, Yan Liu, and Heqing Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 20592
October 2014
JEL No. C01,C58,G0,G1,G12,G3

                                              ABSTRACT

Hundreds of papers and hundreds of factors attempt to explain the cross-section of expected returns.
Given this extensive data mining, it does not make any economic or statistical sense to use the usual
significance criteria for a newly discovered factor, e.g., a t-ratio greater than 2.0. However, what hurdle
should be used for current research? Our paper introduces a multiple testing framework and provides
a time series of historical significance cutoffs from the first empirical tests in 1967 to today. Our new
method allows for correlation among the tests as well as missing data. We also project forward 20
years assuming the rate of factor production remains similar to the experience of the last few years.
The estimation of our model suggests that a newly discovered factor needs to clear a much higher
hurdle, with a t-ratio greater than 3.0. Echoing a recent disturbing conclusion in the medical literature,
we argue that most claimed research findings in financial economics are likely false.


Campbell R. Harvey                                   Heqing Zhu
Duke University                                      University of Oklahoma
Fuqua School of Business                             Norman, OK 73019 USA
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                carolinehzhu@ou.edu
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

Yan Liu
Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843
y-liu@mays.tamu.edu
1     Introduction
Forty years ago, one of the ﬁrst tests of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
found that the market beta was a signiﬁcant explanator of the cross-section of ex-
pected returns. The reported t-ratio of 2.57 in Fama and MacBeth (1973) comfortably
exceeded the usual cutoﬀ of 2.0. However, since that time, hundreds of papers have
tried to explain the cross-section of expected returns. Given the known number of
factors that have been tried and the reasonable assumption that many more factors
have been tried but did not make it to publication, the usual cutoﬀ levels for sta-
tistical signiﬁcance are not appropriate. We present a new framework that allows
for multiple tests and derive recommended statistical signiﬁcance levels for current
research in asset pricing.
    We begin with 313 papers that study cross-sectional return patterns published in
a selection of journals. We provide recommended p-values from the ﬁrst empirical
tests in 1967 through to present day. We also project minimum t-ratios through 2032
assuming the rate of “factor production” remains similar to the recent experience.
We present a taxonomy of historical factors as well as deﬁnitions.1
   Our research is related to a recent paper by McLean and Pontiﬀ (2014) who argue
that certain stock market anomalies are less anomalous after being published.2 Their
paper tests the statistical biases emphasized in Leamer (1978), Ross (1989), Lo and
MacKinlay (1990), Fama (1991) and Schwert (2003).
    Our paper also adds to the recent literature on biases and ineﬃciencies in cross-
sectional regression studies. Lewellen, Nagel and Shanken (2010) critique the usual
practice of using cross-sectional R2 s and pricing errors to judge the success of a
work and show that the explanatory powers of many previously documented factors
are spurious.3 Balduzzi and Robotti (2008) challenge the traditional approach of
estimating factor risk premia via cross-sectional regressions and advocate a factor
projection approach. Our work focuses on evaluating the statistical signiﬁcance of a
factor given the previous tests on other factors. Our goal is to use a multiple testing
framework to both re-evaluate past research and to provide a new benchmark for
current and future research.
    We tackle multiple hypothesis testing from the frequentist perspective. Bayesian
approaches on multiple testing and variable selection also exist. However, the high
dimensionality of the problem combined with the fact that we do not observe all the
factors that have been tried poses a big challenge for Bayesian methods. While we
    1
      We also provide a link to a ﬁle with full references and hyperlinks to the original articles:
http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/˜charvey/Factor-List.xlsx.
    2
      Other recent papers that systematically study the cross-sectional return patterns include Sub-
rahmanyam (2010), Green, Hand and Zhang (2012, 2013).
    3
      A related work by Daniel and Titman (2012) constructs more powerful statistical tests and
rejects several recently proposed factor models.


                                                       1
propose a frequentist approach to overcome this missing data issue, it is unclear how
to do this in the Bayesian framework. Nonetheless, we provide a detailed discussion
of Bayesian methods in the paper.
    There are limitations to our framework. First, should all factor discoveries be
treated equally? We think no. A factor derived from a theory should have a lower hur-
dle than a factor discovered from a purely empirical exercise. Nevertheless, whether
suggested by theory or empirical work, a t-ratio of 2.0 is too low. Second, our tests
focus on unconditional tests. It is possible that a particular factor is very important
in certain economic environments and not important in other environments. The un-
conditional test might conclude the factor is marginal. These two caveats need to be
taken into account when using our recommended signiﬁcance levels for current asset
pricing research.
    While our focus is on the cross-section of equity returns, our message applies to
many diﬀerent areas of ﬁnance. For instance, Frank and Goyal (2009) investigate
around 30 variables that have been documented to explain capital structure decisions
of public ﬁrms. Welch and Goyal (2004) examine the performance of a dozen variables
that have been shown to predict market excess returns. These two applications are
ideal settings to employ multiple testing methods.4
    Our paper is organized as follows. In the second section, we provide a chronology
of the “discovered” factors. The third section presents a categorization of the factors.
Next, we introduce some multiple testing frameworks and suggest appropriate cutoﬀs
for both past and future asset pricing tests. Some concluding remarks are oﬀered in
the ﬁnal section.

2       The Search Process
Our goal is not to catalogue every asset pricing paper ever published. We narrow
the focus to papers that propose and test new factors. For example, Sharpe (1964),
Lintner (1965) and Mossin (1966) all theoretically proposed (at roughly the same
time), a single factor model — the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). Beginning
with Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972), there are hundreds of papers that test the
CAPM. We include the theoretical papers as well as the ﬁrst paper to empirically
test the model, in this case, Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972). We do not include
the hundreds of papers that test the CAPM in diﬀerent contexts, e.g., international
markets, diﬀerent time periods. We do, however, include papers, such as Fama and
MacBeth (1973) which tests the market factor as well as two additional factors.
     Sometimes diﬀerent papers propose diﬀerent empirical proxies for the same type
of economic risk. Although they may look similar from a theoretical standpoint, we
still include them. An example is the empirical proxies for idiosyncratic ﬁnancial
constraints risk. While Lamont, Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001) use the Kaplan and
Zingales (1997) index to proxy for ﬁrm-level ﬁnancial constraint, Whited and Wu
    4
    Harvey and Liu (2014a) show how to adjust Sharpe Ratios used in performance evaluation for
multiple tests.


                                                    2
(2006) estimate their own constraint index based on the ﬁrst order conditions of
ﬁrms’ optimization problem. We include both even though they are likely highly
correlated.
    Since our focus is on factors that can broadly explain asset market return patterns,
we omit papers that focus on a small group of stocks or for a short period of time.
This will, for example, exclude a substantial amount of empirical corporate ﬁnance
research that studies event-driven return movements.
   Certain theoretical models lack immediate empirical content. Although they could
be empirically relevant once suitable proxies are constructed, we choose to exclude
them.
    With these rules in mind, we narrow our search to generally the top journals in
ﬁnance, economics and accounting. To include the most recent research, we search
for working papers on SSRN. Working papers pose a challenge because there are
thousands of them and they are not refereed. We choose a subset of papers that we
suspect are in review at top journals or have been presented at top conferences or
are due to be presented at top conferences. We end up using 63 working papers. In
total, we focus on 313 published works and selected working papers. We catalogue
316 diﬀerent factors.5
   Our collection of 316 factors likely under-represents the factor population. First,
we generally only consider top journals. Second, we are very selective in choosing
only a handful of working papers. Third, and perhaps most importantly, we should
be measuring the number of factors tested (which is unobservable) — that is, we do
not observe the factors that were tested but failed to pass the usual signiﬁcance levels
and were never published (see Fama (1991)).

3       Factor Taxonomy
To facilitate our analysis, we group the factors into diﬀerent categories. We start with
two broad categories: “common” and “individual”. “Common” means the factor can
be viewed as a proxy for a common source of risk. Risk exposure to this factor or its
innovations is supposed to help explain cross-sectional return patterns. “Individual”
means the factor is speciﬁc to the security or portfolio. A good example is Fama and
MacBeth (1973). While the beta against the market return is systematic (exposure
to a common risk factor), the standard deviation of the market model residual is
security speciﬁc and hence an idiosyncratic or individual risk. Many of the individual
factors we identify are referred to in the literature as “characteristics”.
   Based on the unique properties of the proposed factors, we further divide the
“common” and “individual” groups into ﬁner categories. In particular, we divide
“common” into: “ﬁnancial”, “macro”, “microstructure”, “behavioral”, “accounting”
and “other”. We divide “individual” into the same categories — except we omit the
    5
     As already mentioned, some of these factors are highly correlated. For example, we include two
versions of idiosyncratic volatility — where the residual is deﬁned by diﬀerent time-series regressions.


                                                         3
“macro” classiﬁcation, which is common, by deﬁnition. The following table provides
further details on the deﬁnitions of these sub-categories and gives examples for each.



                                  Table 1: Factor Classiﬁcation

            Risk type                          Description                                 Examples

 Common            Financial       Proxy for aggregate ﬁnancial market        Sharpe (1964):    market returns;
    (113)               (46)
                                   movement, including market portfo-         Kraus and Litzenberger (1976):
                                   lio returns, volatility, squared mar-      squared market returns
                                   ket returns, etc.

                    Macro          Proxy for movement in macroeco-            Breeden (1979):     consumption
                        (40)
                                   nomic fundamentals, including con-         growth; Cochrane (1991): invest-
                                   sumption, investment, inﬂation, etc.       ment returns

               Microstructure      Proxy for aggregate movements in           Pastor and Stambaugh (2003): mar-
                        (11)
                                   market microstructure or ﬁnancial          ket liquidity; Lo and Wang (2006):
                                   market frictions, including liquidity,     market trading volume
                                   transaction costs, etc.

                  Behavioral       Proxy for aggregate movements              Baker and Wurgler (2006): investor
                        (3)
                                   in investor behavior, sentiment or         sentiment; Hirshleifer and Jiang
                                   behavior-driven systematic mispric-        (2010): market mispricing
                                   ing

                 Accounting        Proxy for aggregate movement in            Fama and French (1992): size and
                        (8)
                                   ﬁrm-level accounting variables, in-        book-to-market; Da and Warachka
                                   cluding payout yield, cash ﬂow, etc.       (2009): cash ﬂow

                    Other          Proxy for aggregate movements that         Carhart (1997): return momentum;
                        (5)
                                   do not fall into the above categories,     Ozoguz (2008): investors’ beliefs
                                   including momentum, investors’ be-
                                   liefs, etc.

 Individual        Financial       Proxy for ﬁrm-level idiosyncratic ﬁ-       Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang
    (202)               (61)
                                   nancial risks, including volatility, ex-   (2006): idiosyncratic volatility; Bali,
                                   treme returns, etc.                        Cakici and Whitelaw (2011): ex-
                                                                              treme stock returns

               Microstructure      Proxy for ﬁrm-level ﬁnancial market        Jarrow (1980): short sale restric-
                        (28)
                                   frictions, including short sale restric-   tions; Mayshar (1981): transaction
                                   tions, transaction costs, etc.             costs

                  Behavioral       Proxy for ﬁrm-level behavioral bi-         Diether, Malloy and Scherbina
                        (3)
                                   ases, including analyst dispersion,        (2002): analyst dispersion; Fang
                                   media coverage, etc.                       and Peress (2009): media coverage

                 Accounting        Proxy for ﬁrm-level accounting vari-       Basu (1977): PE ratio; Bhandari
                        (87)
                                   ables, including PE ratio, debt to eq-     (1988): debt to equity ratio
                                   uity ratio, etc.

                    Other          Proxy for ﬁrm-level variables that do      Cooper, Gulen and Ovtchinnikov
                        (24)
                                   not fall into the above categories, in-    (2010): political campaign contribu-
                                   cluding political campaign contribu-       tions; Edmans (2011): intangibles
                                   tions, ranking-related ﬁrm intangi-
                                   bles, etc.

 Numbers in parentheses represent the number of factors identiﬁed. See Table 5 for details.

                                                              4
4       Adjusted T-ratios in Multiple Testing

4.1     Why Multiple Testing?

Given so many papers have attempted to explain the same cross-section of expected
returns,6 statistical inference should not be based on a “single” test perspective.7 Our
goal is to provide guidance as to the appropriate signiﬁcance level using a multiple
testing framework.
    We want to emphasize that there are many forces that make our guidance le-
nient, that is, a credible case can be made for even lower p-values. We have already
mentioned that we only sample a subset of research papers and the “publication
bias/hidden tests” issue (i.e. it is diﬃcult to publish a non-result).8 However, there
is another publication bias that is more subtle. In many scientiﬁc ﬁelds, replication
studies routinely appear in top journals. That is, a factor is discovered, and others
try to replicate it. In ﬁnance and economics, it is very diﬃcult to publish replica-
tion studies. Hence, there is a bias towards publishing “new” factors rather than
rigorously verifying the existence of discovered factors.
    There are two ways to deal with the bias introduced by multiple testing: out-of-
sample validation and using a statistical framework that allows for multiple testing.9
When feasible, out-of-sample testing is the cleanest way to rule out spurious fac-
tors. In their study of anomalies, McLean and Pontiﬀ (2014) take the out-of-sample
approach. Their results show a degradation of performance of identiﬁed anomalies
after publication which is consistent with the statistical bias. It is possible that this
degradation is larger than they document. In particular, they drop 10 of their 82
anomalies because they could not replicate the in-sample performance of published
studies. Given these non-replicable anomalies were not even able to survive routine
data revisions, they are likely to be insigniﬁcant strategies, either in-sample or out-
of-sample. The degradation from the original published “alpha” is 100% for these
strategies — which would lead to a higher average rate of degradation for the 82
strategies.
    6
      Strictly speaking, diﬀerent papers study diﬀerent sample periods and hence focus on “diﬀerent”
cross-sections of expected returns. However, the bulk of the papers we consider have substantial
overlapping sample periods. Also, if one believes that cross-sectional return patterns are stationary,
then these papers are studying roughly the same cross-section of expected returns.
    7
      When just one hypothesis is tested, we use the term “individual test”, “single test” and “in-
dependent test” interchangeably. The last term should not be confused with any sort of stochastic
independence.
    8
      See Rosenthal (1979) for one of the earliest and most inﬂuential works on publication bias.
    9
      Another approach to test factor robustness is to look at multiple asset classes. This approach
has been followed in several recent papers, e.g., Frazzini and Pedersen (2012) and Koijen, Moskowitz,
Pedersen and Vrugt (2012).




                                                        5
    While the out-of-sample approach has many strengths, it has one important draw-
back: it cannot be used in real time.10 In contrast to many tests in the physical
sciences, we often need years of data to do an out-of-sample test. We pursue the mul-
tiple testing framework because it yields immediate guidance on whether a discovered
factor is real.



4.2     A Multiple Testing Framework

In statistics, multiple testing refers to simultaneous testing more than one hypothesis.
The statistics literature was aware of this multiplicity problem at least 50 years ago.11
Early generations of multiple testing procedures focus on the control of the family-wise
error rate (see Section 4.3.1). More recently, increasing interest in multiple testing
from the medical literature has spurred the development of methods that control
the false-discovery rate (see Section 4.3.2). Nowadays, multiple testing is an active
research area in both the statistics and the medical literature.12
    Despite the rapid development of multiple testing methods, they have not at-
tracted much attention in the ﬁnance literature.13 Moreover, most of the research
that does involve multiple testing focuses on the Bonferroni adjustment, which is
known to be too stringent. Our paper aims to ﬁll this gap by systematically intro-
ducing the multiple testing framework.
   First, we introduce a hypothetical example to motivate a more general framework.
In Table 5, we categorize the possible outcomes of a multiple testing exercise. Panel
A displays an example of what the literature could have discovered and Panel B
   10
       To make real time assessment in the out-of-sample approach, it is common to hold out some
data. However, this is not genuine out-of-sample testing as all the data are observable to researchers.
A real out-of-sample test needs data in the future.
    11
       For early research on multiple testing, see Scheﬀé’s method (Scheﬀé (1959)) for adjusting sig-
niﬁcance levels in a multiple regression context and Tukey’s range test (Tukey (1977)) on pairwise
mean diﬀerences.
    12
       See Shaﬀer (1995) for a review of multiple testing procedures that control for the family-wise
error rate. See Farcomeni (2008) for a review that focuses on procedures that control the false-
discovery rate.
    13
       For the literature on multiple testing corrections for data snooping biases, see Sullivan, Tim-
mermann and White (1999, 2001) and White (2000). For research on data snooping and variable
selection in predictive regressions, see Foster, Smith and Whaley (1997), Cooper and Gulen (2006)
and Lynch and Vital-Ahuja (2012). For applications of multiple testing approach in the ﬁnance
literature, see for example Shanken (1990), Ferson and Harvey (1999), Boudoukh et al. (2007) and
Patton and Timmermann (2010). More recently, the false discovery rate and its extensions have
been used to study technical trading and mutual fund performance, see for example Barras, Scaillet
and Wermers (2010), Bajgrowicz and Scaillet (2012) and Kosowski, Timmermann, White and Wer-
mers (2006). Conrad, Cooper and Kaul (2003) point out that data snooping accounts for a large
proportion of the return diﬀerential between equity portfolios that are sorted by ﬁrm characteristics.
Bajgrowicz, Scaillet and Treccani (2013) show that multiple testing methods help eliminate a large
proportion of spurious jumps detected using conventional test statistics for high-frequency data.
Holland, Basu and Sun (2010) emphasize the importance of multiple testing in accounting research.


                                                         6
notationalizes Panel A to ease our subsequent deﬁnition of the general Type I error
rate — the chance of making at least one false discovery or the expected fraction of
false discoveries.

             Table 2: Contingency Table in Testing M Hypotheses.

              Panel A shows a hypothetical example for factor testing. Panel B
              presents the corresponding notation in a standard multiple testing
              framework.


               Panel A: An Example
                                          Unpublished         Published      Total
               Truly insigniﬁcant            500                 50           550
                Truly signiﬁcant             100                 50           150
                     Total                   600                100           700
               Panel B: The Testing Framework
                                        H0 not rejected      H0 rejected Total
                     H0 True                 N0|a               N0|r      M0
                     H0 False                N1|a               N1|r      M1
                      Total                M −R                  R        M


    Our example in Panel A assumes 100 published factors (denoted as R). Among
these factors, suppose 50 are false discoveries and the rest are real ones. In addition,
researchers have tried 600 other factors but none of them were found to be signiﬁcant.
Among them, 500 are truly insigniﬁcant but the other 100 are true factors. The total
number of tests (M ) is 700. Two types of mistakes are made in this process: 50 factors
are falsely discovered to be true while 100 true factors are buried in unpublished
work. Usual statistical control in a multiple testing context aims at reducing “50” or
“50/100”, the absolute or proportionate occurrence of false discoveries, respectively.
Of course, we only observe published factors because factors that are tried and found
to be insigniﬁcant rarely make it to publication.14 This poses a challenge since the
usual statistical techniques only handle the case where all test results are observable.
    Panel B deﬁnes the corresponding terms in a formal statistical testing framework.
In a factor testing exercise, the typical null hypothesis is that a factor is not signiﬁcant.
Therefore, a factor is insigniﬁcant means the null hypothesis is “true”. Using “0” (“1”)
to indicate the null is true (false) and “a” (“r”) to indicate acceptance (rejection), we
can easily summarize Panel A. For instance, N0|r measures the number of rejections
  14
     Examples of publication of unsuccessful factors include Fama and MacBeth (1973) and Ferson
and Harvey (1993). Fama and MacBeth (1973) show that squared beta and standard deviation
of the market model residual have an insigniﬁcant role in explaining the cross-section of expected
returns. Overall, it is rare to publish “non-results” and all instances of published non-results are
coupled with signiﬁcant results for other factors.


                                                       7
when the null is true (i.e. the number of false discoveries) and N1|a measures the
number of acceptances when the null is false (i.e. the number of missed discoveries).
To avoid confusion, we try not to use standard statistical language in describing our
notation but rather words unique to our factor testing context. The generic notation
in Panel B is convenient for us to formally deﬁne diﬀerent types of errors and describe
adjustment procedures in subsequent sections.



4.3     Type I and Type II Errors

For a single hypothesis test, a value α is used to control Type I error: the probability
of ﬁnding a factor to be signiﬁcant when it is not. In a multiple testing framework,
restricting each individual test’s Type I error rate at α is not enough to control the
overall probability of false discoveries. The intuition is that, under the null that all
factors are insigniﬁcant, it is very likely for an event with α probability to occur when
many factors are tested. In multiple hypothesis testing, we need measures of the Type
I error that help us simultaneously evaluate the outcomes of many individual tests.
    To gain some intuition on plausible measures of Type I error, we return to Panel
B of Table 5. N0|r and N1|a count the total number of the two types of errors:
N0|r counts false discoveries while N1|a counts missed discoveries. As generalized
from single hypothesis testing, the Type I error in multiple hypothesis testing is also
related to false discoveries — concluding a factor is “signiﬁcant” when it is not. But,
by deﬁnition, we must draw several conclusions in multiple hypothesis testing, and
there is a possible false discovery for each. Therefore, plausible deﬁnitions of the
Type I error should take into account the joint occurrence of false discoveries.
    The literature has adopted at least two ways of summarizing the “joint occur-
rence”. One approach is to count the total number of occurrences N0|r . N0|r greater
than zero suggests incorrect statistical inference for the overall multiple testing prob-
lem — the occurrence of which we should limit. Therefore, the probability of event
N0|r > 0 should be a meaningful quantity for us to control. Indeed, this is the intu-
ition behind the family-wise error rate introduced later. On the other hand, when
the total number of discoveries R is large, one or even a few false discoveries may be
tolerable. In this case, N0|r is no longer a suitable measure; a certain false discovery
proportion may be more desirable. Unsurprisingly, the expected value of N0|r /R is
the focus of false discovery rate, the second type of control.
   The two aforementioned measures are the most widely used in the statistics lit-
erature. Moreover, many other techniques can be viewed as extensions of these mea-
sures.15 We now describe each measure in detail.
  15
     Holm (1979) is the ﬁrst to formally deﬁne the family-wise error rate. Benjamini and Hochberg
(1995) deﬁne and study the false discovery rate. Alternative deﬁnitions of error rate include per
comparison error rate (Saville, 1990), positive false discovery rate (Storey, 2003) and generalized
false discovery rate (Sarkar and Guo, 2009).


                                                       8
4.3.1    Family-wise Error Rate

The family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability of at least one Type I error:

                                    FWER = P r(N0|r ≥ 1).

FWER measures the probability of even a single false discovery, irrespective of the
total number of tests. For instance, researchers might test 100 factors; FWER mea-
sures the probability of incorrectly identifying one or more factors to be signiﬁcant.
Given signiﬁcance or threshold level α, we explore two existing methods (Bonferroni
and Holm’s adjustment) to ensure FWER does not exceed α. Even as the number
of trials increases, FWER still measures the probability of a single false discovery.
This absolute control is in contrast to the proportionate control aﬀorded by the false
discovery rate (FDR), deﬁned below.


4.3.2    False Discovery Rate

The false discovery proportion (FDP) is the proportion of Type I errors:

                                        
                                         N
                                         0|r if R > 0,
                                  FDP =    R
                                        
                                        
                                           0  if R = 0.

The false discovery rate (FDR) is deﬁned as:

                                        FDR = E[F DP ].

FDR measures the expected proportion of false discoveries among all discoveries. It is
less stringent than FWER and usually much less so when many tests are performed.16
  16
    There is a natural ordering between FDR and FWER. Theoretically, FDR is always bounded
above by FWER, i.e., F DR ≤ F W ER. To see this, by deﬁnition,
                                         N0|r
                                FDR = E[       |R > 0]P r(R > 0)
                                           R
                                     ≤ E[I(N0|r ≥1) |R > 0]P r(R > 0)
                                     = P r((N0|r ≥ 1) ∩ (R > 0))
                                     ≤ P r(N0|r ≥ 1) = FWER,

where I(N0|r ≥1) is an indicator function of event N0|r ≥ 1. This implies that procedures that control
FWER under a certain signiﬁcance level automatically control FDR under the same signiﬁcance
level. In our context, a factor discovery criterion that controls FWER at α also controls FDR at α.



                                                        9
Intuitively, this is because FDR allows N0|r to grow in proportion to R whereas FWER
measures the probability of making even a single Type I error.
    Returning to Example A, Panel A shows that a false discovery event has occurred
under FWER since N0|r = 50 ≥ 1 and the realized FDP is high, 50/100 = 50%. This
suggests that the probability of false discoveries (FWER) and the expected proportion
of false discoveries (FDR) may be high.17 The remedy, as suggested by many FWER
and FDR adjustment procedures, would be to lower p-value thresholds for these
hypotheses. In terms of Panel A, this would turn some of the 50 false discoveries
insigniﬁcant and push them into the “Unpublished” category. Hopefully the 50 true
discoveries would survive this p-value “upgrade” and remain signiﬁcant, which is only
possible if their p-values are relatively large.
    On the other hand, Type II errors — the mistake of missing true factors — are
also important in multiple hypothesis testing. Similar to Type I errors, both the total
number of missed discoveries N1|a and the fraction of missed discoveries among all
abandoned tests N1|a /(M − R) are frequently used to measure the severity of Type II
errors.18 Ideally, one would like to simultaneously minimize the chance of committing
a Type I error and that of committing a Type II error. In our context, we would like
to include as few insigniﬁcant factors (i.e., as low a Type I error rate) as possible and
simultaneously as many signiﬁcant ones (i.e., as low a Type II error rate) as possible.
Unfortunately, this is not feasible: as in single hypothesis testing, a decrease in the
Type I error rate often leads to an increase in the Type II error rate and vice versa.
We therefore seek a balance between the two types of errors. A standard approach is
to specify a signiﬁcance level α for the Type I error rate and derive testing procedures
that aim to minimize the Type II error rate, i.e., maximize power, among the class
of tests with Type I error rate at most α.
    When comparing two testing procedures that can both achieve a signiﬁcance level
α, it seems reasonable to use their Type II error rates. However, the exact Type II
error rate typically depends on a set of unknown parameters and is therefore diﬃcult
to assess.19 To overcome this diﬃculty, researchers frequently use distance of the
   17
      Panel A only shows one realization of the testing outcome for a certain testing procedure (e.g.,
independent tests). To evaluate FWER and FDR, both of which are expectations and hence depend
on the underlying joint distribution of the testing statistics, we need to know the population of
the testing outcomes. To give an example that is compatible with Example A, we assume that the
t-statistics for the 700 hypotheses are independent. Moreover, we assume the t-statistic for a true
factor follows a normal distribution with mean zero and variance one, i.e., N (0, 1); for a false factor,
we assume its t-statistic follows N (2, 1). Under these assumptions about the joint distribution of
the test statistics, we ﬁnd via simulations that FWER is 100% and FDR is 26%, both exceeding 5%.
   18
      See Simes (1986) for one example of Type II error in simulation studies and Farcomeni (2008)
for another example in medical experiments.
   19
      In single hypothesis testing, a typical Type II error rate is a function of the realization of the
alternative hypothesis. Since it depends on unknown parameter values in the alternative hypoth-
esis, it is diﬃcult to measure directly. The situation is exacerbated in multiple hypothesis testing
because the Type II error rate now depends on a multi-dimensional unknown parameter vector. See
Zehetmayer and Posch (2010) for power estimation in large-scale multiple testing problems.



                                                         10
actual Type I error rate to some pre-speciﬁed signiﬁcance level as the measure for a
procedure’s eﬃciency. Intuitively, if a procedure’s actual Type I error rate is strictly
below α, we can probably push this error rate closer to α by making the testing
procedure less stringent, i.e., higher p-value threshold so there will be more discoveries.
In doing so, the Type II error rate is presumably lowered given the inverse relation
between the two types of error rates. Therefore, once a procedure’s actual Type I
error rate falls below a pre-speciﬁed signiﬁcance level, we want it to be as close as
possible to that signiﬁcance level in order to achieve the smallest Type II error rate.
Ideally, we would like a procedure’s actual Type I error rate to be exactly the same
as the given signiﬁcance level.20
    Both FWER and FDR are important concepts that have wide applications in many
scientiﬁc ﬁelds. However, based on speciﬁc applications, one may be preferred over the
other. When the number of tests is very large, FWER controlling procedures tend to
become very tough and eventually lead to a very limited number of discoveries, if any.
Conversely, FWER control is more desirable when the number of tests is relatively
small, in which case more discoveries can be achieved and at the same time trusted.
In the context of our paper, it is diﬃcult to judge whether the number of tests in
the ﬁnance literature is large. First, we are unsure of the true number of factors that
have been tried. Although there are around 300 published ones, hundreds or even
thousands of factors might have been constructed and tested. Second, 300 may seem
a large number to researchers in ﬁnance but is very small compared to the number of
tests conducted in medical research.21 Given this diﬃculty, we do not take a stand
on the relative appropriateness of these two measures but instead provide adjusted
p-values for both. Researchers can compare their p-values with these benchmarks to
see whether FDR or even FWER is satisﬁed.
    Related to the false discovery rate, recent research by Lehmann and Romano
(2005) tries to control the probability of the realized FDP exceeding a certain thresh-
old value, i.e., P (F DP > γ) ≤ α, where γ is the threshold FDP value and α is the
signiﬁcance level.22 Instead of the expected FDP (i.e., the FDR), Lehmann and Ro-
mano’s method allows one to make a statement concerning the realized FDP, which
might be more desirable in certain applications. For example, targeting the realized
FDP is a loss control method and seems more appropriate for risk management or
insurance. For our asset pricing applications, we choose to focus on the FDR. In
addition, it is diﬃcult to tell whether controlling the realized FDP at γ = 0.1 with a
  20
      In our framework, individual p-values are suﬃcient statistics for us to make adjustment for
multiple tests. Each individual p-value represents the probability of having a t-statistic that is at
least as large as the observed one under the null hypothesis. What happens under the alternative
hypotheses (e.g., the power of the tests) does not directly come into play because hypothesis testing
in the frequentist framework has a primary focus on the Type I error rate. When we deviate from
the frequentist framework and consider Bayesian methods, the power of the tests becomes important
because Bayesian odds ratios put the Type I and Type II error rate on the same footing.
   21
      For instance, tens of thousands of tests are performed in the analysis of DNA microarrays. See
Farcomeni (2008) for more applications of multiple testing in medical research.
   22
      Also see Romano and Shaikh (2006) and Romano, Shaikh and Wolf (2008).


                                                       11
signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05 is more stringent than controlling FDP at γ = 0.2 with
a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.01. While we use the FDR in our application, we provide
some details on the FDP methods in the Appendix.



4.4    P-value Adjustment: Three Approaches

The statistics literature has developed many methods to control both FWER and
FDR.23 We choose to present the three most well-known adjustments: Bonferroni,
Holm, and Benjamini, Hochberg and Yekutieli (BHY). Both Bonferroni and Holm
control FWER, and BHY controls FDR. Depending on how the adjustment is im-
plemented, they can be categorized into two general types of corrections: a “Single
step” correction equally adjusts each p-value and a “sequential” correction is an adap-
tive procedure that depends on the entire distribution of p-values. Bonferroni is a
single-step procedure whereas Holm and BHY are sequential procedures. Table 3
summarizes the two properties of the three methods.

                  Table 3: A Summary of p-value Adjustments

                 Adjustment type           Single/Sequential Multiple test
                    Bonferroni                   Single            FWER
                       Holm                   Sequential            FWER
            Benjamini, Hochberg and
                                              Sequential             FDR
                Yekutieli (BHY)


    In the usual multiple testing framework, we observe the outcomes of all test statis-
tics, those rejected as well as not rejected. In our context, however, successful factors
are more likely to be published and their p-values observed. This missing observa-
tions problem is the main obstacle in applying existing adjustment procedures. In
appendix A, we propose a new general methodology to overcome this problem. For
now, we assume that all tests and their associated p-values are observed and detail
the steps for the three types of adjustments.
    Suppose there are in total M tests and we choose to set FWER at αw and FDR
at αd . In particular, we consider an example with the total number of tests M = 10
to illustrate how diﬀerent adjustment procedures work. For our main results, we set
both αw and αd at 5%. Table 4, Panel A lists the t-ratios and the corresponding
p-values for 10 hypothetical tests. The numbers in the table are broadly consistent
with the magnitude of t-ratios that researchers report for factor signiﬁcance. Note
  23
     Methods that control FWER include Holm (1979), Hochberg (1988) and Hommel (1988). Meth-
ods that control FDR include Benjamini and Hochberg(1995), Benjamini and Liu (1999) and Ben-
jamini and Yekutieli (2001).


                                                  12
that all 10 factors will be “discovered” if we test one hypothesis at a time. Multiple
testing adjustments will usually generate diﬀerent results.


                         Table 4: An Example of Multiple Testing

Panel A displays 10 t-ratios and their associated p-values for a hypothetical example. Panel
B and C explain Holm’s and BHY’s adjustment procedure, respectively. Bold numbers in
each panel are associated with signiﬁcant factors under the speciﬁc adjustment∑ procedure
of that panel. M represents the total number of tests (10) and c(M ) = M        j=1 1/j. k is
the order of p-values from lowest to highest. αw is the signiﬁcance level for Bonferroni’s
and Holm’s procedure and αd is the signiﬁcance level for BHY’s procedure. Both numbers
are set at 5%. The threshold t-ratio for Bonferroni is 0.05%, for Holm 0.60% and for BHY
0.85%.

 Panel A: 10 Hypothetical t-ratios and Bonferroni “signiﬁcant” factors                                  # of
                                                                                                     discoveries
           k              1       2       3      4       5         6       7      8     9      10
        t-ratio          1.99   2.63    2.21   3.43    2.17      2.64    4.56   5.34   2.75   2.49       3
     p-value (%)         4.66   0.85    2.71   0.05    3.00      0.84    0.00   0.00   0.60   1.28

 Panel B: Holm adjusted p-values and “signiﬁcant” factors

    New order (k)         (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)     (5)       (6)    (7)     (8)    (9)   (10)
     Old order k           8      7      4       9       6         2      10      3      5      1
                                                                                                         4
     p-value (%)         0.00   0.00   0.05    0.60    0.84      0.85    1.28   2.71   3.00   4.66
   αw /(M + 1 − k)       0.50   0.56   0.63    0.71    0.83      1.00    1.25   1.67   2.50   5.00

 Panel C: BHY adjusted p-values and “signiﬁcant” factors

     New order (k)        (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)     (8)    (9)   (10)
      Old order k          8      7       4      9       6         2      10      3      5      1
      p-value (%)        0.00   0.00    0.05   0.60    0.84      0.85    1.28   2.71   3.00   4.66       6
 (k · αd )/(M × c(M ))
                         0.15   0.21   0.50    0.70    0.85      1.00    1.20   1.35   1.55   1.70
        αd = 5%




4.4.1     Bonferroni’s Adjustment

Bonferroni’s adjustment is as follows:

   • Reject any hypothesis with p-value ≤               αw
                                                        M:


                                        pBonf
                                         i
                                              erroni
                                                     = min[M pi , 1].


Bonferroni applies the same adjustment to each test. It inﬂates the original p-value
by the number of tests M ; the adjusted p-value is compared with the threshold value
αw .
   Example 4.4.1 To apply Bonferroni’s adjustment to the example in Table 4, we
simply multiply all the p-values by 10 and compare the new p-values with αw = 5%.

                                                            13
Equivalently, we can look at the original p-values and consider the cutoﬀ of 0.5%(=
αw /10). This leaves the t-ratio of tests 4,7 and 8 as signiﬁcant.
    Using the notation in Panel B of Table 5 and assuming M0 of the M null hy-
potheses are true, Bonferroni operates as a single step procedure that can be shown
to restrict FWER at levels less than or equal to M0 αw /M , without any assumption
on the dependence structure of the p-values. Since M0 ≤ M , Bonferroni also controls
FWER at level αw .24


4.4.2    Holm’s Adjustment

Sequential methods have recently been proposed to adjust p-values in multiple hy-
pothesis testing. They are motivated by a seminal paper by Schweder and Spjotvoll
(1982), who suggest a graphical presentation of the multiple testing p-values. In
particular, using Np to denote the number of tests that have a p-value exceeding p,
Schweder and Spjotvoll (1982) suggest plotting Np against (1 − p). When p is not
very small, it is very likely that the associated test is from the null hypothesis. In this
case, the p-value for a null test can be shown to be uniformly distributed between 0
and 1. It then follows that for a large p and under independence among tests, the
expected number of tests with a p-value exceeding p equals T0 (1 − p), where T0 is the
number of null hypotheses, i.e., E(Np ) = T0 (1 − p). By plotting Np against (1 − p),
the graph should be approximately linear with slope T0 for large p-values. Points on
the graph that substantially deviate from this linear pattern should correspond to
non-null hypotheses, i.e., discoveries. The gist of this argument — large and small
p-values should be treated diﬀerently — have been distilled into many variations of
sequential adjustment methods, among which we will introduce Holm’s method that
controls FWER and BHY’s method that controls FDR.
   Holm’s adjustment is as follows:

   • Order the original p-values such that p(1) ≤ p(2) ≤ · · · p(k) ≤ · · · ≤ p(M ) and let
     associated null hypotheses be H(1) , H(2) , · · · H(k) · · · , H(M ) .

   • Let k be the minimum index such that p(k) >            αw
                                                          M +1−k .

   • Reject null hypotheses H(1) · · · H(k−1) (i.e., declare these factors signiﬁcant) but
     not H(k) · · · H(M ) .
  24
     The number of true nulls M0 is inherently unknown, so we usually cannot make Bonferroni
more powerful by increasing αw to α̂ = M αw /M0 (note that M0 α̂/M = αw ). However some papers,
including Schweder and Spjotvoll (1982) and Hochberg and Benjamini (1990), try to improve the
power of Bonferroni by estimating M0 . We try to achieve the same goal by using either Holm’s
procedure which also controls FWER or procedures that control FDR, an alternative deﬁnition of
Type I error rate.




                                                    14
The equivalent adjusted p-value is therefore

                            pHolm
                             (i)  = min[max{(M − j + 1)p(j) }, 1].
                                             j≤i


Holm’s adjustment is a step-down procedure: 25 for the ordered p-values, we start
from the smallest p-value and go down to the largest one. If k is the smallest index
                       αw
that satisﬁes p(k) > M +1−k , we will reject all tests whose ordered index is below k.
   To explore how Holm’s adjustment procedure works, suppose k0 is the smallest
index such that p(k) > M +1−kαw
                                  . This means that for k < k0 , p(k) ≤ M +1−kαw
                                                                                   . In
                                                   αw        αw                   αw
particular, for k = 1, Bonferroni = Holm, i.e., M = M +1−(k=1) ; for k = 2, M <
    αw
M +1−(k=2) , so Holm is less stringent than Bonferroni. Since less stringent hurdles are
applied to the second to the (k0 − 1)th p-values, more discoveries are generated under
Holm’s than Bonferroni’s adjustment.
    Example 4.4.2 To apply Holm’s adjustment to the example in Table 4, we ﬁrst
order the p-values in ascending order and try to locate the smallest index k that
                 αw
makes p(k) > M +1−k   . Table 4, Panel B shows the ordered p-values and the associated
  αw
M +1−k ’s. Starting from  the smallest p-value and going up, we see that p(k) is below
  αw                                              αw
M +1−k until k = 5, at which p(5) is above 10+1−7 . Therefore, the smallest k that
                  αw
satisﬁes p(k) > M +1−k is 5 and we reject the null hypothesis for the ﬁrst four ordered
tests (we discover four factors) and fail to reject the null for the remaining six tests.
The original labels for the rejected tests are in the second row in Panel B. Compared
to Bonferroni, one more factor (9) is discovered, that is, four factors rather than
three are signiﬁcant. In general, Holm’s approach leads to more discoveries and all
discoveries under Bonferroni are also discoveries under Holm’s.
   Like Bonferroni, Holm also restricts FWER at αw without any requirement on the
dependence structure of p-values. It can also be shown that Holm is uniformly more
powerful than Bonferroni in that tests rejected (factors discovered) under Bonferroni
are always rejected under Holm but not vice versa. In other words, Holm leads
to at least as many discoveries as Bonferroni. Given the dominance of Holm over
Bonferroni, one might opt to only use Holm. We include Bonferroni because it is the
most widely used adjustment and a simple single-step procedure.


4.4.3    Benjamini, Hochberg and Yekutieli’s Adjustment

Benjamini, Hochberg and Yekutieli (BHY)’s adjustment is as follows:
   25
     Viewing small p-values as “up” and large p-values as “down”, Holm’s procedure is a “step-
down” procedure in that it goes from small p-values to large ones. This terminology is consistent
with the statistics literature. Of course, small p-values are associated with “large” values of the test
statistics.




                                                         15
   • As with Holm’s procedure, order the original p-values such that p(1) ≤ p(2) ≤
     · · · p(k) ≤ · · · ≤ p(M ) and let associated null hypotheses be H(1) , H(2) , · · · H(k) · · · , H(M ) .

   • Let k be the maximum index such that p(k) ≤                      k
                                                                   M ×c(M ) αd .

   • Reject null hypotheses H(1) · · · H(k) but not H(k+1) · · · H(M ) .

The equivalent adjusted p-value is deﬁned sequentially as:
                               
                                            p(M )                 if i = M,
                   pBHY    =
                    (i)
                                               M ×c(M )
                                   min[pBHY
                                        (i+1) ,    i     p(i) ] if i ≤ M − 1.

where, c(M ) is a function of the total number of tests M and controls for the generality
of the test. We adopt the choice in Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) and set c(M ) at

                                                     ∑
                                                     M
                                                       1
                                          c(M ) =              ,
                                                     j=1
                                                           j


a value at which the procedure works under arbitrary dependence structure among
the p-values. We discuss alternative speciﬁcations of c(M ) shortly.
    In contrast to Holm’s, BHY’s method starts with the largest p-value and goes up
to the smallest one. If k is the largest index that satisﬁes p(k) ≤ M ×c(M
                                                                       k
                                                                           ) αd , we will
reject all tests (discover factors) whose ordered index is below or equal to k. Also,
note that αd (signiﬁcance level for FDR) is chosen to be a smaller number than αw
(signiﬁcance level for FWER). The reason for such a choice is discussed in Section
4.6.
   To explore how BHY works, let k0 be the largest index such that p(k) ≤ M ×c(M
                                                                             k
                                                                                 ) αd .
                                         k
This means that for k > k0 , p(k) > M ×c(M ) αd . In particular, we have p(k0 +1) >
 (k0 +1)
            p(k0 +2) > M(k×c(M
M ×c(M ) αd ,
                          0 +2)                           M
                                ) αd , . . . , p(M ) > M ×c(M ) αd . We see that the (k0 + 1)th
to the last null hypotheses, not rejected, are compared to numbers smaller than αd ,
the usual signiﬁcance level in single hypothesis testing. By being stricter than single
hypothesis tests, BHY guarantees that the false discovery rate is below the pre-
speciﬁed signiﬁcance level under arbitrary dependence structure among the p-values.
See Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) for details on the proof.
    Example 4.4.3 To apply BHY’s adjustment to the example in Table 4, we ﬁrst
order the p-values in ascending order and try to locate the largest index k that satisﬁes
p(k) ≤ M ×c(Mk
                 ) αd . Table 4, Panel C shows the ordered p-values and the associated
    k
M ×c(M ) αd ’s. Starting from the largest p-value and going down, we see that p(k) is
           k                                                k
above M ×c(M    ) αd until k = 6, at which p(6) is below 10×2.93 αd . Therefore, the smallest


                                                       16
k that satisﬁes p(k) ≤ M ×c(M
                           k
                              ) αd is 6 and we reject the null hypothesis for the ﬁrst six
ordered tests and fail to reject for the remaining four tests. In the end, BHY leads
to six signiﬁcant factors (8,7,4,9,6 and 2), three more than Bonferroni and two more
than Holm.26
    Under independence among p-values, we can gain insight into the choice of pBHY(i)
by interpreting pBHY
                  (i) as  the solution  to a post-experiment   maximization problem.  27

In particular, assume all individual hypotheses are performed and their p-values col-
lected. It can be shown that pBHY
                               (i)   is the solution to the following problem:

         Objective : Choose p̂ that maximizes the number of discoveries n(p̂),
        Constraint : p̂M/n(p̂) ≤ αd .

We ﬁrst interpret the constraint. Under independence and when each hypothesis
is tested individually at level p̂, the expected number of false discoveries satisﬁes
E(N0|r ) ≤ p̂M . Hence, after observing the outcome of the experiment and thus
conditional on having n(p̂) discoveries, the FDR is no greater than p̂M/n(p̂). The
constraint therefore requires the post-experiment FDR to satisfy the pre-speciﬁed
signiﬁcance level. Under this constraint, the objective is to choose p̂ to maximize
the number of discoveries. Since the constraint is satisﬁed for each realized p-value
sequence of the experiment, it is satisﬁed in expectation as well. In sum, pBHY
                                                                            (i) is the
optimal cutoﬀ p-value (i.e., maximal number of discoveries) that satisﬁes the FDR
constraint for each outcome of the experiment.
    The choice of c(M ) determines the generality of BHY’s procedure. Intuitively,
the larger c(M ) is, the more diﬃcult it is to satisfy the inequality p(k) ≤ M ×c(M
                                                                                 k
                                                                                    ) αd
and hence there will be fewer discoveries. This makes it easier to restrict the false
discovery rate below a given signiﬁcance level since fewer discoveries are made. In
the original work that develops the concept of false discovery rate and related testing
procedures, c(M ) is set equal to one. It turns out that under this choice, BHY is only
valid when the test statistics are independent or positively dependent.28 With our
choice of c(M ), BHY is valid under any form of dependence among the p-values.29
                                                    k
Note with c(M ) > 1, this reduces the size of M ×c(M   ) αd and it is tougher to satisfy

  26
       For independent tests, 10/10 are discovered. For BHY, the eﬀective cutoﬀ is 0.85%, for Bon-
ferroni 0.50% and for Holm 0.60%. The cutoﬀs are all far smaller than the usual 5%.
    27
       This interpretation is shown in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Under independence, c(M ) ≡ 1
is suﬃcient for BHY to work. See our subsequent discussions on the choice of c(M ).
    28
       Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) is the original paper that proposes FDR and sets c(M ) ≡
1. They show their procedures restricts the FDR below the pre-speciﬁed signiﬁcance level under
independence. Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) and Sarkar (2002) later show that the choice of
c(M ) ≡ 1 also works under positive dependence. For recent studies that assume speciﬁc dependence
structure to improve on BHY, see Yekutieli and Benjamini (1999), Troendle (2000), Dudoit and Van
der Laan (2008) and Romano, Shaikh and Wolf (2008). For a modiﬁed Type I error rate deﬁnition
that is analogous to FDR and its connection to Bayesian hypothesis testing, see Storey (2003).
    29
       See Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) for the proof.



                                                      17
     the inequality p(k) ≤                k
                                       M ×c(M ) αd .   That is, there will be fewer factors found to be
     signiﬁcant.
                          Figure 1: Multiple Test Thresholds for Example A


          0.050
                      Independent tests
          0.045
                                                                                      Holm
          0.040

          0.035

          0.030
p−value




          0.025

          0.020

          0.015
                                                                                         BHY
          0.010
                      Bonferroni
          0.005

          0.000
                  0       1        2        3          4     5        6    7      8     9      10     11
                                                                 k

     The 10 p-values for Example A and the threshold p-value lines for various adjustment
     procedures. All 10 factors are discovered under independent tests, three under Bonferroni,
     four under Holm and six under BHY. The signiﬁcance level is set at 5% for each adjustment
     method.



        Figure 1 summarizes Example A. It plots the original p-value sample as well as
     threshold p-value lines for various adjustment procedures. We see the stark diﬀerence
     in outcomes between multiple and single hypothesis testing. While all 10 factors
     would be discovered under single hypothesis testing, only three to six factors would
     be discovered under a multiple hypothesis test. Although single hypothesis testing
     guarantees the Type I error of each test meets a given signiﬁcance level, meeting the
     more stringent FWER or FDR bound will lead us to discard a number of factors.
         To summarize the properties of the three adjustment procedures, Bonferroni’s
     adjustment is the simplest and inﬂates the original p-value by the total number of
     tests. Holm’s adjustment is a reﬁnement of Bonferroni but involves ordering of p-
     values and thus depends on the entire distribution of p-values. BHY’s adjustment,

                                                                 18
unlike that of Bonferroni or Holm, aims to control the false discovery rate and also
depends on the distribution of p-values. Importantly, all three methods allow for
general dependence among the test statistics.



4.5     Summary Statistics

Figure 2 shows the history of discovered factors and publications.30 We observe a
dramatic increase in factor discoveries during the last decade. In the early period
from 1980 to 1991, only about one factor is discovered per year. This number has
grown to around ﬁve in the 1991-2003 period, during which a number of papers,
such as Fama and French (1992), Carhart (1997) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003),
spurred interest in studying cross-sectional return patterns. In the last nine years, the
annual factor discovery rate has increased sharply to around 18. In total, 164 factors
were discovered in the past nine years, roughly doubling the 84 factors discovered in
all previous years. We do not include working papers in Figure 2. In our sample,
there are 63 working papers covering 68 factors.
    We obtain t-ratios for each of the 316 factors discovered, including the ones in
working papers.31 The overwhelming majority of t-ratios exceed the 1.96 benchmark
for 5% signiﬁcance.32 The non-signiﬁcant ones typically belong to papers that propose
a number of factors. These likely represent only a small sub-sample of non-signiﬁcant
t-ratios for all tried factors. Importantly, we take published t-ratios as given. That is,
we assume they are econometrically sound with respect to the usual suspects (data
errors, coding errors, misalignment, heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation, outliers, etc.).




4.6     P-value Adjustment When All Tests Are Published
        (M = R)

We now apply the three adjustment methods previously introduced to the observed
factor tests, under the assumption that test results of all tried factors are available. We
know that this assumption is false since our sample under-represents all insigniﬁcant
factors by conventional signiﬁcance standards: we only observe those insigniﬁcant
  30
      To be speciﬁc, we only count those that have t-ratios or equivalent statistics reported. Roughly
20 new factors fail to satisfy this requirement. For details on these, see factors in Table 6 marked
with ‡.
   31
      The sign of a t-ratio depends on the source of risk or the direction of the long/short strategy.
We usually calculate p-values based on two-sided t-tests, so the sign does not matter. Therefore we
use absolute values of these t-ratios.
   32
      The multiple testing framework is robust to outliers. The procedures are based on either the
total number of tests (Bonferroni) or the order statistics of t-ratios (Holm and BHY).


                                                       19
                           Figure 2: Factors and Publications
               70                                                                          280


               60                                                                          240


               50                                                                          200




                                                                                                 Cumulative
               40                                                                          160
    Per year




               30                                                                          120


               20                                                                          80


               10                                                                          40


                0                                                                          0




                           # of factors    # of papers        Cumulative # of factors



factors that are published alongside signiﬁcant ones. We design methods to handle
this missing data issue later.
    Despite some limitations, our results in this section are useful for at least two
purposes. First, the benchmark t-ratio based on our incomplete sample provides a
lower bound of the true t-ratio benchmark. In other words, if M (total number of
tests) >R (total number of discoveries), then we would accept fewer factors than
when M = R,33 , so future t-ratios need to at least surpass our benchmark to claim
signiﬁcance. Second, results in this section can be rationalized within a Bayesian or
hierarchical testing framework.34 Factors in our list constitute an “elite” group: they
have survived academia’s scrutiny for publication. Placing a high prior on this group
in a Bayesian testing framework or viewing this group as a cluster in a hierarchical
testing framework, one can interpret results in this section as the ﬁrst step factor
selection within an a priori group.
  33
      This is always true for Bonferroni’s adjustment but not always true for the other two types of
adjustments. The Bonferroni adjusted t-ratio is monotonically increasing in the number of trials so
the t-ratio benchmark will only rise if there are more factors. Holm and BHY depend on the exact
t-ratio distribution so more factors do not necessarily imply a higher t-ratio benchmark.
   34
      See Wagenmakers and Grünwald (2006) and Storey (2003) on Bayesian interpretations of tradi-
tional hypothesis testing. See Meinshausen (2008) for a hierarchical approach on variable selection.




                                                         20
    Based on our sample of observed t-ratios of published factors,35 we obtain three
benchmark t-ratios. In particular, at each point in time, we transform the set of
available t-ratios into p-values. We then apply the three adjustment methods to
obtain benchmark p-values. Finally, these p-value benchmarks are transformed back
into t-ratios, assuming that standard normal distribution well approximates the t-
distribution. To guide future research, we extrapolate our benchmark t-ratios 20
years into the future.
    We choose to set αw at 5% (Holm, FWER) and αd at 1% (BHY, FDR) for our
main results. Signiﬁcance level is subjective, as in individual hypothesis testing where
conventional signiﬁcance levels are usually adopted. Since FWER is a special case of
the Type I error in individual testing and 5% seems the default signiﬁcance level in
cross-sectional studies, we set αw at 5%. On the other hand, FDR is a weaker control
relative to FWER; moreover, it has no power in further screening individual tests if
FDR is set greater than or equal to the signiﬁcance level of individual tests.36 We
therefore set FDR at 1% but will explain what happens when αd is increased to 5%.
    Figure 3 presents the three benchmark t-ratios. Both Bonferroni and Holm ad-
justed benchmark t-ratios are monotonically increasing in the number of discoveries.
For Bonferroni, the benchmark t-ratio starts at 1.96 and increases to 3.78 by 2012.
It reaches 4.00 in 2032. The corresponding p-values for 3.78 and 4.00 are 0.02% and
0.01% respectively, much lower than the starting level of 5%. Holm implied t-ratios
always fall below Bonferroni t-ratios, consistent with the fact that Bonferroni always
results in fewer discoveries than Holm. However, Holm tracks Bonferroni closely
and their diﬀerences are small. BHY implied benchmarks, on the other hand, are
not monotonic. They ﬂuctuate before year 2000 and stabilize at 3.39 (p-value =
0.07%) after 2010. This stationarity feature of BHY implied t-ratios, inherent in the
deﬁnition of FDR, is in contrast to Bonferroni and Holm. Intuitively, at any ﬁxed
signiﬁcance level α, the Law of Large Numbers forces the false discovery rate (FDR)
   35
       There are at least two ways to generate t-ratios for a risk factor. One way is to show that
factor related sorting results in cross-sectional return patterns that are not explained by standard
risk factors. The t-ratio for the intercept of the long/short strategy returns regressed on common
risk factors is usually reported. The other way is to use factor loadings as explanatory variables
and show that they are related to the cross-section of expected returns after controlling for standard
risk factors. Individual stocks or stylized portfolios (e.g., Fama-French 25 portfolios) are used as
dependent variables. The t-ratio for the factor risk premium is taken as the t-ratio for the factor.
In sum, depending on where the new risk factor or factor returns enter the regressions, the ﬁrst way
can be thought of as the left hand side (LHS) approach and the second the right hand side (RHS)
approach. For our data collection, we choose to use the RHS t-ratios. When they are not available,
we use the LHS t-ratios or simply the t-ratios for the average returns of long/short strategies if the
authors do not control for other risk factors.
    36
       When tests are all signiﬁcant based on single testing and for Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)’s
original adjustment algorithm (i.e., c(M ) ≡ 1), BHY yields the same results as single testing. To see
this, notice that the threshold for the largest p-value becomes αd in BHY’s method. As a result, if
all tests are individually signiﬁcant at level αd , the largest p-value would satisfy p(M ) ≤ αd . Based
on BHY’s procedure, this means we reject all null hypotheses. In our context, the p-values for
published factors are all below 5% due to hidden tests. Therefore, under c(M ) ≡ 1, if we set αd
equal to 5%, all of these factors will be still be declared as signiﬁcant under multiple testing.


                                                         21
                                                  Figure 3: Adjusted t-ratios, 1965-2032




                   5.0                                                                                                          800
                                                               HML       MOM                   DCG
                   4.5                                                                                                          720


                   4.0                                                                                SRV                       640


                   3.5                                                                                         CVOL             560
                                                                                 LIQ

                                                                                                      LRV
                   3.0                                                                                                          480
                                                                                               IVOL
                             MRT
                                                                                       DEF
                   2.5                                                                                                          400
                                            EP                 SMB




         t-ratio
                   2.0                                                                                                          320
                                                                       316 factors in 2012 if working
                                                                                                                                      Cumulative # of factors




                                                                            papers are included
                   1.5                                                                                                          240


                   1.0                                                                                                          160




22
                   0.5                                                                                                          80


                   0.0                                                                                                          0
                      1965     1975              1985                1995                    2005                2015   2025
                                           Bonferroni                                         Holm
                                           BHY                                                T-ratio = 1.96 (5%)
                                           T-ratio = 4.9 (upper bound)                        Cumulative # of factors
                                           Forecasted cumulative # of factors



     The green solid curve shows the historical cumulative number of factors discovered, excluding those from working papers. Forecasts
     (dotted green line) are based on a linear extrapolation. The dark crosses mark selected factors proposed by the literature. They are
     MRT (market beta; Fama and MacBeth (1973)), EP (earnings-price ratio; Basu (1983)), SMB and HML (size and book-to-market;
     Fama and French (1992)), MOM (momentum; Carhart (1997)), LIQ (liquidity; Pastor and Stambaugh (2003)), DEF (default likelihood;
     Vassalou and Xing (2004)), IVOL (idiosyncratic volatility; Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2006)); DCG (durable consumption goods;
     Yogo (2006)); SRV and LRV (short-run and long-run volatility; Adrian and Rosenberg (2008)) and CVOL (consumption volatility;
     Boguth and Kuehn (2012)). T-ratios over 4.9 are truncated at 4.9. For detailed descriptions of these factors, see Table 6.
to converge to a constant.37 If we change αd to 5%, the corresponding BHY implied
benchmark t-ratio is 2.78 (p-value = 0.54%) in 2012 and 2.81 (p-value = 0.50%) in
2032, still much higher than the 1.96 staring value. In sum, taking into account of
testing multiplicity, we believe the minimum threshold t-ratio for 5% signiﬁcance is
about 2.8, which corresponds to a p-value of 0.5%.
    To see how the new t-ratio benchmarks better diﬀerentiate the statistical signiﬁ-
cance of factors, in Figure 3 we mark the t-ratios of a few prominent factors. Among
these factors, HML, MOM, DCG, SRV and MRT are signiﬁcant across all types of
t-ratio adjustments, EP, LIQ and CVOL are sometimes signiﬁcant and the rest are
never signiﬁcant.



4.7     Robustness

Our three adjustment methods are able to control their Type I error rates (FWER
for Bonferroni and Holm; FDR for BHY) under arbitrary distributional assumptions
about the test statistics. However, if the test statistics are positively correlated, then
all three methods might be conservative in that too few factors are discovered. Then
again, counteracting this conservatism is our incomplete coverage of tried factors.
By adding factors to our current sample, certain adjusted threshold t-ratios (e.g.,
Bonferroni) will increase, making our current estimates less conservative. We discuss
the dependence issue in this section and address the incomplete coverage issue in the
Appendix.


4.7.1    Test statistics dependence

In theory, under independence, Bonferroni and Holm approximately achieve the pre-
speciﬁed signiﬁcance level α when the number of tests is large.38 On the other hand,
both procedures tend to generate fewer discoveries than desired when there is a certain
degree of dependence among the tests. Intuitively, in the extreme case where all tests
are the same (i.e., correlation = 1.0), we do not need to adjust at all: FWER is the
  37
     This intuition is precise for the case when tests are independent. When there is dependence,
we need the dependence to be weak to apply the Law of Large Numbers.
  38
     To see this for Bonferroni, suppose tests are independent and all null hypotheses are true. We
have

                                 F W ER = P r(N0|r ≥ 1)
                                        = 1 − P r(N0|r = 0)
                                         = 1 − (1 − α/n)n
                                          n→∞
                                         −−−−→ 1 − exp(−α) ≈ α

where n denotes the number of tests. The last step approximation is true when α is small.



                                                      23
same as the Type I error rate for single tests. Hence, the usual single hypothesis test
is suﬃcient. Under either independence or positive dependence, the actual Type I
error rate of BHY is strictly less than the pre-speciﬁed signiﬁcance level, i.e., BHY is
too stringent in that too few factors are discovered.39
    Having discussed assumptions for the testing methods to work eﬃciently, we now
try to think of scenarios that can potentially violate these assumptions. First, factors
that proxy for the same type of risk may be dependent. Moreover, returns of long-
short portfolios designed to achieve exposure to a particular type of factor may be
correlated. For example, hedge portfolios based on dividend yield, earnings yield
and book-to-market are correlated. Other examples include risk factors that reﬂect
ﬁnancial constraints risk, market-wide liquidity and uncertainty risk. If this type
of positive dependence exists among test statistics, all three methods would likely to
generate fewer signiﬁcant factors than desired. There is deﬁnitely some dependence in
our sample. As mentioned previously, there are a number of factors with price in the
denominator which are naturally correlated. Another example is that we count four
diﬀerent idiosyncratic volatility factors. On the other hand, most often factors need to
“stand their ground” to be publishable. In the end, if you think we are overcounting
at 316, consider taking a haircut to 113 factors (the number of “common” factors).
Figure 3 shows that our main conclusions do not materially change. For example,
the Holm at 113 factors is 3.29 (p-value = 0.10%) while Holm at 316 factors is 3.64
(p-value = 0.03%).
    Second, research studying the same factor but based on diﬀerent samples will
generate highly dependent test statistics. Examples include the sequence of papers
studying the size eﬀect. We try to minimize this concern by including, with a few
exceptions, only the original paper that proposes the factor. To the extent that our
list includes few such duplicate factors, our method greatly reduces the dependence
that would be introduced by including all papers studying the same factor but for
diﬀerent sample periods.
    Finally, when dependence among test statistics can be captured by Pearson corre-
lations among contemporaneous strategy returns, we present a new model in Section
5 to systematically incorporate the information in test correlations.


4.7.2      The Case When M > R

To deal with the hidden tests issue when M > R, we propose in Appendix A a
simulation framework to estimate benchmark t-ratios. The idea is to ﬁrst back out
the underlying distribution for the t-statistics of all tried factors; then, to generate
  39
       See footnote 4.4.3 and the references therein.




                                                        24
benchmark t-ratio estimates, apply the three adjustment procedures to simulated
t-statistics samples.40
    Based on our estimates, 71% of all tried factors are missing. The new benchmark
t-ratios for Bonferroni and Holm are estimated to be 4.01 and 3.96, respectively; both
slightly higher than when M = R. This is as expected because more factors are tried
under this framework. The BHY implied t-ratio increases from 3.39 to 3.68 at 1%
signiﬁcance and from 2.78 to 3.18 at 5% signiﬁcance. In sum, across various scenarios,
we think the minimum threshold t-ratio is 3.18, corresponding to BHY’s adjustment
for M > R at 5% signiﬁcance. Alternative cases all result in even higher benchmark
t-ratios. Please refer to Appendix A for the details.


4.7.3    A Bayesian Hypothesis Testing Framework

We can also study multiple hypothesis testing within a Bayesian framework. One
major obstacle of applying Bayesian methods in our context is the unobservability of
all tried factors. While we propose new frequentist methods to handle this missing
data problem, it is not clear how to structure the Bayesian framework in this con-
text. In addition, the high dimensionality of the problem raises concerns on both the
accuracy and the computational burden of Bayesian methods.
     Nevertheless, ignoring the missing data issue, we outline a standard Bayesian
multiple hypothesis testing framework in Appendix B and explain how it relates
to our multiple testing framework. We discuss in detail the pros and cons of the
Bayesian approach. In contrast to the frequentist approach, which uses generalized
Type I error rates to guide multiple testing, the Bayesian approach relies on the
posterior likelihood function and thus contains a natural penalty term for multiplicity.
However, this simplicity comes at the expense of having a restrictive hierarchical
model structure and independence assumptions that may not be realistic for our factor
testing problem. Although extensions incorporating certain forms of dependence
are possible, it is unclear what precisely we should do for the 316 factors in our
list. In addition, even for the Bayesian approach, ﬁnal reject/accept decision still
involves threshold choice. Finally, as the number of tests becomes large, the Bayesian
approach gets computationally challenging.41 Due to these concerns, we choose not to
implement the Bayesian approach and instead discuss it brieﬂy. We leave extensions
of the basic Bayesian framework that could possibly alleviate the above concerns to
future research.
  40
      The underlying assumption for the model in Appendix A is the independence among t-statistics,
which may not be plausible given our previous discussions on test dependence. In that case, our
structural model proposed in Section 5 provides a more realistic data generating process for the
cross-section of test statistics.
   41
      The calculation of the posterior likelihood function involves multiple integrals. As the number
of tests becomes large, simulation approaches such as importance sampling may become unstable in
calculating these high-dimensional integrals.



                                                       25
4.7.4     Methods Controlling the FDP

Instead of FDR, recent research by Lehmann and Romano (2005) develops methods
to directly control the realized FDP. In particular, they propose a stepdown method
to control the probability of FDP exceeding a threshold value. Since their deﬁnition
of Type I error (i.e., P (F DP > γ) where γ is the threshold FDP value) is diﬀerent
from either FWER or FDR, results based on their methods are not comparable to
ours. However, the main conclusion is the same. For instance, when γ = 0.10 and
α = 0.05, the benchmark t-ratio is 2.70 (p-value = 0.69%), much lower than the
conventional cutoﬀ of 1.96. The details are presented in Appendix C.



5        Correlation Among Test Statistics

Although the BHY method is robust to arbitrary dependence among test statistics,
it does not use any information about the dependence structure. Such information,
when appropriately incorporated, can be helpful in making the method more accurate
(i.e., less conservative). We focus on the type of dependence that can be captured
by Pearson correlation. As one way to generate correlation among test statistics, we
focus on the correlation among contemporaneous variables (i.e., factor returns) that
constitute the test statistics. This is perhaps the most important source of correlation
as contemporaneous returns are certainly aﬀected by the movements of the same set
of macroeconomic and market variables. Therefore, in our context, the dependence
among test statistics is equivalent to the correlation among strategy returns.
    Multiple testing corrections in the presence of correlation has only been consid-
ered in the recent statistics literature. Existing methods include bootstrap based
permutation tests and direct statistical modeling. Permutation tests resample the
entire dataset and construct an empirical distribution for the pool of test statistics.42
Through resampling, the correlation structure in the data is taken into account and
no model is needed. In contrast, direct statistical modeling makes additional distri-
butional assumptions on the data generating process. These assumptions are usually
case dependent as diﬀerent kinds of correlations are more plausible under diﬀerent
circumstances.43
    42
      Westfall(1993) and Ge et al. (2003) are the early papers that suggest the permutation resam-
pling approach in multiple testing. Later development of the permutation approach tries to reduce
computational burden by proposing eﬃcient alternative approaches. Examples include Lin (2005),
Conneely and Boehnke (2007) and Han, Kang and Eskin (2009).
   43
      See Sun and Cai (2008) and Wei et al. (2009).




                                                     26
    In addition, recent research in ﬁnance explores bootstrap procedures to assess the
statistical signiﬁcance of individual tests.44 Most of these studies focus on mutual
fund evaluation. They bootstrap the time-series of mutual fund returns and obtain an
empirical distribution for the t-ratio for each fund. In contrast, our approach focuses
on the joint distribution of the t-ratios, as both FWER and FDR depend on the
cross-section of t-ratios. As such, we are able to apply a multiple testing framework
to the cross-section of factor tests.
    Our data pose a challenge to existing methods both in ﬁnance and statistics be-
cause we do not always observe the time-series of strategy returns (when a t-ratio
is based on long-short strategy returns) or the time-series of slopes in cross-sectional
regressions (when a t-ratio is based on the slope coeﬃcients in cross-sectional regres-
sions). Often all we have is the single t-statistic that summarizes the signiﬁcance of a
factor. We propose a novel approach to overcome this missing data problem. It is in
essence a direct modeling approach but does not require the full information of the
return series based on which the t-statistic is constructed. In addition, our approach
is ﬂexible enough to incorporate various kinds of distributional assumptions. We ex-
pect it to be a valuable addition to the multiple testing literature, especially when
only test statistics are observable.
    Our method ﬁrst proposes a structural model to describe the data generating pro-
cess for the cross-section of returns. It highlights the key statistical properties for
returns in our context and is ﬂexible enough to incorporate various kinds of depen-
dence. Through the structural model, we link Type I error rates in multiple testing to
the few structural parameters in the model. Finally, we estimate the model using the
t-statistics for published factors and provide multiple testing adjusted t-ratios based
on the estimated structural model.45



5.1      A Model with Correlations

For each factor, suppose researchers construct a corresponding long-short trading
strategy and normalize the return standard deviation to be σ = 15% per year, which
is close to the annual volatility of the market index.46 In particular, let the normalized
   44
      See Efron (1979) for the original work in the statistics literature. For recent ﬁnance applications,
see Kosowski, Timmermann, White, and Wermers (2006), Kosowski, Naik and Teo (2007), Fama
and French (2010) and Cao, Chen, Liang and Lo (2013).
   45
      See Harvey and Liu (2014b) for further details of our approach.
   46
      Notice that this assumption is not necessary for our approach. Fixing the standard deviations
of diﬀerent strategies eliminates the need to separately model them, which can be done through a
joint modeling of the mean and variance of the cross-section of returns. See Harvey and Liu (2014b)
for further discussions on this.




                                                          27
strategy return in period t for the i-th discovered strategy be Xi,t . Then the t-stat
for testing the signiﬁcance of this strategy is:

                                           ∑
                                           N
                                                              √
                                  Ti = (         Xi,t /N )/(σ/ N ).
                                           t=1


Assuming joint normality and zero serial correlation for strategy returns, this t-stat
has a normal distribution                   √
                            Ti ∼ N (µi /(σ/ N ), 1),

where µi denotes the population mean of the strategy. The µi ’s are unobservable and
hypothesis testing under this framework amounts to testing µi > 0. We assume that
each µi is an independent draw from the following mixture distribution:

                               µi ∼ p0 I{µ=0} + (1 − p0 )Exp(λ),

where I{µ=0} is the distribution that has a point mass at zero, Exp(λ) is the expo-
nential distribution that has a mean parameter λ and p0 is the probability of drawing
from the point mass distribution. This mixture distribution assumption is the core
component for Bayesian multiple testing47 and succinctly captures the idea of hypoth-
esis testing in the traditional frequentist’s view: while there are a range of possible
values for the means of truly proﬁtable strategies, a proportion of strategies should
have a mean that is indistinguishable from zero. The exponential assumption is not
essential for our model as more sophisticated distributions (e.g., a Gamma distribu-
tion featuring two free parameters) can be used. We use the exponential distribution
for its simplicity48 and perhaps more importantly, for it being consistent with the
intuition that more proﬁtable strategies are less likely to exist. An exponential dis-
tribution captures this intuition by having a monotonically decreasing probability
density function.
    Next, we incorporate correlations into the above framework. Among the various
sources of correlations, the cross-sectional correlations among contemporaneous re-
turns are the most important for us to take into account. This is because, unlike
time-series correlations for individual return series, cross-sectional return correlations
are caused by macroeconomic or market movements and can have a signiﬁcant impact
on multiple testing correction. Other kinds of correlations can be easily embedded
into our framework as well.49
  47
      See Appendix B for a brief discussion on the Bayesian approach for multiple testing.
  48
      As shown later, we need to estimate the parameters in the mixture model based on our t-
statistics sample. An over-parameterized distribution for the continuous distribution in the mixture
model, albeit ﬂexible, may result in imprecise estimates. We therefore use the simple one-parameter
exponential distribution family.
   49
      To incorporate the serial correlation for individual strategies, we can model them as simple
autoregressive processes. To incorporate the spatial structure in the way that factors are discovered



                                                         28
   As a starting point, we assume that the contemporaneous correlation between
two strategies’ returns is ρ. The non-contemporaneous correlations are assumed to
be zero. That is,

                                Corr(Xi,t , Xj,t ) = ρ,        i ̸= j,
                                Corr(Xi,t , Xj,s ) = 0,        t ̸= s.


    Finally, to incorporate the impact of hidden tests, we assume that M factors are
tried but only factors that exceed a certain t-ratio threshold are published. We set
the threshold t-statistic at 1.96 and focus on the sub-sample of factors that have a
t-statistic larger than 1.96. However, as shown in Appendix A, factors with marginal
t-ratios (i.e., t-ratios just above 1.96) are less likely to be published than those with
larger t-ratios. Therefore, our sub-sample of published t-ratios only covers a fraction
of t-ratios above 1.96 for tried factors. To overcome this missing data problem, we
assume that our sample covers a fraction r of t-ratios in between 1.96 and 2.57 and
that all t-ratios above 2.57 are covered. We bootstrap from the existing t-ratio sample
to construct the full sample. For instance, when r = 1/2, we simply duplicate the
sample of t-ratios in between 1.96 and 2.57 and maintain the sample of t-ratios above
2.57 to construct the full sample. For the baseline case, we set r = 1/2, consistent
with the analysis in Appendix A. We try alternative values of r to see how the results
change.50
    Given the correlation structure and the sampling distribution for the means of
returns, we can fully characterize the distributional properties of the cross-section of
returns. We can also determine the distribution for the cross-section of t-statistics as
they are functions of returns. Based our sample of t-statistics for published research,
we match key sample statistics with their population counterparts in the model.
    The sample statistics we choose to match are the quantiles of the sample of t-
statistics and the sample size (i.e., the total number of discoveries). Two concerns
motivate us to use quantiles. First, sample quantiles are less susceptible to outliers
(i.e., a group of factors discovered during a certain period can be related to each other due to
the increased research intensity on that group for that period), we can impose a Markov structure
on the time-series of µi ’s. See Sun and Cai (2008) for an example of spatial dependence for the
null hypotheses. Lastly, to accommodate the intuition that factors within a class should be more
correlated than factors across classes, we can use a block diagonal structure for the correlation matrix
for strategy returns. See Harvey and Liu (2014b) for further discussion of the kinds of correlation
structures that our model is able to incorporate.
    50
       Our choice of the threshold t-ratio is smaller than the 2.57 threshold in Appendix A. This is
for model identiﬁcation purposes. With a large t-ratio threshold (e.g., t= 2.57), factors that are
generated under the null hypothesis (i.e., false discoveries) are observed with a low probability as
their t-ratios rarely exceed the threshold. With little presence of these factors in the sample, certain
parameters (e.g., p0 ) are poorly identiﬁed. In short, we cannot estimate the probability of drawing
from the null hypothesis accurately if we rarely observe a factor that is generated from the null
hypothesis. We therefore lower the threshold to allow a better estimation of the model. For more
details on the selection of the threshold t-ratio, see Harvey and Liu (2014b).


                                                         29
compared to means and other moment-related sample statistics. Our t-ratio sample
does have a few very large observations and we expect quantiles to be more useful
descriptive statistics than the mean and the standard deviation. Second, simulation
studies show that quantiles in our model are more sensitive to changes in parameters
than other statistics. To oﬀer a more eﬃcient estimation of the model, we choose to
focus on quantiles.
   In particular, the quantities we choose to match and their values for the baseline
sample (i.e., r = 1/2) are given by:
           
           
            Tb = Total number of discoveries = 353,
           
            b
             Q1 = The 20th percentile of the sample of t-statistics = 2.39,
            Q
             b2 = The 50th percentile of the sample of t-statistics = 3.16,
           
            b
             Q3 = The 90th percentile of the sample of t-statistics = 6.34.

These three quantiles are representative of the spectrum of quantiles and can be
shown to be most sensitive to parameter changes in our model. Fixing the model
parameters, we can also obtain the model implied sample statistics T, Q1 , Q2 , and Q3
through simulations.51 The estimation works by seeking to ﬁnd the set of parameters
that minimizes the following objective function:

                                                            ∑
                                                            3
                     D(λ, p0 , M, ρ) = w0 (T − Tb)2 +                      bi )2
                                                                  wi (Qi − Q
                                                            i=1


where w0 and {wi }3i=1 are the weights associated with the squared distances. Mo-
tivated by the optimal weighting for the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM)
estimators, we set these weights at w0 = 1 and w1 = w2 = w3 = 10, 000. They can
be shown to have the same magnitude as the inverses of the variances of the corre-
sponding model implied sample statistics across a wide range of parameter values and
should help improve estimation eﬃciency.52
  51
       Model implied quantiles are diﬃcult (and most likely infeasible) to calculate analytically. We
obtain them through simulations. In particular, for a ﬁxed set of parameters, we simulate 5,000
independent samples of t-statistics. For each sample, we calculate the four summary statistics. The
median of these summary statistics across the 5,000 simulations are taken as the model implied
statistics.
    52
       We do not pursue a likelihood-based estimation. Our framework models each factor to have
a mean return that follows a mixture distribution. Depending on the factor being true or not, the
indicator variable in the mixture distribution can take one of two values. However, we never know
if a factor is indeed true or not so the indicator variable is latent. It needs to be integrated out
in a likelihood-based approach. Given that we have more than a thousand factors, the calculation
of the integral for the likelihood function becomes infeasible. Existing methods such as the EM
(Expectation Maximization) algorithm may mitigate the computational burden but there is an
additional issue. Our model involves a search for the number of factors so the number of variables
that need to be integrated out is itself random. These diﬃculties lead us to a GMM-based approach.



                                                       30
    We estimate the three parameters (λ, p0 , and M ) in the model and choose to
calibrate the correlation coeﬃcient ρ. In particular, for a given level of correlation ρ,
we numerically search for the model parameters (λ, p0 , M ) that minimize the objective
function D(λ, p0 , M, ρ).
    We choose to calibrate the amount of correlation because the correlation coeﬃ-
cient is likely to be weakly identiﬁed in this framework. Ideally, to have a better
identiﬁcation of ρ, we would like to have t-statistics that are generated from samples
that have varying degrees of overlap.53 We do not allow this in either our estima-
tion framework (i.e., all t-statistics are generated from samples that cover the same
period) or our data (we do not record the speciﬁc period for which the t-statistic
is generated). As a result, our results are best interpreted as the estimated t-ratio
thresholds for a hypothetical level of correlation. Nonetheless, we provide a brief dis-
cussion on the plausible levels of correlation in later sections. For additional details
about the estimation method and its performance, we refer the readers to Harvey and
Liu (2014b).
   To investigate how correlation aﬀects multiple testing, we follow an intuitive sim-
ulation procedure. In particular, ﬁxing λ, p0 and M at their estimates, we know the
data generating process for the cross-section of returns. Through simulations, we are
able to calculate the previously deﬁned Type I error rates (i.e., FWER and FDR) for
any given threshold t-ratio. We search for the optimal threshold t-ratio that exactly
achieves a pre-speciﬁed error rate.



5.2     Results

Our estimation framework assumes a balanced panel with M factors and N periods
of returns. We need to assign a value to N . Returns for published works usually
cover a period ranging from twenty to ﬁfty years. In our framework, the choice of
N does not aﬀect the distribution of Ti under the null hypothesis (i.e., µi = 0) but
will aﬀect Ti under the alternative√hypothesis (i.e., µi > 0). When µi is diﬀerent
from zero, Ti has a mean of µi /(σ/ N ). A larger N reduces the noise in returns and
makes it more likely for Ti to be signiﬁcant. To be conservative (i.e., less likely to
generate signiﬁcant t-ratios under the alternative hypotheses), we set N at 240 (i.e.,
twenty years). Other speciﬁcations of N change the estimate of λ but leave the other
parameters almost intact. In particular, the threshold t-ratios are little changed for
alternative values of N .
  The results are presented in Table 5. Across diﬀerent correlation levels, λ (the
mean parameter for the exponential distribution that represents the mean returns
  53
     Intuitively, t-statistics that are based on similar sample periods are more correlated than t-
statistics that are based on distinct sample periods. Therefore, the degree of overlap in sample
period helps identify the correlation coeﬃcient. See Ferson and Chen (2013) for a similar argument
on measuring the correlations among fund returns.


                                                      31
for true factors) is consistently estimated at 0.55% per month. This corresponds to
an annual factor return of 6.6%. Therefore, we estimate the average mean returns
for truly signiﬁcant factors to be 6.6% per annum. Given that we standardize factor
returns by an annual volatility of 15%, the average annual Sharpe ratio for these
factors is 0.44 (or monthly Sharpe ratio of 0.13).54
    For the other parameter estimates, both p0 and M are increasing in ρ. Focusing
on the baseline case in Panel A and at ρ = 0, we estimate that researchers have
tried M = 1297 factors and 60.4% (= 1 − 0.396) are true discoveries. When ρ is
increased to 0.60, we estimate that a total of M = 1775 factors have been tried
and around 39.9% (= 1 − 0.601) are true factors. Notice that we can estimate the
average total number of discoveries by M × (1 − p0 ) if we were able to observe which
distribution the factor mean is drawn from. This estimate is around 750 when the
level of correlation is not too high (i.e., ρ < 0.8). Of course, in reality we cannot
observe the underlying distribution for the factor mean and have to rely on the t-
statistics. As a result, a signiﬁcant fraction of these 750 factors are discarded because
their associated t-statistics cannot overcome the threshold t-ratio.
    Turning to the estimates of threshold t-ratios and focusing on FWER, we see that
they are not monotonic in the level of correlation. Intuitively, two forces are at work
in driving these threshold t-ratios. On the one hand, both p0 and M are increasing
in the level of correlation. Therefore, more factors — both in absolute value and
in proportion — are drawn from the null hypothesis. To control the occurrences of
false discoveries based on these factors, we need a higher threshold t-ratio. On the
other hand, a higher correlation among test-statistics reduces the required threshold
t-ratio. In the extreme case when all test statistics are perfectly correlated, we do
not need multiple testing adjustment at all. These two forces work against each other
and result in the non-monotonic pattern for the threshold t-ratios under FWER. For
FDR, it appears that the impact of larger p0 and M dominates so that the threshold
t-ratios are increasing in the level of correlation.
    Across various correlation speciﬁcations, our estimates show that in general a t-
ratio of 3.9 and 3.0 is needed to control FWER at 5% and FDR at 1%, respectively.55
Notice that these numbers are not far away from our previous estimates of 3.78 (Holm
adjustment that controls FWER at 5%) and 3.38 (BHY adjustment that controls FDR
at 1%). However, these seemingly similar numbers are generated through diﬀerent
mechanisms. Our current estimate assumes a certain level of correlation among re-
turns and relies on an estimate of more than 1,300 for the total number of trials. On
   54
      Our estimates are robust to the sample percentiles that we choose to match. For instance, ﬁxing
the level of correlation at 0.2, when we use the 10th together with the 50th and 90th percentiles of
the sample of t-statistics, our parameter estimate is (p0 , λ, M ) = (0.390, 0.548, 1287). Alternatively,
when we use the 80th together with the 20th and 50th percentiles of the sample of t-statistics, our
parameter estimate is (p0 , λ, M ) = (0.514, 0.579, 1493). Both estimates are in the neighborhood of
our baseline model estimate.
   55
      To save space, we choose not to discuss the performance of our estimation method. Harvey and
Liu (2014b) provide a detailed simulation study of our model.



                                                         32
the other hand, our previous calculation assumes that the 316 published factors are
all the factors that have been tried but does not specify a correlation structure.


          Table 5: Estimation Results: A Model with Correlations

  We estimate the model with correlations. r is the assumed proportion of missing
  observations for factors with a t-ratio in between 1.96 and 2.57. Panel A shows the
  results for the baseline case when r = 1/2 and Panel B shows the results for the case
  when r = 2/3. ρ is the correlation coeﬃcient between two strategy returns in the same
  period. p0 is the probability of having a strategy that has a mean of zero. λ is the
  mean parameter of the exponential distribution for the means of the true factors. M
  is the total number of trials.

                                                      t-ratio
  ρ     p0       λ(%)        M     FWER(5%) FWER(1%)             FDR(5%)      FDR(1%)
               (monthly)
                              Panel A: r = 1/2 (Baseline)

  0    0.396     0.550     1,297       3.89           4.28          2.16         2.88
 0.2   0.444     0.555     1,378       3.91           4.30          2.27         2.95
 0.4   0.485     0.554     1,477       3.81           4.23          2.34         3.05
 0.6   0.601     0.555     1,775       3.67           4.15          2.43         3.09
 0.8   0.840     0.560     3,110       3.35           3.89          2.59         3.25
                                   Panel B: r = 2/3

  0    0.683     0.550     2,458       4.17           4.55          2.69         3.30
 0.2   0.722     0.551     2,696       4.15           4.54          2.76         3.38
 0.4   0.773     0.552     3,031       4.06           4.45          2.80         3.40
 0.6   0.885     0.562     4,339       3.86           4.29          2.91         3.55
 0.8   0.922     0.532     5,392       3.44           4.00          2.75         3.39




5.3    How Large Is ρ?

Our sample has limitations in making a direct inference on the level of correlation.
To give some guidance, we provide indirect evidence on the plausible levels of ρ.
   First, the value of the optimized objective function sheds light on the level of ρ.
Intuitively, a value of ρ that is more consistent with the data generating process should
result in a lower optimized objective function. Across the various speciﬁcations of ρ

                                                33
in Table 5, we ﬁnd that the optimized objective function reaches its lowest point when
ρ = 0.2. Therefore, our t-ratio sample suggests a low level of correlation. However,
this evidence is only suggestive given the weak identiﬁcation of ρ in our model.
    Second, we draw on external data source to provide inference. In particular, we
gain access to the S&P CAPITAL IQ database, which includes detailed information
on the time-series of returns of over 400 factors for the US equity market. Calculating
the average correlation among these equity risk factors for the 1985-2014 period, we
estimate ρ to be around 0.15.
    Finally, existing studies in the literature provide guidance on the level of correla-
tion. McLean and Pontiﬀ (2014) estimate the correlation among anomaly returns to
be around 0.05. Green, Hand and Zhang (2012) focus on accounting-based factors and
ﬁnd the average correlation to be between 0.06 and 0.20. Focusing on mutual fund
returns, Barras, Scaillet and Wermers (2010) argue for a correlation of zero among
fund returns while Ferson and Chen (2013) calibrate this number to be between 0.04
and 0.09.
   Overall, we believe that the average correlation among factor returns should be
low, possibly in the neighborhood of 0.20.



5.4    How Many True Factors Are There?

The number of true discoveries using our method seems high given that most of us
have a prior that there are only a handful of true systematic risk factors. However,
many of these factors that our method deems statistically true have tiny Sharpe
Ratios. For example, around 70% of them have a Sharpe Ratio that is less than 0.5.
From a modeling perspective, we impose a monotonic exponential density for the
mean returns of true factors. Hence, by assumption the number of discoveries will be
decreasing in the mean return.
    Overall, statistical evidence can only get us this far in terms of getting rid of the
false discoveries. It is hard to further reduce the number of discoveries to the level
that we believe is true. This is a limitation not only to our framework but probably
any statistical framework that relies on individual p-values. To see this, suppose the
smallest t-ratio among true risk factors is 3.0 and assume our sample covers 50 risk
factors that all have a t-ratio above 3.0. Then based on statistical evidence only, it
is impossible to rule out any of these 50 factors from the list of true risk factors.
    We agree that a further scrutiny of the factor universe is a highly meaningful ex-
ercise. There are at least two routes we can take. One route is to introduce additional
testable assumptions that a systematic risk factor has to satisfy to claim signiﬁcance.
Pukthuanthong and Roll (2014) use the principle components of the cross-section of
realized returns to impose such assumptions. The other route is to incrementally
increase the factor list by thoroughly evaluating the economic contribution of a risk

                                                34
factor. Harvey and Liu (2014d) provide such a framework. We expect both lines of
research to help in culling the number of factors.



6        Conclusion

At least 316 factors have been tested to explain the cross-section of expected returns.
Most of these factors have been proposed over the last ten years. Indeed, Cochrane
(2011) refers to this as “a zoo of new factors”. Our paper argues that it is a serious
mistake to use the usual statistical signiﬁcance cutoﬀs (e.g., a t-ratio exceeding 2.0)
in asset pricing tests. Given the plethora of factors and the inevitable data mining,
many of the historically discovered factors would be deemed “signiﬁcant” by chance.
   Our paper presents three conventional multiple testing frameworks and proposes
a new one that particularly suits research in ﬁnancial economics. While these frame-
works diﬀer in their assumptions, they are consistent in their conclusions. We argue
that a newly discovered factor today should have a t-ratio that exceeds 3.0. We
provide a time-series of recommended “cutoﬀs” from the ﬁrst empirical test in 1967
through to present day. Many published factors fail to exceed our recommended
cutoﬀs.
    While a ratio of 3.0 (which corresponds to a p-value of 0.27%) seems like a very
high hurdle, we also argue that there are good reasons to expect that 3.0 is too low.
First, we only count factors that are published in prominent journals and we sample
only a small fraction of the working papers. Second, there are surely many factors
that were tried by empiricists, failed, and never made it to publication or even a
working paper. Indeed, the culture in ﬁnancial economics is to focus on the discovery
of new factors. In contrast to other ﬁelds such as medical science, it is rare to publish
replication studies of existing factors. Given that our count of 316 tested factors is
surely too low, this means the t-ratio cutoﬀ is likely even higher.56
   Should a t-ratio of 3.0 be used for every factor proposed in the future? Probably
not. A case can be made that a factor developed from ﬁrst principles should have a
lower threshold t-ratio than a factor that is discovered as a purely empirical exercise.
Nevertheless, a t-ratio of 2.0 is no longer appropriate — even for factors that are
derived from theory.
    In medical research, the recognition of the multiple testing problem has led to
the disturbing conclusion that “most claimed research ﬁndings are false” (Ioannidis
(2005)). Our analysis of factor discoveries leads to the same conclusion – many of the
factors discovered in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance are likely false discoveries: of the 296 published
    56
     In astronomy and physics, even higher threshold t-ratios are often used to control for testing
multiplicity. For instance, the high proﬁle discovery of Higgs Boson has a t-ratio of more than 5
(p-value less than 0.0001%). See ATLAS Collaboration (2012), CMS Collaboration (2012), and
Harvey and Liu (2014c).


                                                      35
signiﬁcant factors, 158 would be considered false discoveries under Bonferonni, 142
under Holm, 132 under BHY (1%) and 80 under BHY (5%). In addition, the idea that
there are so many factors is inconsistent with the principal component analysis, where,
perhaps there are ﬁve “statistical” common factors driving time-series variation in
equity returns (Ahn, Horenstein and Wang (2012)).
    The assumption that researchers follow the rules of classical statistics (e.g., ran-
domization, unbiased reporting, etc.) is at odds with the notion of individual incen-
tives which, ironically, is one of the fundamental premises in economics. Importantly,
the optimal amount of data mining is not zero since some data mining produces
knowledge. The key, as argued by Glaeser (2008), is to design appropriate statisti-
cal methods to adjust for biases, not to eliminate research initiatives. The multiple
testing framework detailed in our paper is true to this advice.
   Our research quantiﬁes the warnings of both Fama (1991) and Schwert (2003).
We attempt to navigate the zoo and establish new benchmarks to guide empirical
asset pricing tests.




                                                36
                                                               Table 6: Factor List: Factors Sorted by Year

            An augmented version of this table is available for download and resorting. The main table includes full citations as well as hyperlinks to each of
            the cited articles. See http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/˜charvey/Factor-List.xlsx.
     Year   Common     Indi.   Factor                             Formation                              Type                    Journal                      Short reference
            #          #
     1964                      Market return                      THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Sharpe (1964)
     1965                      Market return                      THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Lintner (1965)
     1966                      Market return                      THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Econometrica                 Mossin (1966)
     1967              1       Total volatility                   Individual stock return volatility     Individual ﬁnancial     Yale Economic Essays         Douglas (1967)
     1972                      Market return                      THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Heckerman (1972)
                               Relative prices of consumption     THEORY                                 Common macro
                               goods
     1972       1              Market return                      Equity index return                    Common ﬁnancial         Studies in the Theory of     Black, Jensen and Sc-
                                                                                                                                 Capital Markets              holes (1972)
     1972                      Market return                      THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Business          Black (1972)
     1973                      State variables representing fu-   THEORY                                 Common       ﬁnancial   Econometrica                 Merton (1973)
                               ture investment opportunity                                               and macro




37
     1973                      Market return†                     Equity index return                    Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Political Econ-   Fama     and     MacBeth
                                                                                                                                 omy                          (1973)
                2              Beta squared*                      Square of market beta                  Common ﬁnancial
                       2       Idiosyncratic volatility*          Residual stock volatility from CAPM    Individual ﬁnancial
     1973                      High order market return           THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Financial and     Rubinstein (1973)
                                                                                                                                 Quantitative Analysis
     1974                      World market return                THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Economic The-     Solnik (1974)
                                                                                                                                 ory
     1974                      Individual investor resources      THEORY                                 Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Financial Eco-    Rubinstein (1974)
                                                                                                                                 nomics
     1975              3       Earnings growth expectations       Projecting ﬁrm earnings growth based   Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Gupta and Ofer (1975)
                                                                  on market beta, ﬁrm size, dividend
                                                                  payout ratio, leverage and earnings
                                                                  variability
     1976                      Market return†                     Equity index return                    Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Kraus and Litzenberger
                                                                                                                                                              (1976)
                3              Squared market return*             Square of equity index return          Common ﬁnancial
     1977              4       PE ratio                           Firm price-to-earnings ratio           Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Basu (1977)
     1978                      Marginal rate of substitution      THEORY                                 Common macro            Econometrica                 Lucas (1978)
     . . . continued
      Year      #          #   Factor                         Formation                                  Type                     Journal                     Short reference
       1979                5   Dividend yield                 Dividend per share divided by share        Individual accounting    Journal of Financial Eco-   Litzenberger and       Ra-
                                                              price                                                               nomics                      maswamy (1979)
                               Market return†                 Equity index return                        Common ﬁnancial
       1979                    Aggregate real consumption     THEORY                                     Common macro             Journal of Financial Eco-   Breeden (1979)
                               growth                                                                                             nomics
       1980                    Short sale restrictions        THEORY                                     Individual         mi-   Journal of Finance          Jarrow (1980)
                                                                                                         crostructure
       1981                    Market return†‡                Equity index return                        Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Fogler, John and Tipton
                                                                                                                                                              (1981)a
                               Treasury bond return‡          3-month US Treasury bill return            Common ﬁnancial
                               Corporate bond return‡         Index of long-term Aa utility bonds        Common ﬁnancial
                                                              with deferred calls returns
       1981            4       Treasury bill return           Principal components extracted from        Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Oldﬁeld   and      Rogalski
                                                              returns of Treasury bills                                                                       (1981)
       1981                    World consumption              THEORY                                     Common macro             Journal of Financial Eco-   Stulz (1981)
                                                                                                                                  nomics
       1981                    Transaction costs              THEORY                                     Individual         mi-   Journal of Finance          Mayshar (1981)
                                                                                                         crostructure




38
       1981                6   Firm size                      Market value of ﬁrm stocks                 Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-   Banz (1981)
                                                                                                                                  nomics
       1981                7   Short interest                 Equity short interest                      Individual         mi-   Journal of Financial and    Figlewski (1981)
                                                                                                         crostructure             Quantitative Analysis
       1982                    Individual consumer’s wealth   THEORY                                     Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Business         Constantinides (1982)
       1983                8   EP ratio                       Firm earnings-to-price ratio               Individual accounting    Journal of Financial Eco-   Basu (1983)
                                                                                                                                  nomics
       1983                    Foreign exchange rate change   THEORY                                     Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Adler and Dumas (1983)
                                                       ‡
       1983                    Institutional holding          Institutional concentration rankings       Individual other         Financial Analyst Journal   Arbel,     Carvell     and
                                                              from Standard and Poor’s                                                                        Strebel (1983)
       1984                    Earnings expectations‡         Consensus earnings expectations            Individual accounting    Financial Analyst Journal   Hawkins,     Chamberlin
                                                                                                                                                              and Daniel (1984)
       1984                    New listings announcement‡     Announcement that a company has            Individual accounting    Financial Analyst Journal   McConnell and Sanger
                                                              ﬁled a formal application to list on the                                                        (1984)
                                                              NYSE
       1985                    Market return†                 Equity index return                        Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Financial Eco-   Chan, Chen and Hsieh
                                                                                                                                  nomics                      (1985)
                       5       Industrial production growth   Seasonally adjusted monthly growth         Common macro
                                                              rate of industrial production
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                            Formation                               Type                    Journal                      Short reference
                       6         Change in expected inﬂation*      Change in expected inﬂation as de-      Common macro
                                                                   ﬁned in Fama and Gibbons (1984)
                       7         Unanticipated inﬂation            Realized minus expected inﬂation        Common macro
                       8         Credit premium                    Risk premium measured as diﬀerence      Common ﬁnancial
                                                                   in return between “under Baa” bond
                                                                   portfolio and long-term government
                                                                   bond portfolio
                       9         Term structure*                   Yield curve slope measured as diﬀer-    Common ﬁnancial
                                                                   ence in return between long-term gov-
                                                                   ernment bond and 1-month Treasury
                                                                   bill
       1985                 9    Long-term return reversal         Long-term past abnormal return          Individual other        Journal of Finance           Bondt and Thaler (1985)
       1985                      Investment          opportunity   THEORY                                  Common ﬁnancial         Econometrica                 Cox, Ingersoll and Ross
                                 change                                                                                                                         (1985)
       1986                      Transaction costs                 THEORY                                  Common microstruc-      Journal of Financial Eco-    Amihud and Mendelson
                                                                                                           ture                    nomics                       (1986)
       1986                      Transaction costs                 THEORY                                  Common microstruc-      Journal of Political Econ-   Constantinides (1986)
                                                                                                           ture                    omy




39
       1986                      Expected inﬂation                 THEORY                                  Common macro            Journal of Finance           Stulz (1986)
       1986            10        Long-term interest rate           Change in the yield of long-term gov-   Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Sweeney    and       Warga
                                                                   ernment bonds                                                                                (1986)
       1986                      Industrial production growth†     Seasonally adjusted monthly growth      Common macro            Journal of Business          Chen, Roll     and    Ross
                                                                   rate of industrial production                                                                (1986)
                                 Credit premium†                   Risk premium measured as diﬀerence      Common ﬁnancial
                                                                   in return between “under Baa” bond
                                                                   portfolio and long-term government
                                                                   bond portfolio
                                 Term structure†                   Yield curve slope measured as diﬀer-    Common ﬁnancial
                                                                   ence in return between long-term gov-
                                                                   ernment bond and 1-month Treasury
                                                                   bill
                                 Unanticipated inﬂation†           Realized minus expected inﬂation        Common macro
                                                               †
                                 Change in expected inﬂation       Changes in expected inﬂation as de-     Common macro
                                                                   ﬁned in Fama and Gibbons (1984)
                       11        Change in oil prices*             Growth rate in oil prices               Common macro
       1988                 10   Debt to equity ratio              Non-common equity liabilities to eq-    Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Bhandari (1988)
                                                                   uity
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                             Formation                                 Type                    Journal                      Short reference
                                                              ‡
       1988                      Long-term growth forecasts         Long-term growth forecasts proxied by     Individual accounting   Financial Analyst Journal    Bauman     and     Dowen
                                                                    the ﬁve-year earnings per share growth                                                         (1988)
                                                                    rate forecasts
       1989            12        Consumption growth                 Per capita real consumption growth        Common macro            Journal of Finance           Breeden, Gibbons and
                                                                                                                                                                   Litzenberger (1989)
       1989                 11   Illiquidity                        Illiquidity proxied by bid-ask spread     Individual        mi-   Journal of Finance           Amihud and Mendelson
                                                                                                              crostructure                                         (1989)
       1989                 12   Predicted earnings change          Predicted earnings change in one year     Individual accounting   Journal of Accounting &      Ou and Penman (1989)
                                                                    based on a ﬁnancial statement analysis                            Economics
                                                                    that combines a large set of ﬁnancial
                                                                    statement items
       1990                 13   Return predictability              Short-term (one month) and long-          Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance           Jegadeesh (1990)
                                                                    term (twelve months) serial correla-
                                                                    tions in returns
       1991                      Market return†                     Equity index return                       Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Political Econ-   Ferson and Harvey (1991)
                                                                                                                                      omy
                                 Consumption growth†                Real per capita growth of personal        Common macro
                                                                    consumption expenditures for non-
                                                                    durables & services




40
                                 Credit spread†                     Baa corporate bond return less            Common ﬁnancial
                                                                    monthly long-term government bond
                                                                    return
                       13        Change in the slope of the yield   Change in the diﬀerence between a         Common ﬁnancial
                                 curve                              10-year Treasury bond yield and a 3-
                                                                    month Treasury bill yield
                                 Unexpected inﬂation†               Diﬀerence between actual and time-        Common macro
                                                                    series forecasts of inﬂation rate
                       14        Real short rate                    One-month Treasury bill return less       Common ﬁnancial
                                                                    inﬂation rate
       1992            15        Size                               Return on a zero-investment portfolio     Common accounting       Journal of Finance           Fama and French (1992)b
                                                                    long in small stocks and short in large
                                                                    stocks
                       16        Value                              Return on a zero-investment portfo-       Common accounting
                                                                    lio long in growth stocks and short in
                                                                    value stocks
       1992                      Return momentum‡                   Size and beta adjusted mean prior         Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Eco-    Chopra, Lakonishok and
                                                                    ﬁve-year returns                                                  nomics                       Ritter (1992)
       1992                      Predicted return signs‡            Return signs predicted by a logit         Individual accounting   Journal of Accounting &      Holthausen and Larcker
                                                                    model using ﬁnancial ratios                                       Economics                    (1992)
     . . . continued
      Year      #      #    Factor                               Formation                                 Type                Journal                     Short reference
       1993            14   Return momentum                      Past stock returns                        Individual other    Journal of Finance          Jegadeesh and Titman
                                                                                                                                                           (1993)
       1993                 Returns on S&P stocks‡               Returns on S&P stocks                     Common ﬁnancial     Review of Financial Stud-   Elton, Gruber, Das and
                                                                                                                               ies                         Hlavka (1993)
                            Returns on non-S&P stocks‡           Returns on non-S&P stocks                 Common ﬁnancial
       1993                 High order market and bond           High order equity index returns and       Common ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance          Bansal and Viswanathan
                            return‡                              bond returns                                                                              (1993)c
       1993                 Market return†                       Equity index return                       Common ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Eco-   Fama and French (1993)
                                                                                                                               nomics
                            Size†                                Return on a zero-investment portfolio     Common accounting
                                                                 long in small stocks and short in large
                                                                 stocks
                            Value†                               Return on a zero-investment portfo-       Common accounting
                                                                 lio long in growth stocks and short in
                                                                 value stocks
                            Term structure†                      Diﬀerence in return between long-         Common ﬁnancial
                                                                 term government bond and one-month
                                                                 Treasury bill




41
                            Credit risk†                         Diﬀerence in return between long-         Common ﬁnancial
                                                                 term corporate bond and long-term
                                                                 government bond
       1993                 World equity return‡                 US dollar return of the MSCI world        Common ﬁnancial     Review of Financial Stud-   Ferson    and     Harvey
                                                                 equity market in excess of a short-term                       ies                         (1993)d
                                                                 interest rate
                            Change in weighted exchange          Log ﬁrst diﬀerence of the trade-          Common ﬁnancial
                            rate‡                                weighted US dollar price of ten indus-
                                                                 trialized countries’ currencies
                            Change in long-term inﬂation-        Change in long-term inﬂationary ex-       Common macro
                            ary expectations‡                    pectations
                            Weighted real short-term inter-      GDP weighted average of short-term        Common ﬁnancial
                            est rate‡                            interest rates in G-7 countries
                            Change in oil price†‡                Change in the monthly average US          Common macro
                                                                 dollar price per barrel of crude oil
                            Change in the Eurodollar-            First diﬀerence of the spread between     Common ﬁnancial
                            Treasury yield spread‡               the 90-day Eurodollar yield and the
                                                                 90-day Treasury-bill yield
                            Change in      G-7      industrial   Change in G-7 industrial production       Common macro
                            production‡
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                           Formation                                 Type                    Journal                      Short reference
                                 Unexpected inﬂation for the G-   Unexpected inﬂation based on a time-      Common macro
                                 7 countries‡                     series model on an aggregate G-7 in-
                                                                  ﬂation rate
       1994            17        World equity return              US dollar return of the MSCI world        Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Banking and       Ferson and Harvey (1994)
                                                                  equity market in excess of a short-term                           Finance
                                                                  interest rate
                       18        Change in weighted exchange      Log ﬁrst diﬀerence of the trade-          Common ﬁnancial
                                 rate*                            weighted US dollar price of ten indus-
                                                                  trialized countries’ currencies
                       19        Change in long-term inﬂation-    Change in long-term inﬂationary ex-       Common macro
                                 ary expectations*                pectations
                                 Change in oil price∗†            Change in the monthly average US          Common macro
                                                                  dollar price per barrel of crude oil
       1994            20        Tax rate for capital gains       Short-term capital gains tax rate         Common accounting       Journal of Finance           Bossaerts and Dammon
                                                                                                                                                                 (1994)
                       21        Tax rate for dividend            Dividend tax rate                         Common accounting
       1995            22        Change in expected inﬂation      Change in expectation from economic       Common macro            Journal of Finance           Elton, Gruber and Blake
                                                                  surveys                                                                                        (1995)




42
                       23        Change in expected GNP           Change in expectation from economic       Common macro
                                                                  surveys
       1995                 15   New public stock issuance        New public stock issuance                 Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Loughran   and     Ritter
                                                                                                                                                                 (1995)
       1995                 16   Dividend initiations             Initiations of cash dividend payments     Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance           Michaely, Thaler     and
                                                                                                                                                                 Womack (1995)
                            17   Dividend omissions               Omissions of cash dividend payments       Individual ﬁnancial
                                                            ‡
       1995                      Seasoned equity oﬀerings         Whether a ﬁrm makes seasoned equity       Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Eco-    Spiess and Aﬄeck-Graves
                                                                  oﬀerings                                                          nomics                       (1995)
       1996            24        Money growth                     M2 or M3 minus currency, divided by       Common macro            Journal of Finance           Chan, Foresi and Lang
                                                                  total population                                                                               (1996)
       1996            25        Returns on physical invest-      Inferred from investment data via a       Common macro            Journal of Political Econ-   Cochrane (1996)
                                 ment                             production function                                               omy
       1996                      Market return†                   Equity index return                       Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Political Econ-   Campbell (1996)
                                                                                                                                    omy
                       26        Labor income                     Real labor income growth rate             Common macro
                                 Dividend yield†                  Dividend yield on value-weighted in-      Common ﬁnancial
                                                                  dex
                                 Interest rate†                   Treasury bill rate less 1-year moving     Common ﬁnancial
                                                                  average
     . . . continued
      Year      #      #    Factor                              Formation                                    Type                     Journal                     Short reference
                                             †
                            Term structure                      Long-short government bond yield             Common ﬁnancial
                                                                spread
       1996                 Market return†                      Equity index return                          Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Jagannathan and Wang
                                                                                                                                                                  (1996)
                            Slope of yield curve†               Long-short government bond yield             Common ﬁnancial
                                                                spread
                            Labor income†                       Real labor income growth rate                Common macro
       1996            18   Earnings forecasts                  Errors in analysts’ forecasts on earn-       Individual accounting    Journal of Finance          Porta (1996)
                                                                ings growth
       1996            19   R&D capital                         R&D capital over total assets                Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting &     Lev    and     Sougiannis
                                                                                                                                      Economics                   (1996)
       1996            20   Accruals                            Accruals deﬁned by the change in non-        Individual accounting    Accounting Review           Sloan (1996)
                                                                cash current assets, less the change in
                                                                current liabilities, less depreciation ex-
                                                                pense, all divided by average total as-
                                                                sets
       1996            21   Buy recommendations                 Buy recommendations from security            Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Finance          Womack (1996)
                                                                analysts




43
                       22   Sell recommendations                Sell recommendations from security           Individual ﬁnancial
                                                                analysts
       1996            23   Credit rating                       Institutional investor country credit        Individual other         Journal of Portfolio Man-   Erb,     Harvey      and
                                                                rating from semi-annual survey                                        agement                     Viskanta (1996)
       1996            24   Illiquidity                         Derivative transaction price with re-        Individual         mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-   Brennan and Subrah-
                                                                spect to signed trade size                   crostructure             nomics                      manyam (1996)
       1997                 Nonlinear functions of con-         Low order orthonormal polynomials            Common macro             Journal of Finance          Chapman (1997)e
                            sumption growth‡                    of current and future consumption
                                                                growth
       1997                 Opportunistic strategy return‡      Return for hedge funds that follow an        Common ﬁnancial          Review of Financial Stud-   Fung and Hsieh (1997)f
                                                                opportunistic strategy                                                ies
                            Global/macro strategy return‡       Return for hedge funds that follow a         Common ﬁnancial
                                                                global/macro strategy
                            Value strategy return‡              Return for hedge funds that follow a         Common ﬁnancial
                                                                value strategy
                            Trend      following     strategy   Return for hedge funds that follow a         Common ﬁnancial
                            return‡                             trend following strategy
                            Distressed investment strategy      Return for hedge funds that follow a         Common ﬁnancial
                            return‡                             distressed investment strategy
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                          Formation                                  Type                    Journal                     Short reference
                                        †
       1997                      Size                            Return on a zero-investment portfolio      Common accounting       Journal of Finance          Carhart (1997)
                                                                 long in small stocks and short in large
                                                                 stocks
                                 Value†                          Return on a zero-investment portfo-        Common accounting
                                                                 lio long in growth stocks and short in
                                                                 value stocks
                                 Market return†                  Equity index return                        Common ﬁnancial
                       27        Momentum                        Return on a zero-investment portfolio      Common other
                                                                 long in past winners and short in past
                                                                 losers
       1997                      Size†                           Market value of equity                     Individual accounting   Journal of Financial Eco-   Brennan, Chordia and
                                                                                                                                    nomics                      Subrahmanyam (1997)
                                 Book-to-market ratio†           Book value of equity plus deferred         Individual accounting
                                                                 taxes to market value of equity
                                 Momentum†                       Past cumulative stock return               Individual ﬁnancial
                            25   Trading volume                  Dollar volume traded per month             Individual        mi-
                                                                                                            crostructure
       1997                 26   Disclosure level                Voluntary disclosure level of manufac-     Individual accounting   Accounting Review           Botosan (1997)




44
                                                                 turing ﬁrms’ annual reports
       1997                 27   Earnings forecast uncertainty   Standard deviation of earnings fore-       Individual accounting   Journal of Financial Re-    Ackert and Athanassakos
                                                                 casts                                                              search                      (1997)
       1997                      Size†                           Market value of equity                     Individual accounting   Journal of Finance          Daniel     and     Titman
                                                                                                                                                                (1997)
                                 Value†                          Book value of equity plus deferred         Individual accounting
                                                                 taxes to market value of equity
       1997                      Earnings management likelihood‡ Earnings management likelihood ob-         Individual accounting   Journal of Accounting and   Beneish (1997)
                                                                 tained by regressiong realized viola-                              Public Policy
                                                                 tors of Generally Accepted Accounting
                                                                 Principles on ﬁrm characteristics
       1997                 28   Corporate acquisitions          Diﬀerence between stock mergers and        Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance          Loughran     and     Vijh
                                                                 cash tender oﬀers for corporate acqui-                                                         (1997)
                                                                 sitions
       1998                      Fundamental analysis‡           Investment signals constructed using       Individual accounting   Accounting Review           Abarbanell and Bushee
                                                                 a collection of variables that relate to                                                       (1998)
                                                                 contemporaneous changes in invento-
                                                                 ries, accounts receivables, gross mar-
                                                                 gins, selling expenses, capital expen-
                                                                 ditures, eﬀective tax rates, inventory
                                                                 methods, audit qualiﬁcations, and la-
                                                                 bor force sales productivity
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                            Formation                                 Type                     Journal                     Short reference
                                                         ‡
       1998                      Firm fundamental value            Firms’ fundamental values estimated       Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting and   Frankel and Lee (1998)
                                                                   from I/B/E/S consensus forecasts and                               Economics
                                                                   a residual income model
       1998                 29   Bankruptcy risk                   The probability of bankruptcy from        Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Finance          Ilia (1998)
                                                                   Altman (1968)
       1998                 30   Illiquidity                       Liquidity proxied by the turnover rate:   Individual         mi-   Journal of Financial Mar-   Datar, Naik and Radcliﬀe
                                                                   number of shares traded as a fraction     crostructure             kets                        (1998)
                                                                   of the number of shares outstanding
       1999            28        Fitted return based on predic-    Expected portfolio return obtained by     Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Ferson and Harvey (1999)
                                 tive regressions                  projecting historical returns on lagged
                                                                   macro instruments, including term
                                                                   spreads, dividend yield, credit spread
                                                                   and short-term Treasury bill
       1999                 31   Industry momentum                 Industry-wide momentum returns            Individual other         Journal of Finance          Moskowitz and Grinblatt
                                                                                                                                                                  (1999)
       1999                      Debt oﬀerings‡                    Whether a ﬁrm makes straight and          Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-   Spiess and Aﬄeck-Graves
                                                                   convertible debt oﬀerings                                          nomics                      (1999)
       2000            29        Entrepreneur income               Proprietary income of entrepreneurs       Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Heaton and Lucas (2000)
       2000            30        Coskewness                        Excess return on a portfolio which        Common ﬁnancial          Journal of Finance          Harvey    and      Siddique




45
                                                                   long stocks with low past coskewness                                                           (2000)
       2000                 32   Trading volume                    Past trading volume                       Individual         mi-   Journal of Finance          Lee and       Swaminathan
                                                                                                             crostructure                                         (2000)
       2000                 33   Within-industry size              Diﬀerence between ﬁrm size and aver-      Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Asness,    Porter      and
                                                                   age ﬁrm size within the industry                                                               Stevens (2000)
                            34   Within-industry value             Diﬀerence between ﬁrm book-to-            Individual accounting
                                                                   market ratio and average book-to-
                                                                   market ratio within the industry
                            35   Within-industry cashﬂow to        Diﬀerence between ﬁrm cashﬂow to          Individual accounting
                                 price ratio                       price ratio and average cashﬂow to
                                                                   price ratio within the industry
                            36   Within-industry         percent   Diﬀerence between ﬁrm percent             Individual accounting
                                 change in employees               change in employees and average
                                                                   percent change in employees within
                                                                   the industry
                            37   Within-industry momentum          Diﬀerence between ﬁrm past stock          Individual ﬁnancial
                                                                   prices and average past stock prices
                                                                   within the industry
       2000                 38   Financial statement informa-      A composite score based on histori-       Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting Re-   Piotroski (2000)
                                 tion                              cal ﬁnancial statement that separates                              search
                                                                   winners from losers
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                          Formation                                 Type                    Journal                      Short reference
                                                         †
       2001                      Consumption growth              Per capita real consumption growth        Common macro            Journal of Political Econ-   Lettau    and   Ludvigson
                                                                 rate                                                              omy                          (2001)
                       31        Consumption-wealth ratio        Proxied by a weighted average of hu-      Common macro
                                                                 man and nonhuman wealth
       2001                 39   Level of liquidity              Level of dollar trading volume and        Individual        mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-    Chordia, Subrahmanyam
                                                                 share turnover                            crostructure            nomics                       and Anshuman (2001)
                            40   Variability of liquidity        Volatility of dollar trading volume and   Individual        mi-
                                                                 share turnover                            crostructure
       2001                 41   Financial constraints           Measure ﬁnancial constraints with Ka-     Individual ﬁnancial     Review of Financial Stud-    Lamont, Polk and Saa-
                                                                 plan and Zingales (1997) index                                    ies                          Requejo (2001)
       2001                      Straddle return‡                Lookback straddles’ returns       con-    Common ﬁnancial         Review of Financial Stud-    Fung and Hsieh (2001)
                                                                 structed based on option prices                                   ies
       2001                      Consensus recommendations∗      Consensus recommendations mea-            Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Barber,    Lehavy, Mc-
                                                                 sured by the average analyst recom-                                                            Nichols   and Trueman
                                                                 mendations                                                                                     (2001)
       2001                 42   Bond rating changes             Moody’s bond ratings changes              Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance           Dichev    and     Piotroski
                                                                                                                                                                (2001)
       2001                 43   Analysts’ forecasts             Financial analysts’ forecasts of annual   Individual accounting   Accounting Review            Pieter, Lo and Pfeiﬀer




46
                                                                 earnings                                                                                       (2001)
       2001                 44   Institutional ownership         Institutional holdings of ﬁrm assets      Individual accounting   Quarterly Journal of Eco-    Gompers     and    Metrick
                                                                                                                                   nomics                       (2001)
       2002                      Market return†                  Equity index return                       Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Dittmar (2002)
                                                             †
                                 Squared market return           Squared equity index return               Common ﬁnancial
                                 Labor income growth†            Smoothed labor income growth rate         Common ﬁnancial
                       32        Squared labor income growth     Squared smoothed       labor   income     Common ﬁnancial
                                                                 growth rate
       2002                 45   Distress risk                   Distress risk as proxied by Ohlson’s O-   Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance           Griﬃn     and     Lemmon
                                                                 score                                                                                          (2002)
       2002                 46   Analyst dispersion              Dispersion in analysts’ earnings fore-    Individual behavioral   Journal of Finance           Diether,   Malloy      and
                                                                 casts                                                                                          Scherbina (2002)
       2002                 47   Breadth of ownership            Ratio of the number of mutual funds       Individual        mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-    Chen, Hong and Stein
                                                                 holding long positions in the stock to    crostructure            nomics                       (2002)
                                                                 total number of mutual funds
       2002                 48   Information risk                Probability of information-based trad-    Individual        mi-   Journal of Finance           Easley, Hvidkjaer      and
                                                                 ing for individual stock                  crostructure                                         O’Hara (2002)
       2002                 49   Short-sale constraints          Shorting costs for NYSE stocks            Individual        mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-    Jones and Lamont (2002)
                                                                                                           crostructure            nomics
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                             Formation                                   Type                    Journal                      Short reference
       2002                 50   Earnings sustainability            A summary score based on ﬁrm fun-           Individual accounting   Working Paper                Penman     and    Zhang
                                                                    damentals that informs about the sus-                                                            (2002)
                                                                    tainability of earning
       2002            33        Market illiquidity                 Average over the year of the daily ra-      Common microstruc-      Journal of Financial Mar-    Amihud (2002)
                                                                    tio of the stock’s absolute return to its   ture                    kets
                                                                    dollar trading volume
       2003            34        GDP growth news                    GDP growth news obtained from pre-          Common macro            Journal of Financial Eco-    Vassalou (2003)
                                                                    dictive regressions on lagged equity                                nomics
                                                                    and ﬁxed-income portfolios
       2003            35        Market liquidity                   Aggregated liquidity based on ﬁrm           Common microstruc-      Journal of Political Econ-   Pastor and Stambaugh
                                                                    future excess stock return regressed        ture                    omy                          (2003)
                                                                    on current signed excess return times
                                                                    trading volume
       2003                      Idiosyncratic return volatility†   Residual variance obtained by regress-      Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Eco-    Ali, Hwang and Trombley
                                                                    ing daily stock returns on market in-                               nomics                       (2003)
                                                                    dex return
                                 Transaction costs†                 Bid-ask spread, volume, etc.                Individual        mi-
                                                                                                                crostructure
                                 Investor sophistication†           Number of analysts or institutional         Individual accounting




47
                                                                    owners
       2003                 51   Shareholder rights                 Shareholder rights as proxied by an in-     Individual accounting   Quarterly Journal of Eco-    Gompers, Ishii and Met-
                                                                    dex using 24 governance rules                                       nomics                       rick (2003)
       2003                 52   Excluded expenses                  Excluded expenses in ﬁrm’s earnings         Individual accounting   Review    of    Accounting   Jeﬀrey, Lundholm and
                                                                    reports                                                             Studies                      Soliman (2003)
       2003                 53   Growth in long-term net oper-      Growth in long-term net operating as-       Individual accounting   Accounting Review            Fairﬁeld, Whisenant and
                                 ating assets                       sets                                                                                             Yohn (2003)
       2003                 54   Order backlog                      Order backlog divided by average total      Individual accounting   Review    of    Accounting   Rajgopal, Shevlin and
                                                                    assets, transformed to a scaled-decile                              Studies                      Venkatachalam (2003)
                                                                    variable
       2003                 55   Return consistency                 Consecutive returns with the same           Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Behavioral Fi-    Watkins (2003)
                                                                    sign                                                                nance
       2004            36        Idiosyncratic consumption          Cross-sectional consumption growth          Common macro            Journal of Finance           Jacobs and Wang (2004)
                                                                    variance
       2004            37        Cash ﬂow news                      News about future market cash ﬂow           Common ﬁnancial         American Economic Re-        Campbell           and
                                                                                                                                        view                         Vuolteenaho (2004)
                       38        Discount rate news                 News about future market discount           Common ﬁnancial
                                                                    rate
       2004                      Market return†                     Equity index return                         Common ﬁnancial         Review of Financial Stud-    Vanden (2004)g
                                                                                                                                        ies
                       39        Index option returns               Return on S&P 500 index option              Common ﬁnancial
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                             Formation                                  Type                    Journal                      Short reference
       2004            40        Default risk                       Firm default likelihood using Merton’s     Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Vassalou and Xing (2004)
                                                                    option pricing model
       2004            41        Real interest rate                 Real interest rates extracted from a       Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Brennan, Wang and Xia
                                                                    time-series model of bond yields and                                                            (2004)
                                                                    expected inﬂation
                       42        Maximum Sharpe ratio portfo-       Maximum Sharpe ratio portfolio ex-         Common ﬁnancial
                                 lio                                tracted from a time-series model of
                                                                    bond yields and expected inﬂation
       2004            43        Return reversals at the style      Zero-investment portfolios sorted          Common other            Journal of Financial Eco-    Teo and Woo (2004)
                                 level                              based on past return performance at                                nomics
                                                                    the style level
       2004                 56   Unexpected change in R&D           Unexpected change in ﬁrm research          Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Allan, Maxwell and Sid-
                                                                    and expenditures                                                                                dique (2004)
       2004                 57   52-week high                       Nearness to the 52-week high price         Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance           George    and       Hwang
                                                                                                                                                                    (2004)
       2004                 58   Analysts’ recommendations          Consensus analysts’ recommendations        Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische
                                                                    from sell-side ﬁrms                                                                             and Lee (2004)
       2004                 59   Put-call parity                    Violations of put-call parity              Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Eco-    Ofek, Richardson      and
                                                                                                                                       nomics                       Whitelaw (2004)




48
       2004                 60   Abnormal capital investment        Past year capital expenditures scaled      Individual accounting   Journal of Financial and     Titman,   Wei and Xie
                                                                    by average capital expenditures for                                Quantitative Analysis        (2004)
                                                                    previous three years
       2004                 61   Balance sheet optimism             Net operating assets scaled by total as-   Individual accounting   Journal of Accounting and    Hirshleifer, Hou,    Teoh
                                                                    sets                                                               Economics                    and Zhang (2004)
       2005            44        Long-horizon         consumption   Three-year consumption growth rate         Common macro            Journal of Political Econ-   Parker    and    Julliard
                                 growth                                                                                                omy                          (2005)
       2005            45        Long-run consumption               Cash ﬂow risk measured by cointegra-       Common macro            Journal of Finance           Bansal,  Dittmar      and
                                                                    tion residual with aggregate consump-                                                           Lundblad (2005)
                                                                    tion
       2005            46        Housing price ratio                Ratio of housing to human wealth           Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance           Lustig and Nieuwerburgh
                                                                                                                                                                    (2005)
       2005                 62   External corporate governance      Proxies for corporate control              Individual accounting   Journal of Finance           Cremers and Nair (2005)
                            63   Internal corporate governance      Proxies for share-holder activism          Individual accounting
                                                †
       2005                      Market return                      Equity index return                        Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Financial Eco-    Acharya   and   Pedersen
                                                                                                                                       nomics                       (2005)h
                       47        Market liquidity*                  Value-weighted individual stock illiq-     Common microstruc-
                                                                    uidity as deﬁned in Amihud (2002)          ture
                            64   Individual stock liquidity         Individual stock illiquidity as deﬁned     Individual        mi-
                                                                    in Amihud (2002)                           crostructure
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                          Formation                                   Type                     Journal                      Short reference
       2005                 65   Price delay                     Delay in a stock price’s response to in-    Individual         mi-   Review of Financial Stud-    Hou    and     Moskowitz
                                                                 formation                                   crostructure             ies                          (2005)
       2005                 66   Heterogeneous beliefs           Factors constructed from disagree-          Individual ﬁnancial      Review of Financial Stud-    Anderson, Ghysels and
                                                                 ment among analysts about expected                                   ies                          Juergens (2005)
                                                                 short- and long-term earnings
       2005                 67   Short-sale constraints          Short-sale constraint proxied by Insti-     Individual         mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-    Nagel (2005)
                                                                 tutional ownership                          crostructure             nomics
       2005                 68   Short-sale constraints          Short-sale constraint proxied by short      Individual         mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-    Asquith, Pathak and Rit-
                                                                 interest and institutional ownership        crostructure             nomics                       ter (2005)
       2005                 69   Patent citation                 Change of patent citation impact de-        Individual other         Journal of Accounting,       Gu (2005)
                                                                 ﬂated by average total assets                                        Auditing & Finance
       2005                 70   Information uncertainty         Information uncertainty proxied by          Individual ﬁnancial      Review    of    Accounting   Jiang, Lee and Zhang
                                                                 ﬁrm age, return volatility, trading vol-                             Studies                      (2005)
                                                                 ume or cash ﬂow duration
       2005                 71   Adjusted R&D                    Adjusted R&D that incorporates cap-         Individual accounting    Working Paper                Lev, Nissim and Thomas
                                                                 italization and amortization                                                                      (2005)
       2005                 72   R&D reporting biases            R&D reporting biases proxied by the         Individual accounting    Contemporary Accounting      Lev, Sarath and Sougian-
                                                                 diﬀerence between R&D growth and                                     Research                     nis (2005)
                                                                 earnings growth




49
       2005                 73   Growth index                    A combined index constructed based          Individual accounting    Review    of   Accounting    Mohanram (2005)
                                                                 on earnings, cash ﬂows, earnings sta-                                Studies
                                                                 bility, growth stability and intensity of
                                                                 R&D, capital expenditure and adver-
                                                                 tising
       2006                      Market return†                  Equity index return and its square          Common ﬁnancial          Review of Financial Stud-    Vanden (2006)i
                                                                                                                                      ies
                                 Index option return†            Index option return and its square          Common ﬁnancial
                                 Interaction between index and   Product of market and option returns        Common ﬁnancial
                                 option return‡
       2006            48        Financing frictions             Default premium                             Common ﬁnancial          Review of Financial Stud-    Gomes, Yaron and Zhang
                                                                                                                                      ies                          (2006)
       2006            49        Investment growth by house-     Household investment growth                 Common macro             Journal of Business          Li, Vassalou and Xing
                                 holds*                                                                                                                            (2006)
                       50        Investment growth by nonfarm    Nonfarm nonﬁnancial corporate ﬁrms          Common macro
                                 nonﬁnancial corporate ﬁrms      investment growth
                       51        Investment growth by nonfarm    Nonfarm noncorporate business in-           Common macro
                                 noncorporate business           vestment growth
                       52        Investment growth by ﬁnancial   Financial ﬁrms investment growth            Common macro
                                 ﬁrms
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                           Formation                                Type                    Journal                     Short reference
       2006                      Third to tenth power of market   Third to tenth power of market return    Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Business         Chung,     Johnson   and
                                 return‡                                                                                                                       Schill (2006)j
       2006                 74   Financial constraints            Constraint index estimated from a        Individual ﬁnancial     Review of Financial Stud-   Whited and Wu (2006)
                                                                  ﬁrm’s investment Euler equation                                  ies
       2006            53        Downside risk                    Correlation with index return condi-     Common ﬁnancial         Review of Financial Stud-   Ang, Chen and Xing
                                                                  tional on index return being below a                             ies                         (2006)
                                                                  threshold value
       2006            54        Systematic volatility            Aggregate volatility relative to Fama    Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance          Ang, Hodrick, Xing and
                                                                  and French (1992) three-factor model                                                         Zhang (2006)
                            75   Idiosyncratic volatility         Idiosyncratic volatility relative to     Individual ﬁnancial
                                                                  Fama and French (1992) three-factor
                                                                  model
       2006            55        Investor sentiment               Composite sentiment index based on       Common behavioral       Journal of Finance          Baker    and    Wurgler
                                                                  various sentiment measures                                                                   (2006)
       2006            56        Retail investor sentiment        Systematic retail trading based on       Common behavioral       Journal of Finance          Kumar and Lee (2006)
                                                                  transaction data
       2006            57        Durable and nondurable con-      Durable and nondurable consumption       Common macro            Journal of Finance          Yogo (2006)
                                 sumption growth                  growth




50
       2006                      Market return†                   Equity index return                      Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance          Lo and Wang (2006)
                       58        Trading volume                   Return on a hedge portfolio con-         Common microstruc-
                                                                  structed using trading volume and        ture
                                                                  market returns
       2006            59        Liquidity                        Market-wide liquidity constructed        Common microstruc-      Journal of Financial Eco-   Sadka (2006)
                                                                  ﬁrst by decomposing ﬁrm-level liq-       ture                    nomics
                                                                  uidity into variable and ﬁxed price
                                                                  eﬀects then averaging the variable
                                                                  component
       2006            60        Earnings                         Return on a zero-investment portfo-      Common accounting       Journal of Financial Eco-   Chordia and Shivakumar
                                                                  lio long in stocks with high earnings                            nomics                      (2006)
                                                                  surprises and short in stocks with low
                                                                  earnings surprises
       2006            61        Liquidity                        Turnover-adjusted number of days         Common microstruc-      Journal of Financial Eco-   Liu (2006)
                                                                  with zero trading over the prior 12      ture                    nomics
                                                                  months
       2006                 76   Capital investment               Capital expenditure growth               Individual accounting   Journal of Finance          Anderson and      Garcia-
                                                                                                                                                               Feijoo (2006)
       2006                 77   Industry concentration           Industry concentration as proxied by     Individual accounting   Journal of Finance          Hou and Robinson (2006)
                                                                  the Herﬁndahl index
       2006                 78   Environment indicator*           A composite index measuring a ﬁrm’s      Individual other        Financial Management        Brammer, Brooks and
                                                                  environmental responsibility                                                                 Pavelin (2006)
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                          Formation                                 Type                     Journal                     Short reference
                            79   Employment indicator*           A composite index measuring em-           Individual other
                                                                 ployee responsibility
                            80   Community indicator*            A composite index measuring commu-        Individual other
                                                                 nity responsiveness
       2006                 81   Intangible information          Residuals from cross-sectional regres-    Individual accounting    Journal of Finance          Daniel     and      Titman
                                                                 sion of ﬁrm returns on fundamental                                                             (2006)
                                                                 growth measures
       2006                 82   Proﬁtability                    Expected earnings growth                  Individual accounting    Journal of Financial Eco-   Fama and French (2006)
                                                                                                                                    nomics
                            83   Investment*                     Expected growth in book equity            Individual accounting
                                 Book-to-market†                 Book value of equity plus deferred        Individual accounting
                                                                 taxes to market value of equity
       2006                 84   Net ﬁnancing                    Net amount of cash ﬂow received from      Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting and   Bradshaw,    Richardson
                                                                 external ﬁnancing                                                  Economics                   and Sloan (2006)
       2006                 85   Forecasted earnings per share   Analysts’   forecasted   earnings   per   Individual accounting    Working Paper               Cen, Wei      and    Zhang
                                                                 share                                                                                          (2006)
       2006                 86   Pension plan funding            Pension plan funding status calculated    Individual accounting    Journal of Finance          Franzoni     and     Marin
                                                                 as the diﬀerence between the fair value                                                        (2006)




51
                                                                 of plan assets and the projected bene-
                                                                 ﬁt obligation, divided by market capi-
                                                                 talization
       2006                 87   Acceleration                    Firm’s ranking on change in six-          Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Gettleman     and    Marks
                                                                 month momentum relative to the                                                                 (2006)
                                                                 cross-section of other ﬁrms
       2006                 88   Unexpected earnings’ autocor-   Standardized unexpected earnings’         Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting Re-   Narayanamoorthy (2006)
                                 relations                       autocorrelations via the sign of the                               search
                                                                 most recent earnings realization
       2007            62        Payout yield                    Return on a zero-investment portfolio     Common accounting        Journal of Finance          Boudoukh,     Michaely,
                                                                 long in high-yield stocks and short in                                                         Richardson and Roberts
                                                                 low-yield stocks                                                                               (2007)
       2007            63        Productivity                    Productivity level as in King and Re-     Common macro             Journal of Financial Eco-   Balvers      and    Huang
                                                                 belo (2000)                                                        nomics                      (2007)
                       64        Capital stock                   Quarterly capital stock interpolated      Common macro
                                                                 from annual data
       2007            65        Fourth-quarter   to   fourth-   Fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter con-     Common macro             Journal of Finance          Jagannathan and Wang
                                 quarter consumption growth      sumption growth rate                                                                           (2007)
       2007                 89   Credit rating                   S&P ﬁrm credit rating                     Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Finance          Avramov, Chordia, Jos-
                                                                                                                                                                tova and Philipov (2007)
       2007                 90   Trader composition              Fraction of total trading volume of a     Individual         mi-   Working Paper               Shu (2007)
                                                                 stock from institutional trading          crostructure
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #    Factor                              Formation                                  Type                    Journal                     Short reference
       2007                 91   Change in order backlog             Change in order backlog                    Individual accounting   Seoul Journal of Business   Baik and Ahn (2007)
       2007                 92   Firm productivity                   Firm productivity measured by re-          Individual accounting   Working Paper               Brown and Rowe (2007)
                                                                     turns on invested capital
       2007                 93   Insider forecasts of ﬁrm volatil-   Future ﬁrm volatility obtained from        Individual ﬁnancial     Working Paper               James, Fodor and Peter-
                                 ity                                 executive stock options                                                                        son (2007)
       2007                 94   Ticker symbol                       Creativity in stocks’ ticker symbols       Individual other        Quarterly Review of Eco-    Head, Smith and Wilson
                                                                                                                                        nomics & Finance            (2007)
       2007            66        Earnings cyclicality                Sensitivity of earnings to changes in      Common macro            Working Paper               Gourio (2007)
                                                                     aggregate total factor productivity
       2008            67        Market volatility innovation        Diﬀerence in monthly average of            Common ﬁnancial         Review of Financial Stud-   Kumar, Sorescu, Boehme
                                                                     squared daily return diﬀerences                                    ies                         and Danielsen (2008)
                            95   Firm age                            Firm’s public listing age                  Individual accounting
                                 Market return†                      Equity index return                        Common ﬁnancial
                            96   Interaction between market          Product of market volatility and ﬁrm       Individual accounting
                                 volatility and ﬁrm age              age
       2008            68        Short-run market volatility         High frequency volatility extracted        Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Finance          Adrian and Rosenberg
                                                                     from a time-series model of market re-                                                         (2008)
                                                                     turns




52
                       69        Long-run market volatility          Low frequency volatility extracted         Common ﬁnancial
                                                                     from a time-series model of market re-
                                                                     turns
       2008            70        Investment growth                   Return on a zero-investment portfolio      Common ﬁnancial         Review of Financial Stud-   Xing (2008)
                                                                     long in low investment growth ﬁrms                                 ies
                                                                     and short in high investment growth
                                                                     ﬁrms
       2008            71        Mean consumption growth             Across-state    mean        consumption    Common macro            Review of Financial Stud-   Korniotis (2008)
                                                                     growth rate                                                        ies
                       72        Variance     of    consumption      Across-state    consumption      growth    Common macro
                                 growth*                             variance
                       73        Mean habit growth                   Across-state mean habit growth rate        Common macro
                       74        Variance of habit growth            Across-state habit growth variance         Common macro
       2008            75        Liquidity                           Systematic liquidity extracted from        Common microstruc-      Journal of Financial Eco-   Korajczyk     and   Sadka
                                                                     eight empirical liquidity measures         ture                    nomics                      (2008)
       2008                 97   Country-level      idiosyncratic    Weighted average of variances and          Individual ﬁnancial     Review of Financial Stud-   Guo and Savickas (2008)
                                 volatility                          auto-covariances of ﬁrm-level idiosyn-                             ies
                                                                     cratic return shocks
       2008                 98   Distress                            Distressed ﬁrm failure probability esti-   Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance          Campbell, Hilscher and
                                                                     mated based on a dynamic logit model                                                           Szilagyi (2008)
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #     Factor                              Formation                                  Type                     Journal                      Short reference
       2008                 99    Shareholder advantage               Beneﬁts from renegotiation upon de-        Individual accounting    Review of Financial Stud-    Garlappi, Shu and Yan
                                                                      fault                                                               ies                          (2008)
                            100   Interaction between share-          Implied market value of assets pro-        Individual accounting
                                  holder advantage and implied        vided by Moody’s KMV
                                  market value of assets
       2008                 101   Asset growth                        Year-on-year percentage change in to-      Individual accounting    Journal of Finance           Cooper, Gulen and Schill
                                                                      tal assets                                                                                       (2008)
       2008                 102   Share issuance                      Annual share issuance based on ad-         Individual accounting    Journal of Finance           Pontiﬀ   and     Woodgate
                                                                      justed shares                                                                                    (2008)
       2008                       Earnings announcement return‡ Earnings announcement return cap-                Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper                Brandt, Kishore, Santa-
                                                                turing the market reaction to unex-                                                                    Clara and Venkatacha-
                                                                pected information contained in the                                                                    lam (2008)
                                                                ﬁrm’s earnings release
       2008                 103   Firm economic links                 Economic links proxied by return of a      Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Finance           Cohen    and       Frazzini
                                                                      portfolio of its major customers                                                                 (2008)
       2008                 104   Sin stock                           Stocks in the industry of adult ser-       Individual other         Financial Analyst Journal    Frank, Ma and Oliphant
                                                                      vices, alcohol, defense, gaming, med-                                                            (2008)
                                                                      ical and tobacco
       2008                 105   Goodwill impairment                 Buyers’ overpriced shares at acquisi-      Individual accounting    Accounting Review            Gu and Lev (2008)




53
                                                                      tion
       2008                 106   Information in order backlog        Changes in order backlog on future         Individual accounting    Working Paper                Gu, Wang and Ye (2008)
                                                                      proﬁtability
       2008                 107   Investor recognition                Investor recognition proxied by the        Individual other         Review    of    Accounting   Lehavy and Sloan (2008)
                                                                      change in the breadth of institutional                              Studies
                                                                      ownership
       2008                 108   DuPont analysis                     Sales over net operating assets in         Individual accounting    Accounting Review            Soliman (2008)
                                                                      DuPont analysis
       2008                 109   Small trades                        Volume arising from small trades           Individual         mi-   Review of Financial Stud-    Hvidkjaer (2008)
                                                                                                                 crostructure             ies
       2008            76         Idiosyncratic component        of   Residual of the linear projection of the   Common ﬁnancial          Working Paper                Brennan and Li (2008)
                                  S&P 500 return                      S&P 500 return onto the CRSP value
                                                                      weighted index return
       2009            77         Cash ﬂow covariance with ag-        Cash ﬂow covariance with aggregate         Common macro             Journal of Finance           Da (2009)
                                  gregate consumption                 consumption
                       78         Cash ﬂow duration                   Cash ﬂow duration sensitivity to ag-       Common macro
                                                                      gregate consumption
       2009                       Financial constraints               THEORY                                     Common         ﬁnan-     Journal of Finance           Livdan,   Sapriza      and
                                                                                                                 cial/macro                                            Zhang (2009)
       2009            79         Long-run stockholder      con-      Aggregated microlevel      stockholder     Common macro             Journal of Finance           Malloy, Moskowitz and
                                  sumption growth                     consumption                                                                                      Vissing-Jorgensen (2009)
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #     Factor                                Formation                                Type                    Journal                     Short reference
       2009            80         Takeover likelihood                   Estimated via a logit model of re-       Common ﬁnancial         Review of Financial Stud-   Cremers, Nair and John
                                                                        gressing ex-post acquisition indicator                           ies                         (2009)
                                                                        on various ﬁrm- and industry-level ac-
                                                                        counting variables
       2009            81         Illiquidity                           Estimated using structural formula in    Common microstruc-      Review of Financial Stud-   Chordia, Huh and Sub-
                                                                        line with Kyle’s (1985) lambda           ture                    ies                         rahmanyam (2009)
       2009            82         Cash ﬂow                              Aggregate earnings based on revisions    Common accounting       Journal of Financial Eco-   Da and Warachka (2009)
                                                                        to analyst earnings forecasts                                    nomics
       2009            83         Investors’ beliefs*                   Belief extracted from a two-state        Common other            Review of Financial Stud-   Ozoguz (2008)
                                                                        regime-switching model of aggregate                              ies
                                                                        market return and aggregate output
                       84         Investors’ uncertainty                Uncertainty extracted from a two-        Common other
                                                                        state regime-switching model of aggre-
                                                                        gate market return and aggregate out-
                                                                        put
       2009                 110   Media coverage                        Firm mass media coverage                 Individual behavioral   Journal of Finance          Fang and Peress (2009)
       2009                 111   Financial distress                    Credit rating downgrades                 Individual accounting   Journal of Financial Eco-   Avramov, Chordia, Jos-
                                                                                                                                         nomics                      tova and Philipov (2009)
       2009                 112   Idiosyncratic volatility              Conditional expected idiosyncratic       Individual accounting   Journal of Financial Eco-   Fu (2009)




54
                                                                        volatility estimated from a GARCH                                nomics
                                                                        model
       2009                 113   Debt capacity                         Firm tangibility as in Almeida and       Individual accounting   Journal of Finance          Hahn and Lee (2009)
                                                                        Campello (2007)
       2009                 114   Realized-implied         volatility   Diﬀerence between past realized          Individual ﬁnancial     Management Science          Bali and    Hovakimian
                                  spread                                volatility and the average of call and                                                       (2009)
                                                                        put implied volatility
                            115   Call-put      implied    volatility   Diﬀerence between call and put im-       Individual ﬁnancial
                                  spread                                plied volatility
       2009                 116   Productivity of cash                  Net present value of all the ﬁrm’s       Individual accounting   Working Paper               Chandrashekar and Rao
                                                                        present and future projects generated                                                        (2009)
                                                                        per dollar of cash holdings
       2009                 117   Advertising                           Change in expenditures on advertising    Individual accounting   Working Paper               Chemmanur       and   Yan
                                                                                                                                                                     (2009)
       2009                 118   Analyst forecasts optimism            Relative optimism and pessimism          Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Mar-   Da and Warachka (2009)
                                                                        proxied by the diﬀerence between                                 kets
                                                                        long-term and short-term analyst fore-
                                                                        cast of earnings growth
       2009                 119   Information revelation                Monthly estimate of the daily correla-   Individual        mi-   Working Paper               Gokcen (2009)
                                                                        tion between absolute returns and dol-   crostructure
                                                                        lar volume
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #     Factor                         Formation                                   Type                     Journal                     Short reference
       2009                 120   Earnings volatility            Earnings volatility                         Individual accounting    Working Paper               Gow and Taylor (2009)
       2009                 121   Cash ﬂow volatility            Rolling standard deviation of the stan-     Individual accounting    Journal of Empirical Fi-    Huang (2009)
                                                                 dardized cashﬂow over the past six-                                  nance
                                                                 teen quarters
       2009                 122   Local unemployment             Relative state unemployment                 Individual other         Working Paper               Korniotis     and    Kumar
                                                                                                                                                                  (2009)
                            123   Local housing collateral       State-level housing collateral              Individual other
       2009                 124   Eﬃciency score                 Firm eﬃciency/ineﬃciency identiﬁed          Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial and    Nguyen      and     Swanson
                                                                 from the residual of the projection of                               Quantitative Analysis       (2009)
                                                                 ﬁrm market-to-book ratio onto various
                                                                 ﬁrm ﬁnancial and accounting variables
       2009                 125   Order imbalance                Diﬀerence between buyer- and seller-        Individual         mi-   Review of Financial Stud-   Barber, Odean and Zhu
                                                                 initiated trades                            crostructure             ies                         (2009)
       2010            85         Market volatility and jumps    Estimated based on S&P index option         Common ﬁnancial          Working Paper               Cremers, Halling          and
                                                                 returns                                                                                          Weinbaum (2010)
       2010            86         Market mispricing              Zero-investment portfolio constructed       Common behavioral        Review of Financial Stud-   Hirshleifer    and    Jiang
                                                                 from repurchasing and issuing ﬁrms                                   ies                         (2010)
       2010                 126   Idiosyncratic skewness         Skewness forecasted using ﬁrm level         Individual ﬁnancial      Review of Financial Stud-   Boyer,    Mitton          and




55
                                                                 predictive variables                                                 ies                         Vorkink (2010)
       2010                 127   Political campaign contribu-   Firm contributions to US political          Individual other         Journal of Finance          Cooper,    Gulen    and
                                  tions                          campaigns                                                                                        Ovtchinnikov (2010)
       2010                 128   Real estate holdings           Real estate to total property, plant        Individual accounting    Review of Financial Stud-   Tuzel (2010)
                                                                 and equipment                                                        ies
       2010                 129   Realized skewness              Realized skewness obtained from high-       Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Amaya,       Christoﬀersen,
                                                                 frequency intraday prices                                                                        Jacobs      and    Vasquez
                                                                                                                                                                  (2011)
                            130   Realized kurtosis              Realized kurtosis obtained from high-       Individual ﬁnancial
                                                                 frequency intraday prices
       2010                 131   Excess multiple                Excess multiple calculated as the dif-      Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting,      An, Bhojraj         and   Ng
                                                                 ference between the accounting mul-                                  Auditing & Finance          (2010)
                                                                 tiple and the warranted multiple ob-
                                                                 tained by regressing the cross-section
                                                                 of ﬁrm multiples on accounting vari-
                                                                 ables
       2010                 132   Firm information quality       Firm information quality proxied by         Individual      ﬁnan-    Working Paper               Armstrong, Banerjee and
                                                                 analyst forecasts, idiosyncratic volatil-   cial/accounting                                      Corona (2010)
                                                                 ity and standard errors of beta esti-
                                                                 mates
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #     Factor                            Formation                                   Type                    Journal                     Short reference
       2010                 133   Long-run idiosyncratic volatil-   Long-run idiosyncratic volatility ﬁl-       Individual ﬁnancial     Working Paper               Cao and Xu (2010)
                                  ity                               tered from idiosyncratic volatility us-
                                                                    ing HP ﬁlters
       2010            87         Private information               Return on a zero-investment portfolio       Common microstruc-      Journal of Financial and    David, Hvidkjaer    and
                                                                    long in high PIN stocks and short in        ture                    Quantitative Analysis       O’Hara (2010)
                                                                    low PIN stocks; PIN (private informa-
                                                                    tion) is the probability of information-
                                                                    based trade
       2010                 134   Intra-industry return reversals   Intra-industry return reversals cap-        Individual ﬁnancial     Working Paper               Hameed,    Huang    and
                                                                    tured by the return diﬀerence be-                                                               Mian (2010)
                                                                    tween loser stocks and winners stocks
                                                                    based on relative monthly perfor-
                                                                    mance within the industry
       2010                 135   Related industry returns          Stock returns from economically re-         Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Finance          Menzly and Ozbas (2010)
                                                                    lated supplier and customer industries
       2010                 136   Earnings distributed to equity    Earnings distributed to equity holders      Individual accounting   Review of Accounting &      Papanastasopoulos,
                                  holders                                                                                               Finance                     Thomakos and Wang
                                                                                                                                                                    (2010)
                            137   Net cash distributed to equity    Dividends minus stock issues                Individual accounting
                                  holders




56
       2010                 138   Excess cash                       Most recently available ratio of cash to    Individual accounting   Financial Management        Simutin (2010)
                                                                    total assets
       2010                 139   Extreme downside risk             Extreme downside risk proxied by the        Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Banking and      Huang, Liu, Rhee and
                                                                    left tail index in the classical general-                           Finance                     Wu (2010)
                                                                    ized extreme value distribution
       2010                 140   Volatility smirk                  Steepness in individual option volatil-     Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial and    Xing, Zhang and Zhao
                                                                    ity smirk                                                           Quantitative Analysis       (2010)
       2010                       Exposure to ﬁnancial distress     THEORY                                      Individual ﬁnancial     Journal of Financial Eco-   George    and     Hwang
                                  costs                                                                                                 nomics                      (2010)
       2011            88         Rare disasters                    Disaster index based on international       Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Financial Eco-   Berkman, Jacobsen and
                                                                    political crises                                                    nomics                      Lee (2011)
       2011                       Distress risk‡                    Aggregate distress risk obtained by         Common ﬁnancial         Journal of Financial Eco-   Kapadia (2011)k
                                                                    projecting future business failure                                  nomics
                                                                    growth rates on a set of basis assets
       2011                       Momentum†                         Factor-mimicking portfolios based on        Common other            Review of Financial Stud-   Hou, Karolyi and Kho
                                                                    momentum of international equity re-                                ies                         (2011)
                                                                    turns
                       89         Cash ﬂow-to-price                 Factor-mimicking portfolios based on        Common accounting
                                                                    cash ﬂow-to-price of international eq-
                                                                    uity returns
     . . . continued
      Year      #           #     Factor                             Formation                                 Type                     Journal                      Short reference
       2011                 141   R&D investment                     Firm’s investment in research and de-     Individual accounting    Review of Financial Stud-    Li (2011)
                                                                     velopment                                                          ies
                                  Financial constraints†             Kaplan and Zingales (1997) ﬁnancial       Individual ﬁnancial
                                                                     constraint index
       2011                 142   Extreme stock returns              Portfolios sorted based on extreme        Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-    Bali,    Cakici        and
                                                                     past returns                                                       nomics                       Whitelaw (2011)
       2011                 143   Jumps in individual stock re-      Average jump size proxied by slope of     Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-    Yan (2011)
                                  turns                              option implied volatility smile                                    nomics
       2011                 144   Intangibles                        Employee satisfaction proxied by the      Individual other         Journal of Financial Eco-    Edmans (2011)
                                                                     list of “100 Best Companies to Work                                nomics
                                                                     for in America”
       2011                       Market return†                     Equity index return                       Common ﬁnancial          Working Paper                Chen, Novy-Marx and
                                                                                                                                                                     Zhang (2011)
                       90         Investment portfolio return        Diﬀerence between returns of portfo-      Common ﬁnancial
                                                                     lios with low and high investment-to-
                                                                     asset ratio
                       91         Return-on-equity portfolio re-     Diﬀerence between returns of portfo-      Common ﬁnancial
                                  turn                               lios with high and low return on eq-
                                                                     uity




57
       2011                 145   Volatility of liquidity            Measured by the price impact of trade     Individual         mi-   Working Paper                Akbas, Armstrong and
                                                                     as in Amihud (2002)                       crostructure                                          Petkova (2011)
       2011                 146   Dispersion in beliefs              Revealed through active holdings of       Individual behavioral    Working Paper                Jiang and Sun (2011)
                                                                     fund managers
       2011                 147   Credit default swap spreads        Five-year spread less one-year spread     Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper                Han and Zhou (2011)
       2011                 148   Organizational capital             Directly measured using Selling, Gen-     Individual accounting    Working Paper                Eisfeldt and Papaniko-
                                                                     eral and Administrative expenditures                                                            laou (2011)
       2011                 149   Residual income                    Firm residual income growth ex-           Individual accounting    Review    of    Accounting   Balachandran and Mo-
                                                                     tracted from ﬁrm earnings growth                                   Studies                      hanram (2011)
       2011                 150   Accrual volatility                 Firm accrual volatility measured by       Individual accounting    Working Paper                Bandyopadhyay, Huang
                                                                     the standard deviation of the ratio of                                                          and Wirjanto (2011)
                                                                     accruals to sales
       2011                 151   Implied cost of capital            Implied cost of capital estimated using   Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper                Callen and Lyle (2011)
                                                                     option contracts
       2011                 152   Non-accounting       information   Average delay with which non-             Individual ﬁnancial      Contemporary Accounting      Callen,     Khan and Lu
                                  quality                            accounting information is impounded                                Research                     (2011)
                                                                     into stock price
                            153   Accounting information qual-       Average delay with which accounting       Individual ﬁnancial
                                  ity                                information is impounded into stock
                                                                     price
     . . . continued
      Year      #      #     Factor                          Formation                                  Type                     Journal                      Short reference
       2011            154   Labor unions                    Labor force unionization measured by       Individual other         Journal of Financial and     Chen, Kacperczyk and
                                                             the percentage of employed workers in                               Quantitative Analysis        Ortiz-Molina (2011)
                                                             a ﬁrm’s primary Census industry Clas-
                                                             siﬁcation industry covered by unions
                                                             in collective bargaining with employ-
                                                             ers
       2011            155   Overreaction to nonfundamen-    Overreaction to within-industry dis-       Individual other         Working Paper                Da, Liu and Schaumburg
                             tal price changes               count rate shocks as captured by                                                                 (2011)
                                                             decomposing the short-term rever-
                                                             sal into across-industry return mo-
                                                             mentum, within-industry variation in
                                                             expected returns, under-reaction to
                                                             within-industry cash ﬂow news and
                                                             overreaction to within-industry dis-
                                                             count rate news
       2011            156   Short interest                  Short interest from short sellers          Individual ﬁnancial      Accounting Review            Michael and Rees (2011)
       2011            157   Percent total accrual           Firm accruals scaled by earnings           Individual accounting    Accounting Review            Hafzalla, Lundholm and
                                                                                                                                                              Van Winkle (2007)
       2011                  Projected earnings accuracy‡    Skilled analysts identiﬁed by both past    Individual accounting    Working Paper                Hess, Kreutzmann and
                                                             earnings forecasts accuracy and skills                                                           Pucker (2011)




58
       2011            158   Firm productivity               Firm level total factor productivity es-   Individual accounting    Working Paper                Imrohoroglu and Tuzel
                                                             timated from ﬁrm value added, em-                                                                (2011)
                                                             ployment and capital
       2011            159   Really dirty surplus            Really dirty surplus that happens          Individual accounting    Accounting Review            Landsman, Miller, Peas-
                                                             when a ﬁrm issues or reacquires its                                                              nell and Shu (2011)
                                                             own shares in a transaction that does
                                                             not record the shares at fair market
                                                             value
       2011            160   Earnings forecast               Earnings forecast based on ﬁrm fun-        Individual accounting    Review    of    Accounting   Li (2011)
                                                             damentals                                                           Studies
       2011            161   Asset growth                    Yearly percentage change in total bal-     Individual accounting    Working Paper                Nyberg and Poyry (2011)
                                                             ance sheet assets
       2011            162   Real asset liquidity            Number of potential buyers for a           Individual         mi-   Working Paper                Ortiz-Molina and Phillips
                                                             ﬁrm’s assets from within the industry      crostructure                                          (2011)
       2011            163   Customer-base concentration     Annual change in customer-base con-        Individual other         Working Paper                Patatoukas (2011)
                                                             centration
       2011            164   Tax expense surprises           Seasonally diﬀerenced quarterly tax        Individual accounting    Journal of Accounting Re-    Thomas       and    Zhang
                                                             expense                                                             search                       (2011)
       2011                  Predicted earnings increase score‡Predicted earnings increase score        Individual accounting    Review    of    Accounting   Wahlen      and    Wieland
                                                               based on ﬁnancial statement informa-                              Studies                      (2011)
                                                               tion
     . . . continued
      Year      #            #     Factor                                 Formation                               Type                  Journal                     Short reference
       2011                        Shareholder recovery                   THEORY                                  Common ﬁnancial       Journal of Finance          Garlappi and Yan (2011)
       2011            92          Garbage growth                         Realized annual garbage growth          Common macro          Journal of Finance          Savov (2011)
       2012            93          Financial            intermediary’s    Intermediary’s marginal value of        Common ﬁnancial       Journal of Finance          Adrian, Etula and Muir
                                   wealth                                 wealth proxied by shocks to leverage                                                      (2012)
                                                                          of securities broker-dealers
       2012            94          Stochastic volatility*                 Estimated from a heteroscedastic        Common ﬁnancial       Working Paper               Campbell, Giglio, Polk
                                                                          VAR based on market and macro vari-                                                       and Turley (2012)
                                                                          ables
       2012            95          Average variance of equity re-         Decomposition of market variance into   Common ﬁnancial       Review of Financial Stud-   Chen and Petkova (2012)
                                   turns                                  an average correlation component and                          ies
                                                                          an average variance component
       2012            96          Income growth for goods pro-           Income growth for goods producing in-   Common macro          Journal of Finance          Eiling (2012)
                                   ducing industries                      dustries
                       97          Income growth for manufactur-          Income growth for manufacturing in-     Common macro
                                   ing industries                         dustries
                       98          Income growth for distributive         Income growth for distributive indus-   Common macro
                                   industries                             tries
                       99          Income growth for service in-          Income growth for service industries    Common macro




59
                                   dustries*
                       100         Income      growth     for   govern-   Income growth for government            Common macro
                                   ment*
       2012            101         Consumption volatility                 Filtered consumption growth volatil-    Common macro          Journal of Finance          Boguth     and    Kuehn
                                                                          ity from a Markov regime-switching                                                        (2012)
                                                                          model based on historical consump-
                                                                          tion data
       2012            102         Market skewness                        Higher moments of market returns es-    Common ﬁnancial       Journal of Financial Eco-   Chang,    Christoﬀersen
                                                                          timated from daily index options                              nomics                      and Jacobs (2012)
       2012            103         Learning*                              Learning estimated from an investor’s   Common ﬁnancial       Working Paper               Viale, Garcia-Feijoo and
                                                                          optimization problem under Knight-                                                        Giannetti (2011)
                                                                          ian uncertainty
                       104         Knightian uncertainty                  Knightian uncertainty estimated from    Common ﬁnancial
                                                                          an investor’s optimization problem
                                                                          under Knightian uncertainty
       2012            105         Market uncertainty                     Proxied by variance risk premium        Common ﬁnancial       Working Paper               Bali and Zhou (2012)
                                                  ‡
       2012                        Labor income                           Labor income at the census division     Common macro          Working Paper               Gomez, Priestley and Za-
                                                                          level                                                                                     patero (2012)l
       2012                  165   Product price change                   Cumulative product price changes        Individual ﬁnancial   Working Paper               Van Binsbergen (2012)
                                                                          since an industry enters the producer
                                                                          price index program
     . . . continued
      Year      #            #     Factor                          Formation                                 Type                     Journal                     Short reference
       2012            106         Future growth in the opportu-   Opportunity cost of money as proxied      Common macro             Working Paper               Lioui and Maio (2012)
                                   nity cost of money              by 3-month Treasury bill rate or eﬀec-
                                                                   tive Federal Funds rate
       2012                        Inter-cohort consumption dif-   THEORY                                    Common macro             Journal of Financial Eco-   Garleanu, Kogan      and
                                   ferences                                                                                           nomics                      Panageas (2012)
       2012            107         Market-wide liquidity           Proxied by “noise” in Treasury prices     Common microstruc-       Working Paper               Hu, Pan       and   Wang
                                                                                                             ture                                                 (2012)
       2012                  166   Stock skewness                  Ex ante stock risk-neutral skewness       Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Finance          Conrad, Dittmar      and
                                                                   implied by option prices                                                                       Ghysels (2012)
       2012                  167   Expected return uncertainty     Proxied by the volatility of option-      Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Baltussen, Van Bekkum
                                                                   implied volatility                                                                             and Van der Grient
                                                                                                                                                                  (2012)
       2012                  168   Information intensity           Proxied by monthly frequency of cur-      Individual         mi-   Working Paper               Zhao (2012)
                                                                   rent report ﬁlings                        crostructure
       2012                  169   Credit risk premia              Market implied credit risk premia         Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Friewald, Wagner     and
                                                                   based on the term structure of CDS                                                             Zechner (2012)
                                                                   spreads
       2012                  170   Geographic dispersion           Number of states in which a ﬁrm has       Individual other         Journal of Financial Eco-   Garcia and Norli (2012)
                                                                   business operations                                                nomics




60
       2012                  171   Political geography             Political proximity measured by po-       Individual other         Journal of Financial Eco-   Kim, Pantzalis and Park
                                                                   litical alignment index of each state’s                            nomics                      (2012)
                                                                   leading politicians with the ruling
                                                                   presidential party
       2012                  172   Option to stock volume ratio    Option volume divided by stock vol-       Individual         mi-   Journal of Financial Eco-   Johnson and So (2012)
                                                                   ume                                       crostructure             nomics
       2012                  173   Cash holdings                   Firm cash holdings                        Individual accounting    Journal of Financial Eco-   Palazzo (2012)
                                                                                                                                      nomics
       2012                  174   Labor mobility                  Labor mobility based on average occu-     Individual accounting    Working Paper               Donangelo (2012)
                                                                   pational dispersion of employees in an
                                                                   industry
       2012                  175   Debt covenant protection        Firm-level covenant index constructed     Individual accounting    Working Paper               Wang (2012)
                                                                   based on 30 covenant categories
       2012                  176   Stock-cash ﬂow sensitivity      Stock-cash ﬂow sensitivity esti-          Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Chen and       Strebulaev
                                                                   mated from a structural one-factor                                                             (2012)
                                                                   contingent-claim model
     . . . continued
      Year      #            #     Factor                             Formation                                Type                     Journal                     Short reference
       2012            108         Jump beta                          Discontinuous jump beta based on         Common ﬁnancial          Working Paper               Sophia Zhengzi Li (2012)
                                                                      Todorov and Bollerslev (2010)
       2012                        Long-run             consumption   Long-run consumption growth rate         Common macro             Journal of Financial Eco-   Ferson, Nallareddy and
                                   growth‡                            identiﬁed from the risk-free rate and                             nomics                      Xie (2012)m
                                                                      market price-dividend ratio based on
                                                                      Bansal and Yaron (2005)’s long-run
                                                                      risk model
                                   Short-run            consumption   Short-run consumption growth rate        Common macro
                                   growth‡                            identiﬁed from the risk-free rate and
                                                                      market price-dividend ratio based on
                                                                      Bansal and Yaron (2005)’s long-run
                                                                      risk model
                                   Consumption               growth   Consumption growth volatility shocks     Common macro
                                   volatility‡                        identiﬁed from the risk-free rate and
                                                                      market price-dividend ratio based on
                                                                      Bansal and Yaron (2005)’s long-run
                                                                      risk model
       2012                  177   Change in call implied volatil-    Change in call implied volatility        Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Ang, Bali and Cakici
                                   ity                                                                                                                              (2012)
                             178   Change in put implied volatil-     Change in put implied volatility         Individual ﬁnancial




61
                                   ity
       2012                  179   Firm hiring rate                   Firm hiring rate measured by the         Individual other         Working Paper               Bazdresch, Belo and Lin
                                                                      change in the number of employees                                                             (2012)
                                                                      over the average number of employees
       2012                  180   Information processing com-        Past return for      paired   pseudo-    Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-   Cohen and Lou (2012)
                                   plexity                            conglomerates                                                     nomics
       2012                  181   Opportunistic buy                  Prior month buy indicator for oppor-     Individual         mi-   Journal of Finance          Cohen, Malloy and Po-
                                                                      tunistic traders who do not trade rou-   crostructure                                         morski (2012)
                                                                      tinely
                             182   Opportunistic sell                 Prior month sell indicator for oppor-    Individual         mi-
                                                                      tunistic traders who do not trade rou-   crostructure
                                                                      tinely
       2012                  183   Innovative eﬃciency                Patents/citations scaled by research     Individual other         Journal of Financial Eco-   Hirshleifer, Hsu and Li
                                                                      and development expenditures                                      nomics                      (2012)
       2012                  184   Abnormal operating cash ﬂows       Abnormal operating cash ﬂows             Individual accounting    Working Paper               Li (2012)
                             185   Abnormal production costs          Abnormal production costs                Individual accounting
       2012                  186   Deferred revenues                  Changes in the current deferred rev-     Individual accounting    Contemporary Accounting     Prakash and Sinha (2012)
                                                                      enue liability                                                    Research
       2012                  187   Earnings conference calls          Sentiment of conference call wording     Individual other         Journal of Banking and      Price, Doran, Peterson
                                                                                                                                        Finance                     and Bliss (2012)
     . . . continued
      Year      #            #     Factor                          Formation                                  Type                     Journal                     Short reference
       2012                  188   Earnings forecast optimism      Diﬀerence between characteristic fore-     Individual accounting    Working Paper               So (2012)
                                                                   casts and analyst forecasts
       2012            109         Commodity index                 Open interest-weighted total index         Common ﬁnancial          Working Paper               Boons, Roon and Szy-
                                                                   that aggregates 33 commodities                                                                  manowska (2012)
       2012                  189   Time-series momentum            Time-series momentum strategy based        Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-   Moskowitz, Ooi and Ped-
                                                                   on autocorrelations of scaled returns                               nomics                      ersen (2012)
       2012                  190   Carry                           Expected return minus expected price       Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Koijen, Moskowitz, Ped-
                                                                   appreciation                                                                                    ersen and Vrugt (2012)
       2012                  191   Expected return proxy           Logistic transformation of the ﬁt (R2 )    Individual ﬁnancial      Journal of Financial Eco-   Burlacu,        Fontaine,
                                                                   from a regression of returns on past                                nomics                      Jimenez-Garces       and
                                                                   prices                                                                                          Seasholes (2012)
       2012                  192   Fraud probability               Probability of manipulation based on       Individual accounting    Financial Analysts Jour-    Beneish, Lee and Nichols
                                                                   accounting variables                                                nal                         (2013)
       2012                  193   Buy orders                      Sensitivity of price changes to sell or-   Individual         mi-   Working Paper               Brennan, Chordia, Sub-
                                                                   ders                                       crostructure                                         rahmanyam and Tong
                                                                                                                                                                   (2012)
                             194   Sell orders                     Sensitivity of price changes to buy or-    Individual         mi-
                                                                   ders                                       crostructure




62
       2013            110         Expected dividend level         Expected dividend level based on a         Common ﬁnancial          Working Paper               Doskov, Pekkala       and
                                                                   macro time-series model                                                                         Ribeiro (2013)
                       111         Expected dividend growth        Expected dividend growth based on a        Common ﬁnancial
                                                                   macro time-series model
       2013                  195   Firm’s ability to innovate      Rolling ﬁrm-by-ﬁrm regressions of          Individual accounting    Review of Financial Stud-   Cohen, Diether and Mal-
                                                                   ﬁrm-level sales growth on lagged R&D                                ies                         loy (2013)
       2013                  196   Board centrality                Board centrality measured by four ba-      Individual other         Journal of Accounting and   Larcker, So and Wang
                                                                   sic dimensions of well-connectedness                                Economics                   (2013)
       2013                  197   Gross proﬁtability              Gross proﬁts to assets                     Individual accounting    Journal of Financial Eco-   Novy-Marx (2013)
                                                                                                                                       nomics
       2013                  198   Betting-against-beta            Long leveraged low-beta assets and         Individual ﬁnancial      Working Paper               Frazzini    and   Pedersen
                                                                   short high-beta assets                                                                          (2013)
       2013                  199   Secured debt                    Proportion of secured to total debt        Individual accounting    Working Paper               Valta (2013)
                             200   Convertible debt                Proportion of convertible to total debt    Individual accounting
                             201   Convertible debt indicator      Dummy variable indicating whether a        Individual accounting
                                                                   ﬁrm has convertible debt outstanding
       2013            112         Cross-sectional pricing ineﬃ-   Pricing ineﬃciency proxied by re-          Common microstruc-       Working Paper               Akbas,     Armstrong,
                                   ciency                          turns to simulated trading strategies      ture                                                 Sorescu and Subrah-
                                                                   that capture momentum, proﬁtability,                                                            manyam (2013)
                                                                   value, earnings and reversal
     . . . continued
      Year      #            #      Factor                            Formation                                 Type                    Journal                      Short reference
       2013                  202    Attenuated returns                Composite trading strategy returns        Individual ﬁnancial     Working Paper                Chordia, Subrahmanyam
                                                                      where the weights are based on aver-                                                           and Tong (2013)
                                                                      aging percentile rank scores of various
                                                                      characteristics for each stock on port-
                                                                      folios
       2013                  203    Bad private information           Decomposing the PIN measure of            Individual        mi-   Working Paper                Brennan, Huh and Sub-
                                                                      Easley, Hvidkjaer and O’Hara (2002)       crostructure                                         rahmanyam (2013)
                                                                      into two elements that reﬂect informed
                                                                      trading on good news and bad news
       2013            113          Trend signal                      Return on a zero-investment port-         Common other            Working Paper                Han and Zhou (2013)
                                                                      folio long in past winners and
                                                                      short in past losers based on short-
                                                                      term, intermediate-term and long-
                                                                      term stock price trends
         Notes to Table
     This table contains a summary of risk factors that explain the cross-section of expected returns. The column “Indi.(#)”(“Common(#)”) reports the cumulative
     number of empirical factors that are classiﬁed as individual (common) risk factors.
     *: insigniﬁcant; †: duplicated; ‡: missing p-value.
     a: No p-values reported for their factors constructed from principal component analysis.
     b: Fama and French (1992) create zero-investment portfolios to test size and book-to-market eﬀects. This is diﬀerent from the testing approach in Banz (1981). We




63
     therefore count Fama and French (1992)’s test on size eﬀect as a separate one.
     c: No p-values reported for their high order equity index return factors.
     d: No p-values reported for their eight risk factors that explain international equity returns.
     e: No p-values reported for his high order return factors.
     f: No p-values reported for their ﬁve hedge fund style return factors.
     g: Vanden (2004) reports a t-statistic for each Fama-French 25 size and book-to-market sorted stock portfolios. We average these 25 t-statistics.
     h: Acharya and Pedersen (2005) consider the illiquidity measure in Amihud (2002). This is diﬀerent from the liquidity measure in Pastor and Stambaugh (2003).
     We therefore count their factor as a separate one.
     i: No p-values reported for the interactions between market return and option returns.
     j: No p-values reported for their co-moment betas.
     k: No p-values reported for his distress tracking factor.
     l: Gomez, Priestley and Zapatero (2012) study census division level labor income. However, most of the division level labor income have a non-signiﬁcant t-statistic.
     We do not count their factors.
     m: No p-values reported for their factors estimated from the long-run risk model.
References
Abarbanell, J.S., and B.J. Bushee, 1998, Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis strategy,
Accounting Review 73, 19-45.
Acharya, Viral V. and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk, Journal of
Financial Economics 77, 375-410.
Ackert, L., and G. Athanassakos, 1997, Prior uncertainty, analyst bias, and subsequent abnormal
returns, Journal of Financial Research 20, 263-273.
Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio choice and corporation ﬁnance:
A synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925-984.
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula and Tyler Muir, 2012, Financial intermediaries and the cross-section
of asset returns, Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
Adrian, Tobias and Joshua Rosenberg, 2008, Stock returns and volatility: Pricing the short-run
and long-run components of market risk, Journal of Finance 63, 2997-3030.
Ahn, Seung C., Alex R. Horenstein and Na Wang, 2012, Determining rank of the beta matrix of a
linear asset pricing model, Working Paper, Arizona State University and Sogang University.
Akbas, Ferhat, Will J. Armstrong and Ralitsa Petkova, 2011, The Volatility of liquidity and ex-
pected stock returns, Working Paper, Purdue University.
Akbas, Ferhat, Will Armstrong, Sorin Sorescu and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2013, Time varying
market eﬃciency in the cross-section of expected stock returns, Working Paper, University of
Kansas.
Ali, Ashiq, Lee-Seok Hwang and Mark A. Trombley, 2003, Arbitrage risk and the book-to-market
anomaly, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 355-373.
Almeida, Heitor and Murillo Campello, 2007, Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and corporate
investment, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429-1460.
Amaya, Diego, Peter Christoﬀersen, Kris Jacobs and Aurelio Vasquez, 2011, Do realized skewness
and kurtosis predict the cross-section of equity returns, Working Paper, University of Aarhus.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series eﬀects, Journal
of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 223-249.
Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson, 1989, The eﬀects of beta, bid-ask spread, residual risk, and
size on stock returns, Journal of Finance 44, 479-486.
An, Jiyoun, Sanjeev Bhojraj and David T. Ng, 2010, Warranted multiples and future returns,
Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance 25, 143-169.
Anderson, Christopher W. and Luis Garcia-Feijóo, 2006, Empirical evidence on capital investment,
growth options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 61, 171-194.
Anderson, Evan W., Eric Ghysels and Jennifer L. Juergens, 2005, Do heterogeneous beliefs matter
for asset pricing, Review of Financial Studies 18, 875-924.
Ang, Andrew, Joseph Chen and Yuhang Xing, 2006, Downside risk, Review of Financial Studies
19, 1191-1239.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of
volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.



                                                     64
Andrew Ang, Turan G. Bali and Nusret Cakici, 2012, The joint cross section of stocks and options,
Working Paper, Columbia University.
Arbel, Avner, Steven Carvell and Paul Strebel, 1983, Giraﬀes, institutions and neglected ﬁrms,
Financial Analysts Journal 39, 57-63.
Armstrong, Chris, Snehal Banerjee and Carlos Corona, 2010, Information quality and the cross-
section of expected returns, Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Asness, Cliﬀord, R. Burt Porter and Ross Stevens, 2000, Predicting stock returns using industry-
relative ﬁrm characteristics, Working Paper, AQR Capital Management.
Asquith, Paul, Parag A. Pathak and Jay R. Ritter, 2005, Short interest, institutional ownership
and stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 243-276.
ATLAS Collaboration, 2012, Observation of a new particle in the search for the Standard Model
Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the LHC, Physics Letters B 716, 1-29.
Avramov, Doron, Tarun Chordia, Gergana Jostova and Alexander Philipov, 2007, Momentum and
credit rating, Journal of Finance 62, 2503-2520.
Avramov, Doron, Tarun Chordia, Gergana Jostova and Alexander Philipov, 2009, Dispersion in
analysts’ earnings forecasts and credit rating, Journal of Financial Economics 91, 83-101.
Baik, Bok and Tae Sik Ahn, 2007, Changes in order backlog and future returns, Seoul Journal of
Business 13, 105-126.
Bajgrowicz, Pierre and Oliver Scaillet, 2012, Technical trading revisited: False discoveries, persis-
tence tests, and transaction costs, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 473-491.
Bajgrowicz, Pierre, Oliver Scaillet and Adrien Treccani, 2013, Jumps in High-Frequency Data:
Spurious Detections, Dynamics, and News, Working Paper, University of Geneva.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns,
Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.
Balachandran, Sudhakar and Partha Mohanram, 2011, Using residual income to reﬁne the rela-
tionship between earnings growth and stock returns, Review of Accounting Studies 17, 134-165.
Balduzzi, P. and C. Robotti, 2008, Mimicking portfolios, economic risk premia, and tests of multi-
beta models, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26, 354-368.
Bali, Turan G. and Armen Hovakimian, 2009, Volatility spreads and expected stock returns, Man-
agement Science 55, 1797-1812.
Bali, Turan G. and Hao Zhou, 2012, Risk, uncertainty, and expected returns, Working Paper,
Georgetown University.
Bali, Turan G., Nusret Cakici and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and
the cross-section of expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427-446.
Baltussen, Guido, Sjoerd Van Bekkum and Bart Van der Grient, 2012, Unknown unknowns: Vol-
of-vol and the cross section of stock returns, Working Paper, Erasmus University.
Balvers, Ronald J. and Dayong Huang, 2007, Productivity-based asset pricing: Theory and evi-
dence, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 405-445.
Bandyopadhyay, Sati, Alan Huang and Tony Wirjanto, 2010, The accrual volatility anomaly, Work-
ing Paper, University of Waterloo.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2005, Risks for the long run: a potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar and Christian T. Lundblad, 2005, Consumption, dividends, and
the cross section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639-1672.


                                                      65
Bansal, Ravi and S. Viswanathan, 1993, No arbitrage and arbitrage pricing: a new approach,
Journal of Finance 48, 1231-1262.
Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks, Journal
of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.
Barber, Brad, Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols and Brett Trueman, 2001, Can investors proﬁt
from the prophets? Security analyst recommendations and stock returns, Journal of Finance 56,
531-563.
Barber, B., T. Odean and N. Zhu, 2009, Do retail trades move markets? Review of Financial
Studies 22, 152-186.
Barras, Laurent, Oliver Scaillet and Russ Wermers, 2010, False discoveries in mutual fund perfor-
mance: Measuring luck in estimated alphas, Journal of Finance 65, 179-216.
Basu, S., 1977, Investment performance of common stocks in relation to their price-earnings ratios:
a test of the eﬃcient market hypothesis, Journal of Finance 32, 663-682.
Basu, S., 1983, The relationship between earnings’ yield, market value and return for NYSE com-
mon stocks: further evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 129-156.
Bauman, Scott and Richard Dowen, 1988, Growth projections and common stock returns, Financial
Analyst Journal 44, 79-80.
Bazdresch, Santiago, Frederico Belo and Xiaoji Lin, 2012, Labor hiring, investment, and stock
return predictability in the cross section, Working Paper, University of Minnesota.
Begg, C.B. and J.A., Berlin, 1988, Publication bias: A problem in interpreting medical data,
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 419-463.
Beneish, M.D., 1997, Detecting GAAP violation: Implications for assessing earnings management
among ﬁrms with extreme ﬁnancial performance, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy 16,
271-309.
Beneish, M.D., M.C. Lee and D. Craig Nichols, 2012, Fraud detection and expected returns, Avail-
able at SSRN, 2012.
Benjamini, Yoav and Daniel Yekutieli, 2001, The control of the false discovery rate in multiple
testing under dependency, Annals of Statistics 29, 1165-1188.
Benjamini, Yoav and Wei Liu, 1999, A step-down multiple hypotheses testing procedure that
controls the false discovery rate under independence, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference
82, 163-170.
Benjamini, Yoav and Yosef Hochberg, 1995, Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing, Journal of the Royal Statistical Socitey, Series B, 289-300.
Berardino, Palazzo, 2012, Cash holdings, risk, and expected returns, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 104, 162-185.
Berkman, Henk, Ben Jacobsen and John B. Lee, 2011, Time-varying rare disaster risk and stock
returns, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 313-332.
Bhandari, Laxmi Chand, 1988, Debt/Equity ratio and expected common stock returns: Empirical
evidence, Journal of Finance 43, 507-528.
Black, Fischer, 1972, Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, Journal of Business
45, 444-454.
Black, Fischer, Michael C. Jensen and Myron Scholes, 1972, The capital asset pricing model: Some
empirical tests. In Studies in the theory of capital markets, ed. Michael Jensen, pp. 79-121. New
York: Praeger.


                                                     66
Bondt, Werner F.M. and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?,Journal of Fi-
nance 40, 793-805.
Brammer, Stephen, Chris Brooks and Stephen Pavelin, 2006, Corporate social performance and
stock returns: UK evidence from disaggregate measures, Financial Management 35, 97-116.
Brandt, Michael, Runeet Kishore, Pedro Santa-Clara and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2008, Earnings
announcements are full of surprises, Working Paper, Duke University.
Bradshaw, Mark, Scott Richardson and Richard Sloan, 2006, The relation between corporate ﬁ-
nancing activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 42,
53-85.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and
investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.
Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical Test of the
Consumption-Oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231-262.
Brennan, Michael J., Ashley W. Wang and Yihong Xia, 2004, Estimation and test of a simple
model of intertemporal capital asset pricing, Journal of Finance 59, 1743-1776.
Brennan, Michael J. and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1996, Market microstructure and asset pricing:
On the compensation for illiquidity in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 441-464.
Brennan, Michael and Feifei Li, 2008, Agency and asset pricing, Working Paper, UCLA.
Brennan, Michael, Sahn-Wook Huh and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2013, The pricing of good and
bad private information in the cross-section of expected stock returns, Working Paper, University
of California at Los Angeles.
Brennan, Michael J., Tarun Chordia and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Alternative factor spec-
iﬁcations, security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics 49, 345-373.
Brennan, Michael J., Tarun Chordia, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Qing Tong, 2012, Sell-order
liquidity and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 105,
523-541.
Brown, David and Bradford Rowe, 2007, The productivity premium in equity returns, Working
Paper, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Brown, D. Andrew, Nicole A. Lazar, Gauri S. Datta, Woncheol Jang, Jennifer E. McDowell, 2012,
Incorporating spatial dependence into Bayesian multiple testing of statistical parametric maps in
functional neuroimaging, JSM.
Boguth, Oliver and Lars-Alexander Kuehn, 2012, Consumption volatility risk, Journal of Finance,
Forthcoming.
Boons, Martijn, Frans De Roon and Marta Szymanowska, 2012, The stock market price of com-
modity risk, Working Paper, Tilburg University.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson and Michael R. Roberts, 2007, On the
importance of measuring payout yield: implications for empirical asset pricing, Journal of Finance
62, 877-915.
Bossaerts, Peters and Robert M. Dammon, 1994, Tax-induced intertemporal restrictions on security
returns, Journal of Finance 49, 1347-1371.
Botosan, Christine A., 1997, Disclosure level and the cost of equity capital, Accounting Review 72,
323-349.




                                                      67
Boudoukh, Jacob, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson and Michael R. Roberts, 2007, On the
importance of measuring payout yield: implications for empirical asset pricing, Journal of Finance
62, 877-915.
Boyer, Brian, Todd Mitton and Keith Vorkink, 2010, Expected idiosyncratic skewness, Review of
Financial Studies 23, 170-202.
Burlacu, Radu, Patrice Fontaine, Sonia Jimenez-Garces and Mark S. Seasholes, 2012, Risk and the
cross section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 511-522.
Callen, Jeﬀrey and Matthew Lyle, 2011, The term structure of implied costs of equity capital,
Working Paper, University of Toronto.
Callen, Jeﬀrey, Mozaﬀar Khan and Hai Lu, 2011, Accounting quality, stock price delay, and future
stock returns, Contemporary Accounting Research 30, 269-295.
Campbell, John Y., 1996, Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy 104, 298-
345.
Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal of
Finance 63, 2899-2939.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, Christopher Polk and Robert Turley, 2012, An Intertemporal
CAPM with Stochastic Volatility, Working Paper, Harvard University.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, Bad beta, good beta, American Economic
Review 94, 1249-1275.
Cao, Xuying and Yexiao Xu, 2010, Long-run idiosyncratic volatilities and cross-sectional stock
returns, Working Paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Cao, Charles, Yong Chen, Bing Liang and Andrew W. Lo, 2013, Can hedge funds time market
liquidity?, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 493-516.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
57-82.
Cen, Ling, John Wei and Jie Zhang, 2006, Forecasted earnings per share and the cross section of
expected stock returns, Working Paper, Hong Kong University of Science & Technology.
Chan, K. C., Nai-fu Chen and David A. Hsieh, 1985, An exploratory investigation of the ﬁrm size
eﬀect, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 451-471.
Chan, K.C., Silverio Foresi and Larry H.P. Lang, 1996, Does money explain returns? Theory and
empirical analysis, Journal of Finance 51, 345-361.
Chandrashekar, Satyajit and Ramesh K.S. Rao, 2009, The productivity of corporate cash holdings
and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Chang, Bo Young, Peter Christoﬀersen and Kris Jacobs, 2012, Market skewness risk and the cross
section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Chapman, David A., 1997, Approximating the asset pricing kernel, Journal of Finance 52, 1383-
1410.
Chemmanur, Thomas and An Yan, 2009, Advertising, attention, and stock returns, Working Paper,
Boston College.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, Breadth of ownership and stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 66, 171-205.
Chen, Huafeng, Marcin Kacperczyk and Hernan Ortiz-Molina, 2011, Labor unions, operating ﬂex-
ibility, and the cost of equity, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 25-58.



                                                     68
Chen, Long, Robert Novy-Marx and Lu Zhang, 2011, An alternative three-factor model, Working
Paper.
Chen, Nai-Fu, Richard Roll and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, Economic forces and stock market, Journal
of Business 59, 383-403.
Chen, Zhanhui and Ralitsa Petkova, 2012, Does idiosyncratic volatility proxy for risk exposure?,
Review of Financial Studies 25, 2745-2787.
Chen, Zhiyao and Ilya Strebulaev, 2012, Contingent-claim-based expected stock returns, Working
Paper, University of Reading.
Chopra, Navin, Josef Lakonishok and Jay R. Ritter, 1992, Measuring abnormal performance: do
stocks overreact?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 235-268.
Chordia, Tarun, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and V. Ravi Anshuman, 2001, Trading activity and
expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3-32.
Chordia, Tarun, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Qing Tong, 2013, Have capital market anoma-
lies attenuated in the recent era of high liquidity and trading activity? Working Paper,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacceco.2014.06.001.
Chordia, Tarun and Lakshmanan Shivakumar, 2006, Earnings and price momentum, Journal of
Financial Economics 80, 627-656.
Chordia, Taurn, Sahn-Wook Huh and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2009, Theory-based illiquidity
and asset pricing, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3629-3668.
Chung, Y. Peter, Herb Johnson and Michael J. Schill, 2006, Asset pricing when returns are non-
normal: Fama-French factors versus higher-order systematic comoments, Journal of Business 79,
923-940.
CMS Collaboration, 2012, Observation of a new boson at a mass of 125 GeV with the CMS
experiment at the LHC, Physics Letters B 716, 30-61.
Cochrane, John, 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
economic ﬂuctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209-237.
Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model, Journal
of Political Economy 104, 572-621.
Cochrane, John H., 2011, Presidential Address: Discount Rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047-1108.
Cohen, Lauren and Andrea Frazzini, 2008, Economic links and predictable returns, Journal of
Finance 63, 1977-2011.
Cohen, Lauren, Christopher Malloy and Lukasz Pomorski, 2012, Decoding inside information,
Journal of Finance 67, 1009-1043.
Cohen, Lauren and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated ﬁrms, Journal of Financial Economics 104,
383-400.
Cohen, Lauren, Karl Diether and Christopher Malloy, 2013, Misvaluing innovation, Review of
Financial Studies 26, 635-666.
Cohen, Randy, Christopher Polk and Bernhard Silli, 2009, Best ideas, Working Paper, Harvard
Business School.
Conrad, Jennifer, Michael Cooper and Gautam Kaul, 2003, Value versus glamour, Journal of
Finance 58, 1969-1996.
Conrad, Jennifer, Robert F. Dittmar and Eric Ghysels, 2013, Ex ante skewness and expected stock
returns, Journal of Finance 68, 85-124.



                                                     69
Constantinides, G., 1982, Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers and without
demand aggregation, Journal of Business 55, 253-267.
Constantinides, G., 1986, Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs, Journal of Political
Economy 94, 842-862.
Cooper, Michael J. and Huseyin Gulen, 2006, Is time-series-based predictability evident in real
time? Journal of Business 79, 1263-1292.
Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen and Alexei V. Ovtchinnikov, 2010, Corporate political contri-
butions and stock returns, Journal of Finance 65, 687-724.
Cooper, Michael J., Huseying Gulen and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-section
of stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609-1651.
Cox, D.R., 1982, Statistical signiﬁcance tests, British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 14, 325-
331.
Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr. and Stephen A. Ross, An intertemporal general equilibrium
model of asset pricing, Econometrica 53, 363-384.
Cremers, Martijn, Michael Halling and David Weinbaum, 2010, In search of aggregate jump and
volatility risk in the cross-section of stock returns, Working Paper, Yale University.
Cremers, K.J. Martijn and Vinay B. Nair, 2005, Governance Mechanisms and equity prices, Journal
of Finance 60, 2859-2894.
Cremers, K. J. Martijn, Vinay B. Nair and Kose John, 2009, Takeovers and the cross-section of
returns, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1409-1445.
Da, Zhi, 2009, Cash ﬂow, consumption risk, and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of
Finance 64, 923-956.
Da, Zhi and Ernst Schaumburg, 2011, Relative valuation and analyst target price forecasts, Journal
of Financial Markets 14, 161-192.
Da, Zhi and Mitchell Craig Warachka, 2009, Cash ﬂow risk, systematic earnings revisions, and the
cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 94, 448-468.
Da, Zhi and Mitchell Craig Warachka, 2009, Long-term earnings growth forecasts, limited attention,
and return predictability, Working Paper, University of Notre Dame.
Da, Zhi, Qianqiu Liu and Ernst Schaumburg, 2011, Decomposing short-term return reversal, Work-
ing Paper, University of Notre Dame.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional variation
in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible information,
Journal of Finance 61, 1605-1643.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 2012, Testing factor-model explanations of market anomalies,
Critical Finance Review 1, 103-139.
Datar, Vinay, Narayan Y Naik and Robert Radcliﬀe, 1998, Liquidity and stock returns: An alter-
native test, Journal of Financial Markets 1, 203-219.
Dichev, Ilia, 1998, Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? Journal of Finance 53, 1131-1147.
Dichev, Ilia and Joseph Piotroski, 2001, The long-run stock returns following bond ratings changes,
Journal of Finance 56, 173-203.
Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Diﬀerences of opinion and the
cross section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.


                                                      70
Dittmar, Robert F., 2002, Nonlinear pricing kernels, kurtosis preference, and evidence from the
cross section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 57, 369-403.
Donangelo, Andres, 2012, Labor Mobility: Implications for Asset Pricing, Working Paper, Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin.
Doskov, Nikolay, Tapio Pekkala and Ruy M. Ribeiro, 2013, Tradable Macro Risk Factors and the
Cross-Section of Stock Returns, Working Paper, Norges Bank Investment Management.
Douglas, G.W., 1967, Risk in the equity markets: An empirical appraisal of market eﬃciency, Yale
Economic Essays 9, 3-48.
Doran, James, Andy Fodor and David Peterson, 2007, Insiders versus outsiders with employee
stock options: Who knows best about future ﬁrm risk and implications for stock returns, Working
Paper, Florida State University.
Doyle, Jeﬀrey, Russell Lundholm and Mark Soliman, 2003, The predictive value of expenses ex-
cluded from pro forma earnings, Review of Accounting Studies 8, 145-174.
Drake, Michael and Lynn Rees, 2011, Should investors follow the prophets or the bears? Evidence
on the use of public information by analysts and short sellers, Accounting Review 86, 101-130.
Dudoit, S. and Van der Laan, M., 2008, Multiple testing procedures with applications to Genomics,
Springer Series in Statistics, New York, USA.
Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer and Maureen O’Hara, 2002, Is information risk a determinant of
asset returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2185-2221.
Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer and Maureen O’Hara, 2010, Factoring information into returns,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 293-309.
Eberhart, Allan, William Maxwell and Akhtar Siddique, 2004, An examination of long-term ab-
normal stock returns and operating performance following R&D increases, Journal of Finance 59,
623-650.
Edmans, Alex, 2011, Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction and
equity prices, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 621-640.
Efron, Bradley, 1979, Bootstrap methods: another look at the jackknife, Annuals of Statistics 7,
1-26.
Efron, Bradley and Robert Tibshirani, 2002, Empirical Bayes methods and false discovery rates
for microarrays, Genetic Epidemiology 23, 70-86.
Efron, Bradley, Robert Tibshirani, John Storey and Virginia Tusher, 2001, Empirical Bayes analysis
of a microarray experiment, Journal of the American Statistical Association 96, 1151-1160.
Efron, Bradley, 2004, Large-scale simultaneous hypothesis testing: the choice of a null hypothesis,
Journal of the American Statistical Association 99, 96-104.
Efron, Bradley, 2006, Microarrays, empirical Bayes, and the two-groups model, Statistical Science
23, 2008.
Eiling, Esther, 2012, Industry-speciﬁc human capital, idiosyncratic risk, and the cross-section of
expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 68, 43-84.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L. and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2011, Organization capital and the cross-section
of expected returns, Working Paper, UCLA.
Elgers, Pieter T., May H. Lo and Ray J. Pfeiﬀer Jr., 2001, Delayed security price adjustments to
ﬁnancial analysts’ forecasts of annual earnings, Accounting Review 76, 613-632.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber and Christopher R. Blake, 1995, Fundamental economic vari-
ables, expected returns, and bond fund performance, Journal of Finance 50, 1229-1256.


                                                     71
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Sanjiv Das and Matthew Hlavka, 1993, Eﬃciency with costly
information: A reinterpretation of evidence from managed portfolios, Review of Financial Studies
6:1, 1-22.
Erb, Claude, Campbell Harvey and Tadas Viskanta, 1996, Expected returns and volatility in 135
countries, Journal of Portfolio Management 22, 46-58.
Fabozzi, Frank J., K.C. Ma and Becky J. Oliphant, 2008, Sin stock returns, Financial Analysts
Journal Fall, 82-94.
Fairﬁeld, Patricia M., J. Scott Whisenant and Teri Lombardi Yohn, 2003, Accrued earnings and
growth: implications for future proﬁtability and market mispricing, Accounting Review 78, 353-371.
Fama, Eugene F., 1991, Eﬃcient capital markets: II, Journal of Finance 46, 1575-1617.
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal
of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2006, Proﬁtability, investment and average returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491-518.
Fama, E., K. French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross section of mutual fund returns, Journal
of Finance 65, 1915-1947.
Fang, Lily and Joel Peress, 2009, Media coverage and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal
of Finance 64, 2023-2052.
Farcomeni, Alessio, 2007, A review of modern multiple hypothesis testing, with particular attention
to the false discovery proportion, Statistical Methods in Medical Research 17, 347-388.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums, Journal
of Political Economy 99, 385-415.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international equity
returns, Review of Financial Studies 6, 527-566.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994, Sources of risk and expected returns in global
equity markets, Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 775-803.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1999, Conditioning variables and the cross section of
stock returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1325-1360.
Ferson, Wayne and Yong Chen, 2013, How many good and bad fund managers are there, really?
Working Paper, University of Southern California.
Ferson, Wayne E., Suresh Nallareddy and Biqin Xie, 2012, The “out-of-sample” performance of
long run risk models, Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Figlewski, Stephen, 1981, The informational eﬀects of restrictions on short sales: some empirical
evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 16, 463-476.
Fogler, H. Russell, Rose John and James Tipton, 1981, Three factors, interest rate diﬀerentials and
stock groups, Journal of Finance 36, 323-335.
Frank, Murray Z. and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2009, Capital structure decisions: Which factors are
reliably important? Financial Management 38, 1-37.
Frankel, Richard and Charles Lee, 1998, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and cross-
sectional stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283-319.


                                                     72
Franzoni, Francesco and Jose M. Marin, 2006, Pension plan funding and stock market eﬃciency,
Journal of Finance 61, 921-956.
Frazzini, Andrea and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2013, Betting against beta, Working Paper, AQR
Capital Management.
Friewald, Nils, Christian Wagner and Josef Zechner, 2012, The cross-section of credit risk premia
and equity returns, Working Paper, Vienna University.
Foster, F. Douglas, Tom Smith and Robert E. Whaley, 1997, Assessing goodness-of-ﬁt of asset
pricing models: the distribution of the maximal R2 , Journal of Finance 52, 591-607.
Fu, Fangjian, 2009, Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of
Financial Economics 91, 24-37.
Fung, William and David A. Hsieh, 1997, Empirical characteristics of dynamic trading strategies:
The case of hedge funds, Review of Financial Studies 10, 275-302.
Fung, William and David A. Hsieh, 2001, The risk in hedge fund strategies: theory and evidence
from trend followers, Review of Financial Studies 14, 313-341.
Garcia, Diego and Oyvind Norli, 2012, Geographic dispersion and stock returns, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics, Forthcoming.
Garlappi, Lorenzo and Hong Yan, 2011, Financial distress and the cross-section of equity returns,
Journal of Finance 66, 789-822.
Garlappi, Lorenzo, Tao Shu and Hong Yan, 2008, Default risk, shareholder advantage, and stock
returns, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2743-2778.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, Leonid Kogan and Stavros Panageas, 2012, Displacement risk and asset returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 105, 491-510.
George, Thomas J. and Chuan-yang Hwang, 2004, The 52-week high and momentum investing,
Journal of Finance 59, 2145-2176.
George, Thomas J. and Chuan-yang Hwang, 2010, A resolution of the distress risk and leverage
puzzles in the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 56-79.
Gettleman, Eric and Joseph M. Marks, 2006, Acceleration strategies, Working Paper, Seton Hall
Univeristy.
Glaeser, Edward, 2008, Research incentives and empirical methods, Chapter 13, The Foundations
of Positive and Normative Economics: A Handbook, Oxford University Press.
Gokcen, Umut, 2009, Information revelation and expected stock returns, Working Paper, Boston
College.
Gomes, Joao F., Amir Yaron and Lu Zhang, 2006, Asset pricing implications of ﬁrms’ ﬁnancing
constraints, Review of Financial Studies 19, 1321-1356.
Gómez, Juan-Pedro, Richard Priestley and Fernando Zapatero, 2012, Labor income, relative wealth
concerns, and the cross-section of stock returns, Working Paper, Instituto de Empresa Business
School.
Gompers, Paul A. and Andrew Metrick, 2001, Institutional investors and equity prices, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116, 229-259.
Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.
Gourio, Francois, 2007, Labor leverage, ﬁrms’ heterogeneous sensitivities to the business cycle, and
the cross-section of expected returns, Working Paper, Boston University.



                                                      73
Gow, Ian and Daniel Taylor, 2009, Earnings volatility and the cross-section of returns, Working
Paper, Northwestern University.
Green, Jeremiah, John RM Hand and X. Frank Zhang, 2012, The supraview of return predictive
signals, Review of Accounting Studies, Forthcoming.
Green, Jeremiah, John RM Hand and X. Frank Zhang, 2013, The remarkable multidimensionality
in the cross section of expected US stock returns, Working Paper, Pennsylvania State University.
Greene, William H., 2008, Econometric analysis, Prentice Hall.
Griﬃn, John M. and Michael L. Lemmon, 2002, Book-to-market equity, distress risk, and stock
returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2317-2336.
Gu, Feng, 2005, Innovation, future earnings, and market eﬃciency, Journal of Accounting, Auditing
and Finance 20, 385-418.
Gu, Feng and Baruch Lev, 2008, Overpriced shares, ill-advised acquisitions, and goodwill impair-
ment, Accounting Review 86, 1995-2022.
Gu, Li, Zhiqiang Wang and Jianming Ye, 2008, Information in order backlog: change versus level,
Working Paper, Fordham University.
Guo, Hui and Robert Savickas, 2008, Average idiosyncratic volatility in G7 countries, Review of
Financial Studies 21, 1259-1296.
Hafzalla, Nader, Russell Lundholm and E. Matthew Van Winkle, 2011, Percent Accruals, Account-
ing Review 86, 209-236.
Hahn, Jaehoon and Hangyong Lee, 2009, Financial constraints, debt capacity, and the cross-section
of stock returns, Journal of Finance 64, 891-921.
Hameed, Allaudeen, Joshua Huang and Mujtaba Mian, 2010, Industries and stock return reversals,
Working Paper, National University of Singapore.
Han, Bing and Yi Zhou, 2011, Term structure of credit default swap spreads and cross-section of
stock returns, Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Han, Yufeng and Guofu Zhou, 2013, Trend factor: A new determinant of cross-section stock returns,
Working Paper, University of Colorado Denver.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests,
Journal of Finance 55, 1263-1295.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Yan Liu, 2014a, Backtesting, Working Paper, Duke University.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Yan Liu, 2014b, Multiple testing in economics, Working Paper, Duke
University.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Yan Liu, 2014c, Evaluating trading strategies, Working Paper, Duke
University.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Yan Liu, 2014d, Incremental factors, Working Paper, Duke University.
Hawkins, Eugene H., Stanley C. Chamberlin and Wayne E. Daniel, 1984, Earnings expectations
and security prices, Financial Analysts Journal, 24-74.
Head, Alex, Gary Smith and Julia Wilson, 2007, Would a stock by any other ticker smell as sweet?
Quarterly Review of Economics & Finance 49, 551-561.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: The importance of
entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163-1198.
Heckerman, Donald G., 1972, Portfolio selection and the structure of capital asset prices when
relative prices of consumption goods may change, Journal of Finance 27, 47-60.


                                                    74
Heckman, James J., 1979, Sample selection bias as a speciﬁcation error, Econometrica 47, 153-161.
Hess, Dieter, Daniel Kreutzmann and Oliver Pucker, Projected earnings accuracy and proﬁtability
of stock recommendations, Working Paper, University of Cologne.
Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Kou, Siew Hong Teoh and Yinglei Zhang, 2004, Do investors overvalue
ﬁrms with bloated balance sheets?, Journal of Accounting and Economics 38, 297-331.
Hirshleifer, David and Danling Jiang, 2010, A ﬁnancing-based misvaluation factor and the cross-
section of expected returns, Review of Financial Studies 23, 3401-3436.
Hirshleifer, David, Po-Hsuan Hsu and Dongmei Li, 2012, Innovative eﬃciency and stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 107, 632-654.
Hochberg, Yosef, 1988, A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of signiﬁcance, Biometrika
75, 800-802.
Hochberg, Yosef and Benjamini Y., 1990, More powerful procedures for multiple signiﬁcance testing,
Statistics in Medicine 9, 811-818.
Hochberg, Yosef and Tamhane, Ajit, 1987, Multiple comparison procedures, John Wiley & Sons.
Holland, Burt, Sudipta Basu and Fang Sun, 2010, Neglect of multiplicity when testing families of
related hypotheses, Working Paper, Temple University.
Holm, Sture, 1979, A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure, Scandinavian Journal
of Statistics 6, 65-70.
Holthausen, Robert W. and David F. Larcker, 1992, The prediction of stock returns using ﬁnancial
statement information, Journal of Accounting & Economics 15, 373-411.
Hommel, G., 1988, A stagewise rejective multiple test procedure based on a modiﬁed Bonferroni
test, Biometrika 75, 383-386.
Hou, Kewei and David T. Robinson, 2006, Industry concentration and average stock returns,
Journal of Finance 61, 1927-1956.
Hou, Kewei, G. Andrew Karolyi and Bong-Chan Kho, 2011, What factors drive global stock re-
turns?, Review of Financial Studies 24, 2527-2574.
Hou, Kewei and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2005, Market frictions, price delay, and the cross-section of
expected returns, Review of Financial Studies 18, 981-1020.
Hu, Grace Xing, Jun Pan and Jiang Wang, 2012, Noise as information for illiquidity, Working
Paper, University of Hong Kong.
Huang, Alan Guoming, 2009, The cross section of cashﬂow volatility and expected stock returns,
Journal of Empirical Finance 16, 409-429.
Huang, Wei, Qianqiu Liu, Ghon Rhee and Feng Wu, 2010, Extreme downside risk and expected
stock returns, Journal of Banking & Finance 36, 1492-1502.
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 2008, Small trades and the cross-section of stock returns, Review of Financial
Studies 31, 1123-1151.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse and Selale Tuzel, 2011, Firm level productivity, risk, and return, Working Paper,
University of Southern California.
Ioannidis, J.P., 2005, Why most published research ﬁndings are false, PLoS medicine 2, e124,
694-701
Jacobs, Kris and Kevin Q. Wang, 2004, Idiosyncratic consumption risk and the cross section of
asset returns, Journal of Finance 59, 2211-2252.



                                                     75
Jagannathan, Ravi and Yong Wang, 2007, Lazy investors, discretionary consumption, and the
cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 62, 1623-1661.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of
expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.
Jarrow, Robert, 1980, Heterogeneous expectations, restrictions on short sales, and equilibrium
asset prices, Journal of Finance 35, 1105-1113.
Jeﬀerys, William H. and James O. Berger, 1992, Ockham’s razor and Bayesian analysis, American
Scientist 80, 64-72.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns, Journal of
Finance 45, 881-898.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Joonghyuk Kim, Suan D. Krische and Charles Lee, 2004, Analyzing the
analysts: When do recommendations add value? Journal of Finance 59, 1083-1124.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
implications for stock market eﬃciency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Jiang, Guohua, Charles MC Lee and Yi Zhang, 2005, Information uncertainty and expected returns,
Review of Accounting Studies 10, 185-221.
Jiang, Hao and Zheng Sun, 2011, Dispersion in beliefs among active mutual funds and the cross-
section of stock returns, Working Paper, Erasmus University.
Johnson, Travis L. and Eric C. So, 2012, The option to stock volume ratio and future returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 106, 262-286.
Jones, Charles M. and Owen A. Lamont, 2002, Short-sale constraints and stock returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 66, 207-239.
Kapadia, Nishad, 2011, Tracking down distress risk, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 167-182.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash ﬂow sensitivities provide useful
measures of ﬁnancing constraints?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.
Kelly, Bryan and Seth Pruitt, 2011, The three-pass regression ﬁlter: A new approach to forecasting
using many predictors, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Kim, Chansog Francis, Christos Pantzalis and Jung Chul Park, 2012, Political geography and stock
returns: The value and risk implications of proximity to political power, Journal of Financial
Economics 106, 196-228.
Kraus, Alan and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1976, Skewness preference and the valuation of risk assets,
Journal of Finance 31, 1085-1100.
Koijen, Ralph SJ, Tobias J. Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen and Evert B. Vrugt, 2012, Carry,
Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Korajczyk, Robert A. and Ronnie Sadka, 2008, Pricing the commonality across alternative measures
of liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 45-72.
Korniotis, George M., 2008, Habit formation, incomplete markets, and the signiﬁcance of regional
risk for expected returns, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2139-2172.
Korniotis, George M. and Alok Kumar, 2009, Long Georgia, short Colorado? The geography of
return predictability, Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmermann, Russ Wermers and Hal White, 2006, Can mutual fund
“stars” really pick stocks? New evidence from a Bootstrap analysis, Journal of Finance 61, 2551-
2595.



                                                     76
Kosowski, Robert, Narayan Y. Naik and Melvyn Teo, 2007, Do hedge funds deliver alpha? A
Bayesian and bootstrap analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 229-264.
Kumar, Alok and Charles MC Lee, 2006, Retail investor sentiment and return comovement, Journal
of Finance 61, 2451-2486.
Kumar, Praveen, Sorin M. Sorescu, Rodney D. Boehme and Bartley R. Danielsen, 2008, Estimation
risk, information, and the conditional CAPM: Theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies
21, 1037-1075.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk and Jesus Saa-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and stock
returns, Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.
Landsman, Wayne R., Bruce L. Miller, Ken Peasnell and Shu Yeh, 2011, Do investors understand
really dirty surplus? Accounting Review 86, 237-258.
Larcker, David F., Eric C. So and Charles CY Wang, 2013, Boardroom centrality and ﬁrm perfor-
mance, Journal of Accounting and Economics 55, 225-250.
Leamer, Edward E., 1978, Speciﬁcation searches: Ad hoc inference with nonexperimental data,
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Lee, Charles and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2000, Price momentum and trading volume, Journal of
Finance 55, 2017-2069.
Lehavy, Reuven and Richard G. Sloan, 2008, Investor recognition and stock returns, Review of
Accounting Studies 13, 327-361.
Lehmann, Erich Leo and Joseph P. Romano, 2005, Generalizations of the familywise error rate,
Springer US, 2012.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A cross-sectional test
when risk premia are time-varying, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238-1287.
Lev, Baruch, Bharat Sarath and Theodore Sougiannis, 2005, R&D reporting biases and their
consequences, Contemporary Accounting Research 22, 977-1026.
Lev, Baruch, Doron Nissim and Jacob Thomas, 2005, On the informational usefulness of R&D
capitalization and amortization, Working Paper, Columbia University.
Lev, Baruch and Theodore Sougiannis, 1996, The capitalization, amortization, and value-relevance
of R&D, Journal of Accounting and Economics 21, 107-138.
Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel and Jay Shanken, 2010, A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing
tests, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 175-194.
Liang, Yulan and Arpad Kelemen, 2008, Statistical advances and challenges for analyzing correlated
high dimensional SNP data in genomic study for complex diseases, Statist. Surv. 2, 43-60.
Li, Dongmei, 2011, Financial constraints, R&D investment, and stock returns, Review of Financial
Studies 24, 2975-3007.
Li, Kevin Ke, 2011, How well do investors understand loss persistence? Review of Accounting
Studies 16, 630-667.
Li, Qing, Maria Vassalou and Yuhang Xing, 2006, Sector investment growth rates and the cross
section of equity returns, Journal of Business 79, 1637-1665.
Li, Sophia Zhengzi, 2012, Continuous beta, discontinuous beta, and the cross-section of expected
stock returns, Working Paper, Duke University.
Li, Xi, 2012, Real earnings management and subsequent stock returns, Working Paper, Boston
College.


                                                     77
Lintner, John, 1965, Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversiﬁcation, Journal of Fi-
nance 20, 587-615.
Lioui, Abraham and Paulo Maio, 2012, Interest rate risk and the cross-section of stock returns,
Working Paper, EDHEC Business School.
Litzenberger, Robert H. and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1979, The eﬀect of personal taxes and dividends
on capital asset prices, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 163-195.
Liu, Weimin, 2006, A liquidity-augmented capital asset pricing model, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 82, 631-671.
Livdan, Dmitry, Horacio Sapriza and Lu Zhang, 2009, Financially constrained stock returns, Jour-
nal of Finance 64, 1827-1862.
Lo, Andrew and Craig Mackinlay, 1990, Data-snooping biases in tests of ﬁnancial asset pricing
models, Review of financial studies 3, 431-467.
Lo, Andrew W. and Jiang Wang, 2006, Trading volume: Implications of an intertemporal capital
asset pricing model, Journal of Finance 61, 2805-2840.
Loughran, Tim and Anand Vijh, 1997, Do long-term shareholders beneﬁt from corporate acquisi-
tions? Journal of Finance 52, 1765-1790.
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Lucas Jr, Robert E., 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.
Lustig, Hanno N. and Stijn G. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2005, Housing collateral, consumption insurance,
and risk premia: An empirical perspective, Journal of Finance 60, 1167-1219.
Lynch, Anthony and Tania Vital-Ahuja, 2012, Can subsample evidence alleviate the data-snooping
problem?: A comparison to the maximal R2 cutoﬀ test, Working Paper, New York University.
Malloy, Christopher J., Tobias J. Moskowitz and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, Long-run stock-
holder consumption risk and asset returns, Journal of Finance 64, 2427-2479.
Markowitz, Harry H. and Gan Lin Xu, 1994, Data mining corrections, Working Paper, Daiwa
Securities Trust Company.
Mayshar, Joram, 1981, Transaction costs and the pricing of assets, Journal of Finance 36, 583-597.
McConnell, John J. and Gary C. Sanger, 1984, A trading strategy for new listings on the NYSE,
Financial Analysts Journal, 34-38.
McLean, R. David and Jeﬀrey Pontiﬀ, 2014, Does academic research destroy stock return pre-
dictability? Working Paper, University of Alberta.
Meinshausen, Nicolai, 2008, Hierarchical testing of variable importance, Biometrika 95, 265-278.
Meng, Cliﬀ YK and Arthur P. Dempster, 1987, A Bayesian approach to the multiplicity problem
for signiﬁcance testing with binomial data, Biometrics 43, 301-311.
Menzly, Lior and Oguzhan Ozbas, 2010, Market segmentation and cross-predictability of returns,
Journal of Finance 65, 1555-1580.
Merton, Robert C., An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867-887.
Michaely, Roni, Richard H. Thaler and Kent L. Womack, 1995, Price reactions to dividend initia-
tions and omissions: overreaction or drift? Journal of Finance 50, 573-608.
Mohanram, Partha S., 2005, Separating winners from losers among low book-to-market stocks
using ﬁnancial statement analysis, Review of Accounting Studies 10, 133-170.
Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum?, Journal of
Finance 54, 1249-1290.


                                                     78
Moskowitz, Tobias J., Yao Hua Ooi and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2012, Time series momentum, Journal
of Financial Economics 104, 228-250.
Mossin, Jan, Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market, Econometrica 34, 768-783.
Nagel, Stefan, 2005, Short sales, institutional investors and the cross-section of stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 78, 277-309.
Narayanamoorthy, Ganapathi, 2006, Conservatism and cross-sectional variation in the post-
earnings announcement drift, Journal of Accounting Research 44, 763-789.
Nguyen, Giao X. and Peggy E. Swanson, 2009, Firm characteristics, relative eﬃciency and equity
returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 213-236.
Novy-Marx, Robert, 2013, The other side of value: The gross proﬁtability premium, Journal of
Financial Economics 108, 1-28.
Nyberg, Peter and Salla Pöyry, 2011, Firm expansion and stock price momentum, Working Paper,
Aalto University.
Ofek, Eli, Matthew Richardson and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2004, Limited arbitrage and short sales
restrictions: evidence from the options markets, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 305-342.
Gupta, Manak C. and Aharon R. Ofer, Investor’s expectations of earnings growth, their accuracy
and eﬀects on the structure of realized rates of return, Journal of Finance 30, 509-523.
Oldﬁeld, George S. and Richard J. Rogalski, 1981, Treasury bill factors and common stock returns,
Journal of Finance 36, 337-350.
Ortiz-Molina, Hernán and Gordon M. Phillips, 2011, Real asset liquidity and the cost of capital,
Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
Ou, Jane A. and Stephen H. Penman, 1989, Financial statement analysis and the prediction of
stock returns, Journal of Accounting & Economics 11, 295-329.
Ozoguz, Arzu, 2009, Good times or bad times? Investor’s uncertainty and stock returns, Review
of Financial Studies 22, 4377-4422.
Papanastasopoulos, Georgios, Dimitrios Thomakos and Tao Wang, 2010, The implications of re-
tained and distributed earnings for future proﬁtability and stock returns, Review of Accounting &
Finance 9, 395-423.
Parker, Jonathan A. and Christian Julliard, 2005, Consumption risk and the cross section of
expected returns, Journal of Political Economy 113, 185-222.
Pastor, Lubos and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal
of Political Economy 111, 643-685.
Patatoukas, Panos N., 2011, Customer-base concentration: implications for ﬁrm performance and
capital markets, Working Paper, University of California Berkeley.
Patton, Andrew J. and Allan Timmermann, 2010, Monotonicity in asset returns: New tests with
applications to the term structure, the CAPM, and portfolio sorts, Journal of Financial Economics
98, 605-625.
Penman, Stephen and Xiao-jun Zhang, 2002, Modeling sustainable earnings and P/E ratios with
ﬁnancial statement analysis, Working Paper, Columbia University.
Pesaran, M. Hashem and Allan Timmermann, 2007, Selection of estimation window in the presence
of breaks, Journal of Econometrics 137, 134-161.
Piotroski, Joseph D., 2000, Value investing: The use of historical ﬁnancial statement information
to separate winners from losers, Journal of Accounting Research 38, 1-41.



                                                    79
Pontiﬀ, Jeﬀrey and Artemiza Woodgate, 2008, Share issuance and cross-sectional returns, Journal
of Finance 63, 921-945.
Porta, Rafael, 1996, Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 51,
1715-1742.
Prakash, Rachna and Nishi Sinha, 2012, Deferred revenues and the matching of revenues and
expenses, Contemporary Accounting Research, Forthcoming.
Price, S. Mckay, James S. Doran, David R. Peterson and Barbara A. Bliss, Earnings conference
calls and stock returns: The incremental informativeness of textual tone, Journal of Banking and
Finance 36, 992-1011.
Pukthuanthong, Kuntara and Richard Roll, 2014, Working Paper, University of Missouri,
Columbia.
Rajgopal, Shivaram, Terry Shevlin and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2012, Does the stock market fully
appreciate the implications of leading indicators for future earnings? Evidence from order backlog,
Review of Accounting Studies 8, 461-492.
Roll, Richard, 1988, R2 , Journal of Finance 43, 541-566.
Romano, Joseph P., Azeem M. Shaikh and Michael Wolf, 2008, Formalized data snooping based
on generalized error rates, Econometric Theory 24, 404-447.
Rosenthal, Robert, 1979, The “ﬁle drawer problem” and tolerance for null results, Psychological
Bulletin 86, 638-641.
Ross, Stephen A., 1989, Regression to the max, Working Paper, Yale University.
Romano, Joseph P., Azeem M. Shaikh and Michael Wolf, 2008, Control of the false discovery rate
under dependence using the bootstrap and subsampling, Test 17, 417-442.
Rubinstein, Mark E., 1973, The fundamental theorem of parameter-preference security valuation,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 8, 61-69.
Rubinstein, Mark E., 1974, An aggregation theorem for securities markets, Journal of Financial
Economics 1, 225-244.
Sarkar, Sanat K., 2002, Some results on false discovery rate in stepwise multiple testing procedure,
Annals of Statistics 30, 239-257.
Sarkar, Sanat K. and Wenge Guo, 2009, On a generalized false discovery rate, The Annals of
Statistics 37, 1545-1565.
Sadka, Ronnie, 2006, Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of
liquidity risk, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 309-349.
Saville, Dave J., 1990, Multiple comparison procedures: The practical solution, The American
Statistician 44, 174-180.
Savov, Alexi, 2011, Asset pricing with garbage, Journal of Finance 66, 177-201.
Scheﬀe, H., 1959, The Analysis of Variance, Wiley, New York.
Schweder, T. and Eil Spjøtvoll, 1982, Plots of p-values to evaluate many tests simultaneously,
Biometrika 69, 493-502.
Schwert, G. William, 2003, Anomalies and market eﬃciency, Handbook of the Economics of Fi-
nance, edited by G.M. Constantinides, M. Haris and R. Stulz, Elsevier Science B.V.
Scott, James G., 2009, Bayesian adjustment for multiplicity, Dissertation, Duke University.
Scott, James G. and James O. Berger, 2006, An exploration of aspects of Bayesian multiple testing,
Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 136, 2144-2162.


                                                      80
Scott, James G. and James O. Berger, 2010, Bayes and empirical-Bayes multiplicity adjustment in
the variable-selection problem, Annuals of Statistics 38, 2587-2619.
Shaﬀer, Juliet Popper, 1995, Multiple hypothesis testing, Annual Review of Psychology 46, 561-584.
Shanken, Jay, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation, Journal of Economet-
rics 45, 99-120.
Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.
Shu, Tao, 2007, Trader composition, price eﬃciency, and the cross-section of stock returns, Working
Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Simes, R. John, 1986, An improved Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of signiﬁcance,
Biometrika 73, 751-754.
Simutin, Mikhail, 2010, Excess cash and stock returns, Financial Management 39, 1197-1222.
Sloan, Richard G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reﬂect information in accruals and cash ﬂows about
future earnings? Accounting Review 71, 289-315.
So, Eric C., 2012, A new approach to predicting analyst forecast errors: Do investors overweight
analyst forecasts? Working Paper, Stanford University.
Soliman, Mark T., 2008, The use of DuPont analysis by market participants, Accounting Review
83, 823-853.
Solnik, Bruno H., 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal of
Economic Theory 8, 500-524
Spiess, D. Katherine and John Aﬄeck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock returns
following seasoned equity oﬀerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243-267.
Spiess, Katherine and John Aﬄeck-Graves, 1995, The long-run performance of stock returns fol-
lowing debt oﬀerings, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 45-73.
Storey, John D., 2003, The positive false discovery ratee: A Bayesian interpretation and the q-value,
The Annals of Statistics 31, 2013-2035.
Stulz, René M., 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,
383-406.
Stulz, René M., 1986, Asset Pricing and Expected Inﬂation, Journal of Finance 41, 209-223.
Sullivan, Ryan, Allan Timmermann and Halbert White, 1999, Data-snooping, technical trading
rule performance, and the Bootstrap, Journal of Finance 54, 1647-1691.
Sullivan, Ryan, Allan Timmermann and Halbert White, 2001, Dangers of data mining: The case
of calendar eﬀects in stock returns, Journal of Econometrics 105, 249-286.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, 2010, The cross-section of expected stock returns: What have we
learnt from the past twenty-ﬁve years of research? Working Paper, UCLA.
Sweeney, Richard J. and Arthur D. Warga, 1986, The pricing of interest-rate risk: evidence from
the stock market, Journal of Finance 41, 393-410.
Vanden, Joel M., 2004, Options trading and the CAPM, Review of Financial Studies 17, 207-238.
Teo, Melvyn and Sung-Jun Woo, 2004, Style eﬀects in the cross-section of stock returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 74, 367-398.
Thomas, Jacob and Frank X. Zhang, 2011, Tax expense momentum, Journal of Accounting Re-
search 49, 791-821.



                                                      81
Thornton, Alison and Peter Lee, 2000, Publication bias in meta-analysis: its causes and conse-
quences, Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 53, 207-216.
Titman, Sheridan, Kuo-Chiang Wei and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677-700.
Troendle, James F., 2000, Stepwise normal theory multiple test procedures controlling the false
discovery rate, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 84, 139-158.
Todorov, Viktor and Tim Bollerslev, 2010, Jumps and betas: A new framework for disentangling
and estimating systematic risks, Journal of Econometrics 157, 220-235.
Tukey, John W., 1977, Exploratory data analysis, Addison-Wesley.
Tuzel, Selale, 2010, Corporate real estate holdings and the cross-section of stock returns, Review
of Financial Studies 23, 2268-2302.
Valta, Philip, 2013, Strategic default, debt structure, and stock returns, Working Paper, University
of Lausanne.
Van Binsbergen, Jules H., 2009, Good-speciﬁc habit formation and the cross-section of expected
returns, Working Paper, Stanford University.
Vanden, Joel M., 2006, Option coskewness and capital asset pricing, Review of Financial Studies
19, 1279-1320.
Vassalou, Maria, 2003, News related to future GDP growth as a risk factor in equity returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 68, 47-73.
Vassalou, Maria and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Default risk in equity returns, Journal of Finance 2004,
831-868.
Viale, Ariel M., Luis Garcia-Feijoo and Antoine Giannetti, 2012, Safety ﬁrst, robust dynamic
asset pricing, and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Working Paper, Florida Atlantic
University.
Wagenmakers, Eric-Jan and Peter Grünwald, 2005, A Bayesian perspective on hypothesis testing:
A comment on Killeen (2005), Psychological Science 17, 641-642.
Wahlen, James M. and Matthew M. Wieland, 2011, Can ﬁnancial statement analysis beat consensus
analysts’ recommendations? Review of Accounting Studies 16, 89-115.
Wang, Yuan, 2012, Debt covenants and cross-sectional equity returns,Working Paper, Concordia
University.
Watkins, Boyce, 2003, Riding the wave of sentiment: An analysis of return consistency as a pre-
dictor of future returns, Journal of Behavioral Finance 4, 191-200.
Westfall, Peter H., 1993, Resampling-based multiple testing, John Wiley & Sons.
Welch, Ivo and Amit Goyal, 2008, A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity
premium prediction, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455-1508.
White, Halbert, 2000, A reality check for data snooping, Econometrica 68, 1097-1126.
Whited, Toni M. and Guojun Wu, 2006, Financial constraints risk, Review of Financial Studies
19, 531-559.
Whittemore, Alice S., 2007, A Bayesian false discovery rate for multiple testing, Journal of Applied
Statistics 34, 1-9.
Womack, Kent L., 1996, Do brokerage analysts’ recommendations have investment value? Journal
of Finance 51, 137-167.



                                                      82
Xing, Yuhang, 2008, Interpreting the value eﬀect through the Q-Theory: An empirical investiga-
tion, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1767-1795.
Xing, Yuhang, Xiaoyan Zhang and Rui Zhao, 2010, What does the individual option volatility smirk
tell us about future equity returns? Journal of Financial & Quantitative Analysis 45, 641-662.
Yan, Shu, 2011, Jump risk, stock returns, and slope of implied volatility smile, Journal of Financial
Economics 99, 216-233.
Yekutieli, Daniel and Yoav Benjamini, 1999, Resampling-based false discovery rate controlling
multiple test procedures for correlated test statistics, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference
82, 171-196.
Yogo, Motohiro, 2006, A consumption-based explanation of expected stock returns, Journal of
Finance 61, 539-580.
Zehetmayer, Sonja and Martin Posch, 2010, Post hoc power estimation in large-scale multiple
testing problems, Bioinformatics 26, 1050-1056.
Zhao, Xiaofei, 2012, Information intensity and the cross-section of stock returns, Working Paper,
University of Toronto.




                                                       83
A      Multiple Testing When the Number of Tests
       (M ) is Unknown

The empirical diﬃculty in applying standard p-value adjustments is that we do not
observe factors that have been tried, found to be insigniﬁcant and then discarded.
We attempt to overcome this diﬃculty using a simulation framework. The idea is
ﬁrst simulate the empirical distribution of p-values for all experiments (published
and unpublished) and then adjust p-values based on these simulated samples.
    First, we assume the test statistic (t-statistic, for instance) for any experiment
follows a certain distribution D (e.g., exponential distribution) and the set of pub-
lished works is a truncated D distribution. Based on the estimation framework for
truncated distributions,57 we estimate parameters of distribution D and total number
of trials M . Next we simulate many sequences of p-values, each corresponding to a
plausible set of p-value realizations of all trials. To account for the uncertainty in
parameter estimates of D and M , we simulate p-value sequences based on the distri-
bution of estimated D and M . Finally, for each p-value, we calculate the adjusted
p-value based on a sequence of simulated p-values. The median is taken as the ﬁnal
adjusted p-value.



A.1     Using Truncated Exponential Distribution to Model the
        t-ratio Sample

Truncated distributions have been used to study hidden tests (i.e., publication bias)
in medical research.58 The idea is that studies reporting signiﬁcant results are more
likely to get published. Assuming a threshold signiﬁcance level or t-statistic, re-
searchers can to some extent infer the results of unpublished works and gain under-
standing of the overall eﬀect of a drug or treatment. However, in medical research,
insigniﬁcant results are still viewed as an indispensable part of the overall statisti-
cal evidence and are given much more prominence than in the ﬁnancial economics
research. As a result, medical publications tend to report more insigniﬁcant results.
This makes applying the truncated distribution framework to medical studies diﬃcult
as there is no clear-cut threshold value.59 In this sense, the truncated distributional
framework suits our study better — 1.96 is the obvious hurdle that research needs to
overcome to get published.
  57
     See Heckman (1979) and Greene (2008), Chapter 24.
  58
     See Begg and Berlin (1988) and Thornton and Lee (2000).
  59
     When the threshold value is unknown, it must be estimated from the likelihood function.
However, such estimation usually incurs large estimation errors.




                                                  84
    On the other hand, not all tried factors with p-value above 1.96 are reported.
In the quantitative asset management industry signiﬁcant results are not published
— they are considered “trade secrets”. For the academic literature, factors with
“borderline” t-ratios are diﬃcult to get published. Thus, our sample is likely missing
a number of factors that have t-ratios just over the bar of 1.96. To make our inference
robust, for our baseline result, we assume all tried factors with t-ratios above 2.57 are
observed and ignore those with t-ratios in the range of (1.96, 2.57). We experiment
with alternative ways to handle t-ratios in this range.
   Many distributions can be used to model the t-ratio sample. One restriction that
we think any of these distributions should satisfy is the monotonicity of the density
curve. Intuitively, it should be easier to ﬁnd factors with small t-ratios than large
ones.60 We choose to use the simplest distribution that incorporates this monotonicity
condition: the exponential distribution.
    Panel A of Figure A.1 presents the histogram of the baseline t-ratio sample and the
ﬁtted truncated exponential curve.61 The ﬁtted density closely tracks the histogram
and has a population mean of 2.07.62 Panel B is a histogram of the original t-ratio
sample which, as we discussed before, is likely to under-represent the sample with a
t-ratio in the range of (1.96, 2.57). Panel C is the augmented t-ratio sample with
the ad hoc assumption that our sample covers only half of all factors with t-ratios
between 1.96 and 2.57. The population mean estimate is 2.22 in Panel B and 1.93
in Panel C. As expected, the under-representation of relatively small t-ratios results
in a higher mean estimate for the t-ratio population. We think the baseline model is
the best among all three models as it not only overcomes the missing data problem
for the original sample, but also avoids guessing the fraction of missing observations
in the 1.96-2.57 range. We use this model estimates for the follow-up analysis.
    Using the baseline model, we calculate other interesting population characteristics
that are key to multiple hypothesis testing. Assuming independence, we model ob-
served t-ratios as draws from an exponential distribution with mean parameter λ̂ and
a known cutoﬀ point of 2.57. The proportion of unobserved factors is then estimated
as:
              P (unobserved) = Φ(2.57; λ̂) = 1 − exp(−2.57/λ̂) = 71.1%           (A.1)
   60
       This basic scarcity assumption is also the key ingredient in our model in Section 5.
   61
       There are a few very large t-ratios in our sample. We ﬁt the truncated exponential model
without dropping any large t-ratios. In contrast to the usual normal density, exponential distribution
is better at modeling extreme observations. In addition, extreme values are pivotal statistics for
heavy-tailed distributions and are key for model estimation. While extreme observations are included
for model estimation, we exclude them in Figure A.1 to better focus on the main part of the t-ratio
range.
    62
       Our truncated exponential distribution framework allows a simple analytical estimate for the
population mean of the exponential distribution. In particular, let c be the truncation∑point and
                                                                                              N
the t-ratio sample be {ti }Ni=1 . The mean estimate is given by λ̂ = 1/(t̄ − c), where t̄ = ( i=1 ti )/N
is the sample mean.




                                                         85
                                               Figure A.1: Density Plots for t-ratio

           Probability Density                        Panel A: Baseline t−ratio > 2.57 sample

                                 0.6                                                               Empirical density
                                                                                                   Fitted density, λ = 2.07
                                 0.4

                                 0.2

                                  0
                                       0   1      2    3         4        5         6       7             8        9          10
                                                                       t−ratio
                                                           Panel B: Original t−ratio sample
           Probability Density




                                 0.6                                                               Empirical density
                                                                                                   Fitted density, λ = 2.22
                                 0.4

                                 0.2

                                  0
                                       0   1      2    3         4     5      6       7                   8        9          10
                                                                    t−ratio
                                                       Panel C: Augmented t−ratio sample
           Probability Density




                                 0.6                                                  Empirical density: added sample
                                                                                      Empirical density: original sample
                                 0.4
                                                                                      Fitted density, λ = 1.93
                                 0.2

                                  0
                                       0   1      2    3         4        5           6        7          8        9          10
                                                                       t−ratio


Empirical density and ﬁtted exponential density curves based on three diﬀerent samples.
Panel A is based on the baseline sample that includes all t-ratios above 2.57. Panel B is
based on the original sample with all t-ratios above 1.96. Panel C is based on the augmented
sample that adds the sub-sample of observations that fall in between 1.96 and 2.57 to the
original t-ratio sample. It doubles the number of observations within the range of 1.96 and
2.57 in the original sample. λ is the single parameter for the exponential curve. It gives the
population mean for the unrestricted (i.e., non-truncated) distribution.



    where Φ(c; λ) is the cumulative distribution function evaluated at c for a exponen-
tial distribution with mean λ. Our estimates indicate that the mean absolute value of
the t-ratio for the underlying factor population is 2.07 and about 71.1% of tried factors
are discarded. Given that 238 out of the original 316 factors have a t-ratio exceeding
2.57, the total number of factor tests is estimated to be 824 (= 238/(1 − 71.1%)) and
the number of factors with a t-ratio between 1.96 and 2.57 is estimated to be 82.63
Since our t-ratio sample covers only 57 such factors, roughly 30% (=(82-57)/82) of
t-ratios between 1.96 and 2.57 are hidden.
  63
     Directly applying our estimate framework to the original sample that includes all t-ratios above
1.96, the estimated total number of factor tests would be 713. Alternatively, assuming our sample
only covers half of the factors with t-ratios between 1.96 and 2.57, the estimated number of factors
is 971.



                                                                                 86
A.2      Simulated Benchmark t-ratios Under Independence

The truncated exponential distribution framework helps us approximate the distri-
bution of t-ratios for all factors, published and unpublished. We can then apply the
aforementioned adjustment techniques to this distribution to generate new t-ratio
benchmarks. However, there are two sources of sampling and estimation uncertainty
that aﬀect our results. First, our t-ratio sample may under-represent all factors with
t-statistics exceeding 2.57.64 Hence, our estimates of total trials are biased (too low),
which aﬀects our calculation of the benchmarks. Second, estimation error for the
truncated exponential distribution can aﬀect our benchmark t-ratios. Although we
can approximate the estimation error through the usual asymptotic distribution the-
ory for MLE, it is unclear how this error aﬀects our benchmark t-ratios. This is
because t-ratio adjustment procedures usually depend on the entire t-ratio distribu-
tion and so standard transformational techniques (e.g., the delta method) do not
apply. Moreover, we are not sure whether our sample is large enough to trust the
accuracy of asymptotic approximations.
   Given these concerns, we propose a simulation framework that incorporates these
uncertainties. We divide it into four steps:

Step I Estimate λ and M based on a new t-ratio sample with size r × R.
       Suppose our current t-ratio sample size is R and it only covers a fraction of 1/r
       of all factors. We sample r × R t-ratios (with replacement) from the original
       t-ratio sample. Based on this new t-ratio sample, we apply the above truncated
       exponential distribution framework to the t-ratios and obtain the parameter
       estimates λ for the exponential distribution. The truncation probability is cal-
       culated as P̂ = Φ(2.57; λ̂). We can then estimate the total number of trials
       by
                                                 rR
                                        M̂ =
                                               1 − P̂

Step II Calculate the benchmark t-ratio based on a random sample gen-
     erated from λ̂ and M̂ .
       Based on the previous step estimate of λ̂ and M̂ , we generate a random sample
       of t-ratios for all tried factors. We then calculate the appropriate benchmark
       t-ratio based on this generated sample.

Step III Repeat Step II 10,000 times to get the median benchmark t-ratio.
       Repeat Step II (based on the same λ̂ and M̂ ) 10,000 times to generate a collec-
       tion of benchmark t-ratios. We take the median as the ﬁnal benchmark t-ratio
       corresponding to the parameter estimate (λ̂, M̂ ).
  64
     This will happen if we miss factors published by the academic literature or we do not have
access to the “trade secrets” by industry practitioners.


                                                    87
Step IV Repeat Step I-III 10,000 times to generate a distribution of bench-
     mark t-ratios.
       Repeat Step I-III 10,000 times, each time with a newly generated t-ratio sample
       as in Step I. For each repetition, we obtain a benchmark t-ratio ti correspond-
       ing to the parameter estimates (λ̂i , M̂i ). In the end, we have a collection of
       benchmark t-ratios {ti }10000
                               i=1 .


To see how our procedure works, notice that Steps II-III calculate the theoretical
benchmark t-ratio for a t-ratio distribution characterized by (λ̂, M̂ ). As a result, the
outcome is simply one number and there is no uncertainty around it. Uncertainties are
incorporated in Steps I and IV. In particular, by sampling repeatedly from the original
t-ratio sample and re-estimating λ and M each time, we take into account estimation
error of the truncated exponential distribution. Also, under the assumption that
neglected signiﬁcant t-ratios follow the empirical distribution of our t-ratio sample,
by varying r, we can assess how this under-representation of our t-ratio sample aﬀects
results.
   Table A.2 shows estimates of M and benchmark t-ratios. When r = 1, the
median estimate for the total number of trials is 817,65 almost the same as our
previous estimate of 820 based on the original sample. Unsurprisingly, Bonferroni
implied benchmark t-ratio (4.01) is larger than 3.78, which is what we get ignoring
unpublished works. Holm implied t-ratio (3.96), while not necessarily increasing in the
number of trials, is also higher than before (3.64). BHY implied t-ratio increases from
3.39 to 3.68 at 1% signiﬁcance and from 2.78 to 3.18 at 5% signiﬁcance. As r increases,
sample size M and benchmark t-ratios for all four types of adjustments increase.
When r doubles, the estimate of M also approximately doubles and Bonferroni and
Holm implied t-ratios increase by about 0.2, whereas BHY implied t-ratios increase
by around 0.03 (under both signiﬁcance levels).




  65
     Our previous estimate of 820 is a one-shot estimate based on the truncated sample. The results
in Table A.2 are based on repeated estimates based on re-sampled data: we re-sample many times
and 817 is the median of all these estimates. It is close to the one-shot estimate.


                                                      88
            Table A.2: Benchmark t-ratios When M is Estimated

Estimated total number of factors tried (M ) and benchmark t-ratio percentiles based on
a truncated exponential distribution framework. Our estimation is based on the original
t-ratio sample truncated at 2.57. The sampling ratio is the assumed ratio of the true
population size of t-ratios exceeding 2.57 over our current sample size. Both Bonferroni
and Holm have a signiﬁcance level of 5%.

 Sampling ratio           M          Bonferroni            Holm        BHY(1%)         BHY(5%)
      (r)         [10%        90%]   [10%    90%]     [10%    90% ]   [10%    90%]     [10%    90%]
       1                 817             4.01              3.96           3.68            3.17
                  [731     947 ]     [3.98   4.04 ]   [3.92   4.00]   [3.63   3.74 ]   [3.12   3.24]
      1.5             1234               4.11              4.06           3.70            3.20
                  [1128   1358 ]     [4.08   4.13 ]   [4.03   4.09]   [3.66   3.74 ]   [3.16   3.24]
       2              1646               4.17              4.13           3.71            3.21
                  [1531   1786 ]     [4.15   4.19 ]   [4.11   4.15]   [3.67   3.75 ]   [3.18   3.25]




                                                      89
B       A Simple Bayesian Framework

The following framework is adopted from Scott and Berger (2006). It highlights the
key issues in Bayesian multiple hypothesis testing.66 More sophisticated generaliza-
tions modify the basic model but are unlikely to change the fundamental hierarchical
testing structure.67 We use this framework to explain the pros and cons of performing
multiple testing in a Bayesian framework.
    The hierarchical model is as follows:
                         iid
H1. (Xi |µi , σ 2 , γi ) ∼ N (γi µi , σ 2 ),
              iid                   iid
H2. µi |τ 2 ∼ N (0, τ 2 ), γi |p0 ∼ Ber(1 − p0 ),
H3. (τ 2 , σ 2 ) ∼ π1 (τ 2 , σ 2 ), p0 ∼ π2 (p0 ).

    We explain each step in detail as well as the notation:

H1. Xi denotes the average return generated from a long-short trading strategy
    based on a certain factor; µi is the unknown mean return; σ 2 is the common
    variance for returns and γi is an indicator function, with γi = 0 indicating a
    zero factor mean. γi is the counterpart of the reject/accept decision in the usual
    (frequentists’) hypothesis testing framework.
        H1 therefore says that factor returns are independent conditional on mean γi µi
        and common variance σ 2 , with γi = 0 indicating that the factor is spurious.
        The common variance assumption may look restrictive but we can always scale
        factor returns by changing the dollar investment in the long-short strategy. The
        crucial assumption is conditional independence of average strategy returns. Cer-
        tain form of conditional independence is unavoidable for Bayesian hierarchical
        modeling68 — probably unrealistic for our application. We can easily think of
        scenarios where average returns of diﬀerent strategies are correlated, even when
        population means are known. For example, it is well known that two of the most
        popular factors, the Fama and French (1992) HML and SMB are correlated.
   66
       We choose to present the full Bayes approach. An alternative approach — the empirical-Bayes
approach — is closely related to the BHY method that controls the false-discovery rate (FDR). See
Storey (2003) and Efron and Tibshirani (2002) for the empirical-Bayes interpretation of FDR. For
details on the empirical-Bayes method, see Efron, Tibshirani, Storey and Tusher (2001), Efron (2004)
and Efron (2006). For an in-depth investigation of the diﬀerences between the full Bayes and the
empirical-Bayes approach, see Scott and Berger (2010). For an application of the empirical-Bayes
method in ﬁnance, see Markowitz and Xu (1994).
    67
       See Meng and Dempster (1987) and Whittemore (2007) for more works on the Bayesian ap-
proach in hypothesis testing.
    68
       Conditional independence is crucial for the Bayesian framework and the construction of poste-
rior likelihoods. Although it can be extended to incorporate special dependence structures, there is
no consensus on how to systematically handle dependence. See Brown et al. (2012) for a discussion
of independence in Bayesian multiple testing. They also propose a spatial dependence structure into
a Bayesian testing framework.


                                                      90
H2. The ﬁrst step population parameters µi ’s and γi ’s are assumed to be generated
    from two other parametric distributions: µi ’s are independently generated from
    a normal distribution and γi ’s are simply generated from a Bernoulli distribu-
    tion, i.e., γi = 0 with probability p0 .
       The normality assumption for the µi ’s requires the reported Xi ’s to randomly
       represent either long/short or short/long strategy returns. If researchers have
       a tendency to report positive abnormal returns, we need to randomly assign to
       these returns plus/minus signs. The normality assumptions in both H1 and H2
       are important as they are necessary to guarantee the properness of the posterior
       distributions.

H3. Finally, the two variance variables τ 2 and σ 2 follow a joint prior distribution π1
    and the probability p0 follows a prior distribution π2 .
       Objective or “neutral” priors for π1 and π2 can be speciﬁed as:

                                  π1 (τ 2 , σ 2 ) ∝ (τ 2 + σ 2 )−2
                                      π2 (p0 ) = Uniform(0, 1)


Under this framework, the joint conditional likelihood function for Xi ’s is simply a
product of individual normal likelihood functions and the posterior probability that
γi = 1 (discovery) can be calculated by applying Bayes’ law. When the number of
trials is large, to calculate the posterior probability we need eﬃcient methods such as
importance sampling, which involves high dimensional integrals.
    One beneﬁt of a Bayesian framework for multiple testing is that the multiplicity
penalty term is already embedded. In the frequentists’ framework, this is done by
introducing FWER or FDR. In a Bayesian framework, the so-called “Ockham’s ra-
zor eﬀect”69 automatically adjusts the posterior probabilities when more factors are
simultaneously tested.70 Simulation studies in Scott and Berger (2006) show how the
discovery probabilities for a few initial signals increase when more noise are added to
the original sample.
    However, there are several shortcomings for the Bayesian approach. Some of them
are speciﬁc to the context of our application and the others are generic to the Bayesian
multiple testing framework.
    At least two issues arise when applying the Bayesian approach to our factor se-
lection problem. First, we do not observe all tried factors. While we back out the
distribution of hidden factors parametrically under the frequentist framework, it is not
clear how the missing data and the multiple testing problems can be simultaneously
  69
     See Jeﬀerys and Berger (1992).
  70
     Intuitively, more complex models are penalized because extra parameters involve additional
sources of uncertainty. Simplicity is rewarded in a Bayesian framework as simple models produce
sharp predictions. See the discussions in Scott (2009).


                                                    91
solved under the Bayesian framework. Second, the hierarchical testing framework
may be overly restrictive. Both independence as well as normality assumptions can
have a large impact on the posterior distributions. Although normality can be some-
what relaxed by using alternative distributions, the scope of alternative distributions
is limited as there are only a few distributions that can guarantee the properness
of the posterior distributions. Independence, as we previously discussed, is likely to
be violated in our context. In contrast, the three adjustment procedures under the
frequentists’ framework are able to handle complex data structures since they rely on
only fundamental probability inequalities to restrict their objective function — the
Type I error rate.
    There are a few general concerns about the Bayesian multiple testing framework.
First, it is not clear what to do after obtaining the posterior probabilities for indi-
vidual hypotheses. Presumably, we should ﬁnd a cutoﬀ probability P and reject all
hypotheses that have a posterior discovery probability larger than P . But then we
come back to the initial problem of ﬁnding an appropriate cutoﬀ p-value, which is
not at all a clear task. Scott and Berger (2006) suggest a decision-theoretic approach
that chooses the cutoﬀ P by minimizing a loss-function. The parameters of the loss-
function, however, are again subjective. Second, the Bayesian posterior distributions
are computationally challenging. We document three hundred factors but there are
potentially many more if missing factors are taken into account. When M gets large,
importance sampling is a necessity. However, results of importance sampling rely
on simulations and subjective choices of the centers of the probability distributions
for random variables. Consequently, two researchers trying to calculate the same
quantity might get very diﬀerent results. Moreover, in multiple testing, the curse of
dimensionality generates additional risks for Bayesian statistical inference.71 These
technical issues create additional hurdles for the application of the Bayesian approach.




  71
     See Liang and Kelemen (2008) for a discussion on the computational issues in Bayesian multiple
testing.


                                                      92
C      Method Controlling the FDP

We apply the methods developed in Lehmann and Romano (2005) to control the
realized FDP. The objective is P (F DP > γ) ≤ α, where γ is the threshold FDP
value and α is the signiﬁcance level. Fixing γ and α, we order the individual p-
values from the smallest to the largest (i.e., p(1) ≤ p(2) ≤ · · · ≤ p(M ) ) and let the
corresponding hypotheses be H(1) , H(2) , · · · , H(M ) . We then reject the i-th hypothesis
if p(i) ≤ αi /C⌊γM ⌋+1 , where

                                           (⌊γi⌋ + 1)α
                                 αi =                    ,
                                        M + ⌊γi⌋ + 1 − i
                                        ∑k
                                            1
                                 Ck   =       .
                                        j=1
                                            j


Here, for a real number x, ⌊x⌋ denotes the greatest integer that is no greater than x.
Similar to c(M ) in BHY’s adjustment, C⌊γM ⌋+1 allow one to control the FDP under
arbitrary dependence structure of the p-values.
    Table C.1 shows the benchmark t-ratios based on our sample of 316 factors for
diﬀerent levels of FDP thresholds and signiﬁcance . The benchmark t-ratios are
higher when the FDP thresholds are tougher (i.e., γ is lower) or when the signiﬁcance
levels are lower (i.e., α is lower). For typical values of γ and α, the benchmark t-
ratios are signiﬁcantly lower than conventional values, consistent with previous results
based on the FWER or FDR methods. For instance, when γ = 0.10 and α = 0.05,
the benchmark t-ratio is 2.70 (p-value = 0.69%), much higher than the conventional
cutoﬀ of 1.96.



      Table C.1: Benchmark t-ratios for Lehmann and Romano (2005)

                      Estimated benchmark t-ratios based on
                      Lehmann and Romano (2005). The objective
                      is P (F DP > γ) ≤ α.

                                      γ = 0.05   γ = 0.10    γ = 0.20
                      α = 0.01          3.70       3.46        3.25
                      α = 0.05          3.04       2.70        2.38
                      α = 0.10          2.38       2.16        2.16




                                                   93
D      FAQ

D.1     Speciﬁc Questions
    • Why is FWER called “rate” when it is a single number? (Section 4.3)

      FWER has been used by the statistics literature a long time ago, even be-
      fore 1979. However, Holm (1979) seems to be the ﬁrst one that formally deﬁnes
      the family-wise error rate. Terms used in Holm (1979) are diﬀerent from our
      current presentation. Our “family-wise” terminology is likely ﬁrst mentioned in
      Cox (1982) and later formally deﬁned in Hochberg and Tamhane (1987). “Rate”
      is the standard terminology nowadays, though we are not sure of the historical
      reason for calling it “rate” instead of probability. But we notice people using
      “Type I error rate” instead of “Type I error probability” in single hypothesis
      testing. We think that “probability” can be used interchangeably with “rate”
      since “probability” is “rate” in frequentists’ view.


    • How can we tell in real time the errors? (Section 4.3.2)

      We never know the “true” errors. Even with out-of-sample testing, all we can
      tell is how likely it is for a factor to be “real” for one particular realization of
      historical returns.


    • Is it possible to set the actual Type I error rate to be exactly at the pre-speciﬁed
      level? (Section 4.3.2)

      Any adjustment procedure has a theoretically implied upper bound on the Type
      I error rate. This bound is the “actual Type I error rate” (as opposed to the re-
      alized Type I error rate for a particular outcome of a multiple test) and usually
      achievable under speciﬁc distributional assumptions (e.g.,negative dependence
      among p-values as in BHY). We usually use the distance between this bound
      and the pre-speciﬁed signiﬁcance level to measure the goodness of a procedure.
      In reality, for a particular sequence of p-value realizations, e.g., 316 p-values for
      our 316 factors, we cannot do much. By following a speciﬁc adjustment proce-
      dure, we can say what the maximal expected Type I error rate is if we repeat
      such multiple testing many times, each time with a diﬀerent p-value sequence.
      Comparing two procedures A and B, we want to know whether the expected
      Type I error rate (after integrating out the randomness in the return data) un-
      der A is closer to the signiﬁcance level than it is under B. It makes little sense
      to compare A and B based on a particular outcome (e.g., 316 p-values) of a
      multiple test.



                                                 94
• Why doesn’t the t-value go to something much larger than 3.5 after so many
  tests (Section 4.6)

  We report t-ratios not p-values. Suppose you start with a cutoﬀ p-value of
  0.05. For a single test, the t-ratio needs to be 2.0 or above. Now consider
  a multiple testing framework. For simplicity, consider the Bonferroni test. If
  there are two tests, appropriate cutoﬀ is a p-value of 0.025. For 10 tests, the
  p-value drops to 0.005. The table below shows the number of multiple tests
  necessary for certain levels of t-ratios. For example, if we had 87,214 tests, then
  the Bonferroni would require the factor to have a t-ratio of 5.0 to be deemed
  signiﬁcant (p-value of 0.00000057).

    Table D.1: Bonferroni t-ratios and Required Number of Tests

      Bonferroni t-ratios, cut-oﬀ p-values and the required number of tests.

                    t-ratio    p-value     # of Bonferroni tests
                       2        0.05                 1
                       3       0.0027                19
                       4      0.000063              789
                       5     0.00000057            87,214
                       6    0.0000000020        25,340,000
                       7    2.56 × 10−12        1.95 × 1010
                       8    1.33 × 10−15        3.75 × 1013


• Why is there a drop for the time-series of BHY implied t-ratios? (Section 4.6)

  In Figure 3, there seems to be a drop for BHY implied t-ratios around 1995.
  Unlike Bonferroni or Holm, BHY implied benchmark t-ratios are not necessar-
  ily monotonically increasing in the number of factors. This is because false
  discovery rate (FDR) is about the proportion of false discoveries among all dis-
  coveries. Given a set of t-ratios for the years before 1995, suppose we ﬁnd the
  BHY implied adjusted t-ratio. In year 1995, suppose we observe a set of large
  t-ratios. These large t-ratios will likely increase the denominator of FDR (i.e.,
  the number of discoveries R). At the same time, they are unlikely to increase
  the numerator (i.e., the number of false discoveries N0|r ). As a result, including
  this new set of large t-ratios into the previous t-ratio set, the new BHY im-
  plied benchmark t-ratio will likely decrease. The highly signiﬁcant t-ratios for
  1995 dilute the proportion of false discoveries made based on the t-ratios from
  previous years.


• Is “. . . control their Type I error rates under arbitrary distributional assump-
  tions” really true? Suppose we had 186 factors but they were 99% correlated —
  eﬀectively just one factor. This seems to me to be a situation where independent
  test criterion is appropriate. (Section 4.7)


                                              95
       The statement is correct and the concern is about the Type II rather than
       Type I error of the testing procedure. In the example, it is true that indepen-
       dent criterion makes more sense. But multiple testing procedures are also able
       to control the Type I error rates, albeit too much in this case. For instance,
       Bonferroni implies a threshold t-ratio of 3.8 when there are 316 factors. If most
       of the factors are perfectly correlated, then the FWER under Bonferroni’s cri-
       terion is eﬀectively zero. Since zero is less than any pre-speciﬁed signiﬁcance
       level, the tests still control what they are supposed to control — Type I error
       rate (FWER or FDR). Of course, the power of the test, which, as previously
       discussed, can be measured by the distance between the actual Type I error
       rate and the pre-speciﬁed level, would be too low.


   • How does incomplete coverage of “signiﬁcant” factors aﬀect our results? (Sec-
     tion 4.7)

       It is likely that our sample somewhat under-represents the population of sig-
       niﬁcant factors. As previously discussed, there are a number of causes for this
       under-coverage. First, there are some truly signiﬁcant factors that were tested as
       insigniﬁcant and never made it to publication. Second, we are highly selective in
       choosing among working papers. Third, we only consider the top three ﬁnance
       journals in choosing among published works. This under-coverage will impact
       our t-value cutoﬀs. To quantitatively evaluate this impact, we tabulate a new
       set of cutoﬀs: those generated under diﬀerent degrees of under-representation
       of the population of signiﬁcant factors. Table D.2 reports the cutoﬀ t-statistics
       for 2012. Assuming a true population size over our sample size ratio of r, we
       report adjusted t-ratios for our three approaches.72 The top row corresponds
       to a sample size ratio of one, i.e., our original sample. We see that when the
       true population is twice as large as our sample, Bonferroni implied benchmark
       t-ratio increases from 3.78 to 3.95 and Holm from 3.64 to 3.83. Relative to the
       percentage change in t-ratios, the corresponding change in p-values is large. For
       Bonferroni, p-value changes from 0.016% to 0.008%; for Holm from 0.027% to
       0.013%. Both p-values drop by at least half. For BHY, however, the change is
       less dramatic. This is consistent with our previous discussion of the stationarity
       of BHY. In sum, we think a robust t-ratio range for Bonferroni and Holm is
       3.6-4.0; for BHY, 3.3-3.4 when αd = 1% and 2.80-2.85 when αd = 5%.

  72
     Assuming this r ratio and sample size N , we obtain Bonferroni adjusted t-ratios straightfor-
wardly based on total number of factors N r. For Holm and BHY, we sample (with replacement)
N (r − 1) values from the recent 10 years’ t-ratios sample. Together with the original sample, we
have an augmented sample of N r t-ratios. We follow Holm or BHY to get the adjusted t-ratio
benchmarks for each augmented sample. Finally, we generate W = 1000 such augmented samples
and take the median as the ﬁnal benchmark t-ratio. When N r or N (r − 1) are not integers, we use
the smallest integer that is greater than or equal to N r and N (r − 1), respectively.




                                                     96
           Table D.2: Cutoﬀ t-ratios for Alternative Sample Sizes

Benchmark t-ratios and their associated p-values for the three multiple testing adjustments
for 2012. Sample size ratio is true population size over our sample size. Both Bonferroni
and Holm have a signiﬁcance level of 5%.

   Sample size ratio (r)       Bonferroni        Holm       BHY(1%)         BHY(5%)
   for signiﬁcant factors        [p-value]      [p-value]     [p-value]      [p-value]
              1                    3.78          3.64          3.34            2.78
                                 [0.016%]       [0.027%]      [0.08%]         [0.544%]

              2                    3.95          3.83          3.39            2.81
                                 [0.008%]       [0.013%]      [0.070%]        [0.495%]

              3                    4.04          3.93          3.41            2.84
                                 [0.005%]       [0.008%]      [0.065%]        [0.451%]


   • Haven’t there been recent advances in Bayesian literature with respect to multi-
     ple testing? (Appendix B)

      In papers that apply the Bayesian testing method, there are many new ways that
      try to handle inadequacies. For instance, to relax the independence assumption,
      Brown et al. (2012) introduce an autoregressive dependence structure because
      their data are obtained sequentially. But they have to assume that noise from
      the autoregressive processes is independent from the rest of the system. Condi-
      tional independence is key to Bayesian modeling. There are ways to circumvent
      it, but most methods are data-driven and not applicable in our context. For
      instance, it is unclear how to model dependence among the test statistics of
      factors in our list. The indeterminacy of the cutoﬀ is mentioned in Scott and
      Berger (2006). There are many applied works that propose ad hoc methods to
      try to establish a threshold. Finally, computational diﬃculty is a longstanding
      issue in Bayesian literature. People often discard Bayesian methods because
      they incorporate a “subjective” prior (i.e.,generate random samples around a
      region where researchers “believe” the parameters should be concentrated) into
      their posterior calculation. Multiple testing introduces dimensionality concerns,
      and it is well-known that posterior distributions are hard to calculate accurately
      when the dimensionality is high. In sum, we think the above three issues are
      generic to the Bayesian multiple testing framework and for which there are no
      simple/systematic solutions.




                                                  97
D.2     General Questions
  • What if the underlying data are non-stationary in that as anomalies are dis-
    covered, they are arbitraged away; some newer frictions/biases arise, they are
    discovered, and then arbitraged away, and so on? This seems like a possible
    alternative that would lead to the creation of more and more factors over time,
    without necessarily implying that the t-ratio ought to be raised for newer factors.

      Our preferred view is that the factor universe is a combination of some station-
      ary factors that cannot be arbitraged away (systematic risk) and some other
      transitory factors that can be arbitraged away once discovered. As time goes
      by and we accumulate more data, stationary factors tend to become more sig-
      niﬁcant (t-ratio proportional to the square root of the number of time periods).
      Through our multiple testing framework, the adjusted benchmark t-ratio be-
      comes higher. This higher bar helps screen newly discovered transitory factors.
      In other words, it should be harder to propose new transitory factors as longer
      sample is available. Without multiple testing, recent transitory factors are just
      as likely to be discovered as past transitory factors. This means that the dis-
      covery rate for transitory factors will remain high (if not higher) as time goes
      by. This is exactly the trend that we try to curb. Ideally, the ﬁnance profession
      should focus on systematic/stationary factors rather than transitory abnormal-
      ities.

  • What if many of the factors are highly correlated or at least within a “span” other
    than the common 3-4 factors like the Fama-French three factors and Momentum
    which are controlled for while ﬁnding new factors? That is, is it possible that the
    literature has just been rediscovering “new” factors but they remain spanned by
    other documented factors that did not become an “industry” like Fama-French
    three factors and Momentum factors?

      This is possible, although as we mentioned in the paper, newly proposed factors
      often need to “stand their ground” against similar factors (not just Fama-French
      three factors and Momentum) that are previously proposed. All of our three
      adjustments are robust to correlations among the factors. This means that the
      Type I error (rate of false discoveries) is still under control. However, high cor-
      relations make our adjustment less powerful, that is, the benchmark t-ratio is
      too high for a new factor to overcome. However, given the hundreds of factors
      proposed, we think it is time to worry more about the Type I error than the
      power of the tests. A recent paper by Green, Hand and Zhang (2013) show
      that the correlations among strategy signals are low on average. This seems to
      suggest that new factors proposed in the literature are somewhat independent
      from past ones.

  • Should the benchmark t-ratios be higher simply because the number of data points
    has increased through time?


                                                98
  For a single, independent test, the t-ratio threshold should remain constant
  through time. For a return series that has a mean and variance, it is true that
  its t-ratio will increase as we have more data points. However, this does not
  imply a higher t-value threshold for hypothesis testing. At 5% signiﬁcance level,
  we should always use 2.0 for single test as it gives the correct Type I error rate
  under the null hypothesis that mean return is zero. As time goes by, truly
  signiﬁcant factors are more likely to be identiﬁed as signiﬁcant and false factors
  are more likely to be identiﬁed as insigniﬁcant. In other words, the power of
  the test is improved as we have more observations but this should not change
  the cutoﬀ value.

  In fact, when the sample size is extremely large, it becomes very easy to gen-
  erate large t-statistics. In this case, people often use alternative statistics (e.g.,
  odds ratios) to summarize strategy performance.

• How does Kelly and Pruitt (2011, “The three-pass regression ﬁlter: A new ap-
  proach to forecasting using many predictors”) relate to our paper?

  Kelly and Pruitt (2011) is related to our paper in that it also tries dimen-
  sion reduction when there is a large cross-section. However, their paper is
  fundamentally diﬀerent from ours. Kelly and Pruitt (2011) try to extract a few
  factors from the cross-section and use them to forecast other series. Therefore,
  the ﬁrst-step extraction needs to be done in a way that increases the forecast-
  ing power in the second step. Our paper stops at the ﬁrst stage: we look to
  condense the factor universe that can explain the cross-section of returns.




                                              99
