                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OPTIMAL LABOR CONTRACTS, IMPERFECT
           COMPETITION AND UNDREMPLOYMENT EQUILIBRIA:
                    A FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS




                         Russell Cooper




                     Working Paper No. 2060




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1986




Much of this research was conducted while I was a Visiting Scholar
at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I am very
grateful to that institution for its support. Seminar participants
at the 1986 NBER Summer Institute, the University of Delaware, the
Univerity of Iowa and the University of Pennsylvania provided
numerous helpful comments and suggestions. Financial support from
the National Science Foundation, NSF #SES86—05302, is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program -in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2060
                                               October 1986




               Optimal Labor Contracts, Imperfect Competition

          and Underemployment Equilibria: A Framework for Analysis




                                  ABSTRACT




     This paper examines the macroeconomic properties of imperfectly
competitive economies. The focus is on the coordination failures that
might arise in these economies, a study of alternative policies and the
comparative static properties of these models. This paper differs from
others in this area by modeling the labor market from the perspective
of optimal contract theory. This permits an evaluation of the role of
labor market behavior in producing these coordination failures and a
study of labor market policies (such as unemployment insurance and
alternative compensation schemes).




                                              Russell Cooper
                                              Department of Economics
                                              College of Business
                                                Administration
                                              University of Iowa
                                              Iowa City, Iowa 52242
I. Introduction

  This paper is about coordination failures in decentralized economies.

In    particular,   it concerns    the possibility that allocations

decentralized through the price system may not have desirable welfare

properties.     If so, prices have failed to coordinate trades between

agents and opportunities for mutually advantageous trades may exist in

equilibrium.    In some cases, these coordination failures may be of an

aggregate nature and hence important for understanding macroeconomic

behavior. This paper studies the positive and normative properties of

model economies exhibiting macroeconomic coordination failures.

  To begin, it is useful to contrast this approach with that stemming

from the study of the Arrow-Debreu general equilibrium model. In a

model economy with complete markets,          perfect information,    no

externalities and perfect competition, the first Fundamental Theorem of

Welfare Economics states that competitive equilibria are Pareto

Optimal.       In a competitive equilibrium, no feasible mutually

advantageous trades exist between agents so that coordination failures,

as defined above, do not exist. Fluctuations in output and employment

arise through the intertemporal substitution of agents and the flow of

resources between sectors of an economy in response to exogenous shocks

to the system. However, there are no gains to stabilization policy in

such an economy.

     Hence, to formally study coordination failures, the first step is to

specify perturbations to the underlying Arrow-Debreu framework.      The

source of these coordination failures must be found in modifications of
                                                                          2

the Arrow-Debreu model which either relax some of the assumptions

outlined above or in one way or another weaken the ability of the

auctioneer to facilitate trades between agents. Models which include

direct externalities in technology or preferences are examples of the

first approach while those that assume incomplete markets and/or rigid

prices are examples of the second.

  A third approach is to relax the assumption of price taking behavior

by studying imperfectly competitive general equilibrium models.     The

inefficiencies generated in such economies (some of which we know of

from partial equilibrium analysis) may have interesting macroeconomic

implications.   General equilibrium models, such as the one studied

here, go beyond the partial equilibrium analysis of imperfect
competition by stressing spillover effects across multisector economies

and by emphasizing the interaction of product and factor markets. Of

course, the basic inefficiency in these models is closely linked to

that displayed in the partial equilibrium analysis.

    Hart [1982] argues that models of imperfect competition are capable

of generating macroeconomic results such as underemployment equilibria,

multiplier effects and so forth.      Related results on coordination

failures in this class of models are reported by Heller [1985],

Kiyotaki [1985], Roberts [1984,1986] and Cooper-John [1986]. Finally,

Startz [1986] illustrates that many of the textbook results on policy

effectiveness in Keynesian models also hold in models of monopolistic

competition.

  As suggested by Cooper-John [1986] these models of imperfect
competition share an important feature: the strategic interaction
                                                                          3

between agents creates positive feedback effects. This "strategic

complementarity" arises from the pattern of demands across sectors of a

multi-sector economy.1 Firms in one sector are induced to produce more

if firms in other sectors increase their own output as long as

consumption goods are normal. Given that the assumption of normality is

not very strong, these complementarities are likely to be present in a

wide range of economies. Because of the non-cooperative nature of the

interaction between firms, mutually advantageous expansions may not be

consummated. Hence these models of imperfect competition can generate

coordination failures in that the non-cooperative equilibrium is Pareto

sub-optimal.   As discussed further below, these models may also have

multiple   equilibria   which   can be      Pareto   ranked.     These

coniplementarities are also present model of trading externalities and

coordination failures explored by Diamond [1982], Howitt [1985] and

others.

  The results in these models of imperfect competition are quite

promising from the perspective of building a microeconomic foundation

for understanding coordination failures. The strong Keynesian results

(e.g. coordination failures, multipliers, importance of quantities in

individual decisions) emerging from these models are not driven by

assumed rigidities in prices and/or wages. Instead, the price system

fails to coordinate trades due to the presence of imperfectly

competitive agents who, in part,      base quantity decisions on the

quantities chosen by other agents in the economy.

  There are, of course, a number of open issues in this growing

literature. First, these models have not been developed to the extent
                                                                           4

that a full comparison with alternative approaches to understanding

business cycles is possible. Are these models successful in reproducing

observed co-movements in output, employment, prices and wages? What

are the sources of these fluctuations?        To address these issues

requires the development of dynamic stochastic models of imperfectly

competitive economies.

  Second, what is the role of labor markets in helping to coordinate

the activities of firms in the product market?         If there is an

underemployment equilibria, why are there no forces operating in the

labor markets to remedy the situation? From a theoretical perspective,

it is critical to clarify whether the inefficiencies found in these

models are merely a consequence of some form of suboptimal labor

arrangement.

 A good example of this second issue arises in the work by Weitznian

[1985] .   Weitzman supposes that a "wage system" exists for the trading

of labor services in which the wage is predetermined and employment is

demand determined. Cooper [1986] shows that an imperfectly competitive

economy with this structure of labor contracts will generate
underemployment equilibria and multiplier effects. That contracts such

as these produce socially suboptimal behavior is not surprising since

these contracts are generally not even privately optimal.     Hence, an

important aspect of Weitzman's argument for the introduction of a share

system appears to rest on the assumption that agents trade labor

services in a privately suboptimal fashion. Furthermore, Hart [1982]

stresses the importance of market power by the suppliers of labor in

his study of imperfectly competitive economies.2        The "contracts"
                                                                          5

between workers and firms in Hart's model are not privately optimal in

that the allocation does not lie on a contract curve between the

contractants.      In a number of other studies in this area, the

contracting structure is either suboptimal or not completely specified.

 Augmenting these models with optimal labor arrangements (from the

perspective of the contractants though not necessarily society) would

strengthen the argument that these are interesting models of
coordination failures and macroeconomic behavior. That is, if these

coordination failures remain in the presence of optimal labor
contracts, then it should be clear that the labor markets will not

operate to offset the imperfect competition in the product markets.

  The approach taken here is thus to introduce labor contracts into a

simple general equilibrium model of imperfect competition as a mode of

transacting in labor markets.   This analysis will attempt to address

the question, raised above, about the coordinating ability of labor

markets.   Furthermore, as is well understood, optimal labor contracts

sever the connection between compensation and employment so that in

partial equilibrium models a wide variety of correlations between wages

and employment are feasible. As noted by Blanchard-Kiyotaki [1985), it

is important to see whether these model of imperfect competition are

capable of matching the stylized fact that wages tend to fluctuate much

less than output or employment.     This paper is thus an attempt to

integrate the partial equilibrium models of labor contracts into the

general equilibrium models of imperfect competition as a means of

understanding coordination failures and generating predictions of labor

market outcomes.
                                                                          6

  An overview of this exercise is presented in Section II and the

imperfectly competitive contracting equilibrium is analyzed in Section

III. The results in this paper provide full support for the view that

economies with imperfectly competitive product markets can experience

underemployment equilibria even in the presence of optimal labor

contracts. In contrast to Hart [1982], this arises with optimal

contracts and a bargaining setting in which the power of unions is not

an important determinant of the degree of underemployment.

  In Section IV, this framework is used to study the comparative static

properties of these class of models. Shocks to the system are magnified

by the demand linkages across sectors just as in the case of Weitzman's

wage system (see the discussion in Cooper [19861.) While output and

employment fluctuate quite a lot, the predicted correlation between

real wages and employment depends on the form of the insurance

arrangements within the labor contract. Hence the model can generate

correlated movements in output and employment across sectors of an

economy without large movements in the real return to labor. In

contrast to the "real business cyclet' models these fluctuations do not

rely on the intertemporal substitution of leisure today for consumption

tomorrow and/or technological linkages as in Long-Plosser [1983].

Instead, these correlated movements in output across sectors is

possible because of the underutilization of resources prevalent in

imperfectly competitive economies and the presence of demand linkages

across these sectors.

     The model is also used to study the effects of alternative

government policies.    First, we find that increases in unemployment
                                                                          7

insurance produce unemployment since the cost of reducing output by a

given firm-union pair is lower.    This alters reaction curves in the

product market game and produces an equilibrium with lower activity. As

in Hart [1982] and Startz [1986], we also study the effects of a

balanced budget policy by the government.     Following the advice of

Weitzman [1983,1985],    the model is used to consider direct
interventions in labor markets as an alternative form of government

policy. These results are presented in Section V.

  While these models are successful in predicting underemployment of

resources, the contracting structure does not provide support for the

view that unemployed workers "envy" those with jobs.      That is, the

presence of severance pay implies that workers (with the assumed

structure of preferences) will be indifferent with respect to

employment status. Extensions of the model by adding some distortions

into the labor contract associated with asymmetric information and

moral hazard problems within the firm are discussed in Section VI.

  In that section, we also discuss the effects of alternative union and

industrial structures on the equilibrium of this type of model. To the

extent that coordination failures emerge because firms can not

coordinate their output decisions, it is interesting to see whether

unions which represent workers in a number of sectors can play this

coordinating role. A similar implication of mergers is noted as well.

Finally, we also discuss examples of multiple equilibria and the

possibility of "catastrophic" changes in the level of economic

activity.

II. Overview of Model
                                                                          8


  Before delving into the details of the model, it is useful to begin

with an informal overview of the basic approach to this problem. The

model contains two key components. First is the design of a labor

contract between a group of workers and a firm.         Second is the

interaction of this coalition of workers and a firm with other such

coalitions in the determination of a product market equilibrium. The

timing of decisions in the model is, as always, quite important.

  Figure 1 displays the interactions between a single firm and the

group of workers it contracts with and the product market in which it

sells.    The next section of the paper will provide a detailed
discussion of these decisions. For now, we focus on the behavior of a

single firm to motivate the subsequent analysis.

  Labor contracts are negotiated prior to the determination of the

state of the economy.    The state will be described by the level of

endowment of a non-produced good, preferences and technology. Given the

insurance role that contracts play, it is reasonable to assume that

they are determined ex ante so that the maximal gains to risk sharing

are feasible.   At this stage, we assume that both the firm and the

workers costlessly observe the state so that contingent compensation

and employment rules are feasible.     Note that we are allowing the

contractants to negotiate both compensation and employment rules rather

than allowing the firm the latitude to select employment ex post given

wages.    This is in keeping with the literature on optimal labor

contracts stemming from the initial contributions of Azariadis [1975]

and Baily [1974). This is an important element of the model since any
                                                                     Consumers
                                               Competitors          From Other
                                                                      Sectors



                                           Ex Post
                                          Residual
Workers          Ex Ante                   Demand            Product
(Union)                                                      Market
          I
              Labor Contract                Curve




                               Figure 1
                                                                          9

inefficiencies in the equilibrium will not be the consequence of direct

restrictions on contracts.

  The labor contract is negotiated between a group of workers and a

single firm and is determined by maximizing a weighted sum of expected

profits for the firm and expected utility for workers. The bargaining

weight is assumed to be exogenous so that the comparative static

effects of variations in union strength can be analyzed. The contracts

are assumed to be fully enforceable once the state is known.

  Following the negotiation of these contracts, the random endowments,

preferences and technology of the agents in the economy are determined

and the product markets open. As described in the following section,

the economy is composed of a number of sectors producing different

products. In each sector, there are a small number of firms who act as

oligopolists.   These firms select quantity as their strategy variable

taking as given the quantities selected by other firms in their sector

and the firms in other sectors.      This interaction of firms across

sectors arises because the level of economic activity in one sector

determines the position of the demand curve facing firms in another

sector.   These demand linkages create the strategic complementarities

discussed in the Introduction.

  Of course, the agents negotiating the labor contract in the first

stage of the game anticipate the subsequent behavior of firms in the

product market game.         Since these contracts are binding, the

equilibrium can be determined by characterizing the Nash equilibrium

for the contingent employment rules stipulated in the optimal contract.

For ease of exposition, we will split the analysis into two parts: the
                                                                          10

determination of an optimal labor contract and the second stage product

market game.

  Demands in the economy are structured to highlight the specificity of

production relative to consumption.   In particular, workers and firms

are assumed to consume all products in the economy except for the

output they produce. This structure of demands is common to models of

coordination failures and imperfect competition (see Hart [1982],

Heller [1985], Roberts [1984] and Cooper [1986] as examples). The model

also includes a non-produced good which is the endowment of a third

group of agents, termed outsiders. The endowment of the outsiders is

assumed to be random and this produces one type of fluctuation in the

economy. The shock to endowments will often be called a demand shock

since variations in endowments influence economic behavior through the

demands of the outsiders. In future work on dynamic models of demand

complementarities as discussed in Section VI, this non-produced good

will be modelled as money.

  The structure of this model can be contrasted with that of the Long-

Plosser [1983].    The models share a common goal of attempting to

understand the co-movement of output and employment in a multi-sector

economy.   Long-Plosser [1983] also consider the propagation of shocks

across time which is not addressed in this paper. In both models, the

normality of goods in agent's preferences spreads the effects of a

shock in one sector to others.        In the Long-Plosser model these

increased demands are met by the allocation of additional inputs into

an expanding sector. Employment may also increase if the intertemporal

substitution effects are strong enough.
                                                                            11

  The model of imperfect competition explored here has as a key

feature the underutilization of workers. As a consequence, increases

in demand can be met by expanding output without the need to induce

workers to supply more labor by increasing real wages.    In addition,

wages do not decentralize employment decisions due to the presence of

optimal labor contracts and prices do not decentralize product market

behavior because of imperfect competition.   Thus evidence that wages

and prices fluctuate little relative to quantities is consistent with

this class of models. These models imply that quantity variations can

arise, even though prices are constant, if other quantities in the

economy are varying as well.



III. Structure of the Economy and a Characterization of Equilibrium

  Consider an economy composed of S sectors indexed by s — 1,2        ,S.


In each sector there are F identical firms producing a homogenous

product. Firms in each of the S sectors produces a distinct commodity

so that there are S produced goods in the economy. There are N workers

per firm in each sector who provide labor services to their respective

firms. This allocation of workers to firms is not really a restriction

given the symmetry in the model. For simplicity we will often term a

group of N workers, a union, and view contracts as negotiated between a

union and a firm.     So, for the sake of presentation, we focus on

explicit contracts.      Subject to the appropriate conditions of

enforceability, one could also think of these as implicit arrangements.
                                                                          12

  Finally, there is a non-produced good in the economy which is the

endowment of the outsiders.     These outsiders trade their endowments

for the goods produced in each of the S sectors.



a) Preferences

  The structure of preferences employed in this model is quite simple.

In models of this genre, identical homothetic preferences are often

used to avoid the issues of aggregation and distribution effects.

These preferences imply that demand curves are linear in income which

makes the calculations of the Nash equilibrium in product markets

easier. We take a step further and assume that all workers and firms

have Cobb-Douglas preferences over the commodities they consume. This

permits us to generate a closed form characterization of the
equilibrium which is useful for expositional purposes and tractability.

We comment in Section VI on relaxing these strong assumptions.

  In addition to this restriction on preferences, we also assume a

strong pattern to the demands by a worker or firm in sector s.       In

particular, we assume that agents do not consume the commodity they are

active in producing. Hence, workers and firms in sector s consume the

goods produced in the other sectors and the non-produced good. This

assumption highlights the specificity of production relative to

consumption. More importantly, this assumption implies that the demand

for sector s output comes solely from other sectors so that

coordination failures emerge.     Relaxing this assumption would lead

firms to recognize that output expansions would influence the position
                                                                                13

of their demand curves so that the underemployment effects discussed

here would be somewhat weakened.

  Workers in sector s have preferences given by




(1) U(c,m,n)              (c) m - rn)

where n equals one if the worker is employed and zero if the worker is

unemployed. The disutility of work equals r and is assumed to be less than one.

Assume that (S-l)a +         1, so that preferences are homothetic, and that U( )

is    strictly increasing and strictly concave so that workers are risk averse.

The demands coming from these preferences are



(2)      c. (c /p.)Y for is and m —


where Y is the worker's income.

  Firms (i.e. a technology which is wholly owned by an agent in this economy)

in sector s spend the proceeds from their production activities on commodities

other their output and the non-produced good. Firm's (shareholder's)

preferences are given by

(3) V(c,m) = V(
                      isk
where V( )    is   increasing and concave.   Since firms and workers in the same

sector have identical ordinal preferences, firms' demands are given by (2) as

well with Y equal to the profit level per firm of ir.    Firms' attitudes towards

risk are characterized by V( ).

  The outsiders split their demands evenly across the S sectors and consume the
                                                                                   14

nonproduced good as well. Their preferences are also Cobb-Douglas with demands

given by

(4)       c — (r   /p ) M for k —   1,2   S and m — (1-Si-) M
          k          k

where M is the aggregate endowment of the outsiders.



b) Technology

  The presence of imperfect competition in product markets derives front some

element in the industry which prevents the free entry and exit of firms. These

barriers to entry are certainly important in understanding the long run

behavior of a particular industry. Here, the model is very short run in nature

so that these barriers will not be explicitly introduced into the analysis.

That is, we will simply assume that there are F firms per sector and not model

the source of this market power.           Extensions of this framework to study

dynamics will require the formulation of a model of entry and exit.

  The technology will simply be a proportional relationship between output and

labor input with one unit of labor producing 0 units of output. Later in the

analysis we will view 9 as a random variable and consider sector specific

shocks.       Assume that 9 has a mean value of one.            Again, fixed costs or

increasing returns to scale could be introduced to make the model more

compatible with the underlying technological features of imperfectly
competitive industries. (See the discussion in Section VI).

  We also assume that worksharing is not feasible so that workers are either

employed or unemployed.       This may reflect features of technology which make

hours and people imperfect substitutes. This structure is imposed so that the

model will generate employment fluctuations rather than variations in hours

which allows us to investigate the role of unemployment insurance.
                                                                              15




c) Uncertainty

 In the next section of the paper we will study the properties of the model in

the face of a variety of shocks to the economy. For the purposes of describing

an equilibrium, we need to specify the variables which are unknown to workers

and firms when contracts are negotiated.    To do so, we differentiate between

the two types of variables in the economy. First are the exogenous variables

which may be stochastic such as the endowments of the outsiders (M), the

preferences of the outsiders (i), the preferences of the workers and firms

(a,/3) and technology (0). Second, there are the strategic variables which are

outside of the control of a firm negotiating a contract with a group of

workers. These variables, essentially the output levels of other firms in the

economy, are determined ex post and are conjectured, on a state-by-state basis,

by the contractants when negotiating a contract ex ante. In equilibrium, these

conjectures are correct. So a labor contract, outlined next, will be written

contingent on the realization of the random variables in the economy given

conjectures about the ex post quantity decisions of other firms in the economy.

For simplicity we let r denote the vector describing the state of nature and

model contracts as contingent on r.



d) Market Structure and Equilibrium

  As discussed in the previous section of the paper, there are two types of

markets in the economy. The first is the ex ante labor market in which workers

and firms determine the rules of employment and compensation through a labor

contract. The second set of markets open after the random variables describing
                                                                             16

the state of the economy have been realized. In these markets, goods are

exchanged between the non-competitive firms and the consumers.

  An equilibrium is, in part, described by a labor contract for each union-

firm which specifies state contingent employment and compensation schedules.

That is, the contract states the employment level for each realization of the

exogenous random variables. Given the linear technology linking outputs to

inputs, the labor contract thus determines the output decision in a particular

state for the union-firm coalition.        Recall though that the contract is

designed given a conjecture (correct in equilibrium) about the behavior of

other firms.

  So, ex post, the quantities of output stipulated in the contracts will

determine the Nash equilibrium for the product markets.    These output levels

represent a best response of the firm-union pair to the output levels chosen by

other firms (as conjectured ex ante). Prices for the produced commodities are

determined so that these markets clear. This is, of course, fully anticipated

by the contractants in the labor market.



e) Optimal Labor Contracts

  The heart of this problem is the determination of the labor contract.     We

focus on the contracting problem between an arbitrary firm f of sector s and a

group of N workers who form a union. The structure of unions and the size of

their membership is taken as exogenous for this exercise. Section VI comments

on this issue.

   Since the economy is symmetric, we will focus on symmetric Nash equilibria.

The contract devised for this firm and group of workers will therefore be
                                                                                     17

optimal for all other union-firm pairs in the economy. All expectations used in

describing the contracting problem will be relative to the distribution of r.

  The optimal contract between firm f of sector s and that firm's N workers is
                                   e      U
characterized by three schedules: w (r), w (I'), and L(r). The first schedule is

the state-contingent wage paid to employed workers, the second is the state-

contingent level of severance pay and the third is the employment rule

contingent on r as well. For simplicity of notation we will denote a contract

by 6 and eliminate most of the superscripts and subscripts.             The union-firm

choose 6 to maximize

(5) E(V(zir) + C[(L/N)U(ZWe -        r)   + (N-L/N)U(zw'5])

           subject to: L(r) N and

                          we,wu,L non-negative for all r.



In the objective function,                represents the bargaining weight attached to

workers' expected utility.            The ratio L/N is the probability that a given

worker is employed if L workers are employed under the optimal contract in some

state. The firms utility function depends on the product of the firm's profit ir

and a variable z (which also appears in the workers' payoffs).              The profit

level it    is   determined by

                e                u
(6) r R(L,r) - w L         - w (N-L).


The function R(L,r) is the firm's revenue if it employs L workers and the state

is r.      The presence of I' in this revenue function is the key linkage between

the contracting problem and the remainder of the economy. Embedded in r are

the quantities chosen by other firms in the economy as well as the parameters

describing the tastes, endowments and technology of agents in the economy.
                                                                                      18

Since all of these variables lie outside of this contracting problem, they are

all subsumed in r for now.

  The other      variable which requires explanation is z, which appears in the

payoffs of both the firm and the worker. This enters into the indirect utility

functions of the agents from their demands as generated by the Cobb-Douglas

preferences. For later reference,



(7) z —   #
and is a price deflator for the market basket of goods generated by these Cobb-

Douglas preferences.

  Assuming for the moment that the constraint on the employment level not

exceeding N does not bind, the first order conditions for the problem can be

sunimarized by


(8) U(WeZ -   r)a/N    —   U   (w )a/N — V (z,r) and

(9) RL(L,r) —    r/z   for all r

where RLIs the derivative of R(L,r) with respect to L.

  Equation (8) implies that risks are shared efficiently between the firm and

its workers. Because of the strict concavity of U( ),        (8)   implies that workers

are indifferent between the states of employment and unemployment; i.e. the

level of severance pay compensates the unemployed worker for the lost wage

income less the utility of leisure (r). As a consequence, workers' welfare is

independent of employment status. Note though that as long as the firm is not

risk neutral, the utility level of workers will depend on the level of economic

activity in the economy.           Section VI of the paper discusses the implications

of adding asymmetric information on the sharing of employment risks.
                                                                               19

  Equation (9) represents the employment rule in the optimal contract. Since

workers are indifferent between employment and unemployment, the only cost to

the firm of employing an additional worker is the value of that workers leisure

in terms of the consumer basket, r/z. The gains to employing another worker is

the marginal revenue gained from selling an extra unit of output. If the

constraint that LN binds, then employment is set at N and (9) does not hold

with equality.

  The important element about (9) is that once r is specified, this expression

is also the firm's reaction curve in the ex post product market game.        The

union and the firm act as a coalition in this product market game with their

product market strategy determined in the ex ante labor contract.     There is no

pressure in this economy to be at full employment. In contrast to Hart [1982]

this reflects the joint market power of the union-firm coalition in product

markets and not the labor market power of the union per se.           The optimal

contract allows some workers to remain unemployed as a means of obtaining the

largest surplus possible given the market power of the firm.   The compensation

rule then determines how this surplus is to be divided between the firm and the

union.

    Note that the employment rule is independent of the parameter measuring the

bargaining power of the union,a. Of course, the level of wages does depend on

.     This separation of employment and compensation arises from the structure
of preferences (i.e. no income effects) for the contractants. The decisions of

the union-firm in the product market game are thus equivalent to that of a firm

facing a marginal cost of labor (in terms of the numeraire) of r/z.

    There is also a strong connection between (9) and the characterization of

equilibrium in Weitzman's wage system given in Cooper [1986]. In Weitzman's
                                                                             20

economy, the firms took as given the real wage and determined labor demand to

maximize profits in the product market game with other imperfect competitors.

Here, that assumption of a constant real wage is not really needed. Essentially

the ratio r/z replaces the real wage as the true cost of an additional unit of

labor.     Nonetheless, as discussed below the operation of this economy looks

very much like that of Weitzman's wage system.

  Equations (8) and (9) completely specify the employment, wage and severance

pay schedules in an optimal contract between firm f in sector s and its N

workers. Recall that we have omitted any notation regarding the identity of

this firm or its sector of operation. Given the symmetry of the problem, the

conditions describing this optimal contract also characterize that for other

union-firm pairs in other sectors.    The only change that is necessary is to

define z to correspond to the sector of interest. Given this optimal contract,

we are able to compute the Nash equilibrium in the product market.



f) Goods Market Equilibrium

  To complete our characterization of an equilibrium, we need to model the

interaction of firms in product markets, ex post.         The labor contracts

negotiated ex ante with their unions, specifies an employment rule for a firm

contingent on the realization of random variables in the economy           the

actions taken by all the other firms in the economy.       Recall that we have

assumed that workers and firms are equally informed about the state of the

economy.

  Given the structure of workers' preferences, (9) alone determines the

employment and hence output decisions of the firms. To understand (9), note

that the revenues earned by firm f of sector s are:
                                                                                    21


(10) R(LE,r) p5q —        qf    E/ q.
where qf —         for all f.
             L59

The key aspect of this expression is that the Cobb-Douglas preferences imply

that each commodity has a constant budget share for each of the consuming

agents in this economy.          Hence, the price in sector s is simply the total

expenditure in that sector, E, divided by the total output in sector s. As

stated earlier, we will concentrate on symmetric Nash equilibria for this

economy. Denote by q the level of output for each firm in sector s if they are

all producing at the same level.              Since the expenditure on sector s is

independent of q, we can solve for the symmetric partial equilibrium in sector

s by finding that level of output per firm in that sector which is a best

response to the output levels chosen by the other firms in that sector given

the level of expenditure on that sector.            To do so, use (10) to solve (9)

yielding


(11) RL(L,r)        OE)2/ Fq— r/z

where p is defined as (1 -       1/F).   Note that (11) holds only when the constraint

that LN is not binding. The variable p will serve as a useful measure of the

market power of firms in the economy. As F , p 1 while p 0 as the industry

approaches monopoly.      Recall that the sectors are symmetric so that p is not

indexed by the sector. Using (11), the price in sector s is simply


(12) Ps      r/pOz.


It is important to note that z depends on prices in other sectors as well as

parameters of preferences so that, in (11) and (12), we index it by s.
                                                                               22

  To characterize the symmetric Nash equilibrium for this economy, note that

(11) and (12) hold for all s. Since z depends on the prices in other sectors,

we can solve for the output price, common to all sectors, using (7). This will

be



             r
(l3)p—
           a l-j9/8


where 9 is a productivity shock (assumed for now to be) common across firms and
sectors.     Note that prices can be determined independent of output levels.

This is a feature of homothetic preferences and constant marginal costs. This

implies that variations in the endowments of outsiders II will cause output but

not prices to change. With these strict assumptions on preferences, the model

is incapable of matching observed cyclical movements in markups as reported in,

for example, Domowitz, Hubbard and Petersen [1986].

     To determine the reaction curve of an arbitrary firm in sector s (given that

all firms are producing the same level of output in the partial Nash

equilibrium), we need to specify the level of expenditure on sector s. Using

the Cobb-Douglas preferences, this is given by


(14) E —
             aFE,
                         +   r
Again note that the summation here is for sectors other than s. Using (12), in

a symmetric Nash equilibrium, (14) can be rewritten as


(15) E5 —    Fp[a5q+ ri].

where —l/Fp—9z/Fr.
                                                                             23

  This is a very appealing expression. It states that the total expenditure on

sector s depends on the level of economic activity in all the other sectors and

is proportional to the endowment of the outsiders. This is similar to a simple

model of income determination in which there are autonomous expenditures and an

expenditure term which depends on the level of economic activity.

  Inserting (15) into (11) implies that

(16) q   —
             aEq+   i;i   —
                                q    +   rtk/Fp.


So the per firm level of output in sector s is a linear function of the

aggregate level of activity in other sectors and the per firm endowments of the

outsiders (in terms of the produced commodity).    For S large enough (so that

each sector is small), (16) implies that the level of output per firm in sector

s is a linear function of the aggregate output level in the economy.

  Figure 2 displays a "reaction curve" for sector s for a given level of

activity in other sectors. Note that this is not literally a "reaction curve"

for a particular firm but rather an expression for the sector specific Nash

equilibrium for given output levels in other firms.     The intercept of this

"reaction curve" is the sector specific level of autonomous expenditures.

  The strategic coniplementarities discussed in the Introduction are also clear

from this expression. As the output levels in other sectors increase, all of

the firms in sector s will expand as well. So even though the firms in a given

sector are producing perfect substitutes, the complementarities are present

between firms across sectors in a symmetric Nash equilibrium. Perhaps this is

a good point to stress that these complementarities are not a product of the

specific demand structure we have assumed beyond the natural assumption that
                         sector s "reaction curve"




S   T/FpS




            Figure   2
                                                                                 24

there are no inferior goods in the economy.        The value of the Cobb-Douglas

preferences is the tractability they generate.

  Since (16) holds for all s, we can use it to compute the output level per

firm in each sector in a symmetric Nash equilibrium. This output level is given

by


               rt/Fp           A
(17) q
              1 -   (S-l)a
where A is the level of autonomous expenditure on the produced good.        Recall

that     is the budget share of the numeraire good and represents the share of

income that leaks out of the income stream connecting the firms in the economy.

  To guarantee that this level of output is feasible, we need to check that

qNO since each firm had available only N workers. This inequality (and hence

the condition that L(I')N) is satisfied as long as M is not too large and      not

too small. We will use (17) as an equation for the equilibrium level of output

even though it contains the price in it. From (13), we know the reduced form of

the price level. Given that p is independent of q, (17) will be a useful

expression.

  Then the level of output given in (17) exceeds ON, then the economy is at

full employment and the expressions derived in this section will not apply.

Each firm will then simply employ all N workers and prices in each sector will

adjust so that markets clear at full employment.

  Finally, and perhaps most importantly, note that the equilibrium levels of

output, employment and prices are actually independent of a number of labor

market variables in this economy: the number of workers N and the bargaining

weight a.     This independence of the equilibrium of the number of workers is

also a property of many efficiency wage models (see, for e.g., Weiss [1980] and
                                                                              25

Yellen [1984]). If the level of per firm output satisfying (17) is less than

N, we have an underemployment equilibrium. Furthermore, increasing the number

of workers in this economy (assuming that they all join a union) will only

increase the unemployment rate and will not alter the form of the optimal

contract between the union and the firm. Again, the optimal contract specifies

employment to obtain the maximal amount of payoffs for the coalition of workers

and the firm and this decision rule is independent of the number of workers N

and the bargaining weight. Therefore, this economy has the property that there

are no forces at work to reduce the rate of unemployment since the agents in

the economy have no incentive to employ the excess labor force.

  In this economy, a coordination failure emerges because prices do not provide

all the necessary information for selecting output levels and firms are unable

to coordinate trades to take advantage of mutually advantageous opportunities.

In Section V of this paper we address the topic of welfare improving actions by

the government to overcome this coordination failure. Before doing so, we

discuss some of the comparative static properties of this model economy.

IV. Comparative Statics

  These models generate interesting multiplier effects from changes in

exogenous variables.   (This point is made by Hart [1982] and Startz [1986] as

well.) From the perspective of attempting to match macroeconomic times series,

these multiplier effects can be rather useful since they create large aggregate

fluctuations from either (relatively small) aggregate shocks or from sector

specific shocks.   Thus, it is not necessary to explain aggregate fluctuations

from aggregate shocks of the same magnitude.

  In addition, these quantity fluctuations arise even though observed movements

in wages and prices may be relatively small.      This arises in these models
                                                                              26

because wages and prices do not completely decentralize allocations.
Employment is determined directly in the labor contract and depends, in part,

on the quantity decisions of other agents in the economy.

  In addition to focusing on the multiplier effects of "small" fluctuations in

exogenous variables, versions of these models which allow for multiple

equilibria (as discussed in Section VI) have an additional property. Changes

in the exogenous variables may alter the set of equilibria in a dramatic way so

that economic activity is changed quite a lot as well. This interpretation of

a multiplier effect rests on the presence of "catastrophic behavior" found in

models of multiple equilibria. As discussed later, this catastrophic behavior

is of additional interest in models of coordination failures because the

equilibria may be Pareto comparable. Hence, a change in an exogenous variable

may have a large effect on observed economic behavior       welfare.

  Finally,     as noted in Hart [1982) and other studies of imperfectly

competitive economies, there is a multiplier effect present in the face of

changes in policy variables.   This will become important in the discussion of

interventions in the following section.

  Expression (17) is quite useful for understanding the multiplier effects

associated with aggregate shocks. Unless stated otherwise, we will assume that

we are starting from an equilibrium in which the full labor force is not

employed. From (17) we see that


(18) dq/dA   l//3

This expression is quite familiar from the simple Keynesian models of income

determination. A change in autonomous expenditure creates a larger change in

the level of output and employment because of the demand interaction across

sectors of this economy.       As each sector expands from the increase in
                                                                             27

autonomous expenditure, the demand curves for the other sectors simultaneously

shift out which leads them to further expand output.    The process converges

because of the non-zero "leakage" effect associated with the consumption of the

non-produced good. This effect is measured by 9.

  From the definition of A, we know that these multiplier effects could be

associated with changes in either M,r, p or F since A depends on all of these

variables. Recall that p is given in (13) and depends on the parameters of

preferences, the productivity shock and the measure of competitiveness i.   So

fluctuations in an economy of this type are due to movements in the aggregate

endowment of the non-produced good, changes in tastes by the outsiders (r),

productivity shocks or changes in the number of active firms.          If one

reinterprets the non-produced good as one which is produced by a competitive

sector(s), then variations in I can be viewed as a form of productivity shock

for that sector.   The point here is that these shocks are magnified by the

demand linkages across sectors of this economy.

  Perhaps more interestingly, this model is also capable of producing aggregate

fluctuations from sector specific shocks. To see this, suppose we define the

autonomous expenditure on sector i by A. One can think of the outsiders as

being split into a number of classes by the type of produced commodity they

consume.   So the autonomous expenditure on sector i measures the demand by

outsiders for the commodity produced in that sector either due to a change in

tastes or endowments.     Suppose that the autonomous demand for sector i

increases. This will again lead to an increase in output by all firms in that

sector. Because of the normality of other goods produced in the economy, some

of the additional income earned by firms and workers in the initial sector will

be spread to other sectors, inducing them to expand as well. Starting from the
                                                                                     28

symmetric Nash equilibrium given in (17), the eQuilibrium change in the output

in sector i due to a change in autonomous expenditure on that sector (computed

from (16)) is given by




            i          1 +           (dq   /dA.)




So we see that the initial effect of a change in autonomous expenditures in

sector i is augmented by spillovers from other sectors.               Furthermore, the

equilibrium changes in output in one of the other sectors is



       dq
   ______          =            . (dq 5/dA.)
                             S7-1         1
       d




This   expression indicates that the demand spillovers from the sector in which

the shock originates leads to output changes in other sectors which then feed

on each other.           So that sector specific shocks will produce positive

correlations in output and employment in this multisector economy. These

sectors are able to expand together because of the presence of unemployed

workers.        If the economy starts at a full employment point (which is possible

for some values of 11, N, F etc.) then these shocks will simply produce

variations in prices.

  This model can also be used to understand the effects of sector specific

shocks to the productivity of labor.               Suppose that sector i experiences a

reduction in productivity (such as a drought in the agricultural sector) so
                                                                               29

that 9. falls. From (12) this will lead to an increase in that sector's price

and (from (11)) a reduction in output and employment in that sector. The price

increase in sector i will influence the prices in other sector through zk for

k7' i.    From (7), the "cost of living" for other sectors will rise due to the

price increase in the sector experiencing the productivity reduction.       (The

strength of this effect will depend on the number of sectors so that as S gets

large each sector will have a small effect on the price index). This increase

in the marginal cost of employment in sectors other than i will lead to a rise

in prices in other sectors (from (9)), so that output and employment will fall

in other sectors as well. Furthermore, the initial reduction in activity in

sector i will spillover to other sectors as described above. Thus an adverse

productivity shock in one sector will create an overall reduction in economic

activity in all sectors. Note that the model predicts that prices (in terms of

the numeraire commodity) will be countercyclical in the face of productivity

shocks.

  It should be noted that the fluctuations in the economy caused by either

sector-specific or aggregate shocks have implications for the welfare of both

workers (the union) and firms.      From   (8) we know that the optimal labor

contract provides a vehicle for the contractants to share risks.     If workers'

are risk averse and firms are risk neutral then from (8) we know that the

compensation level to employed and unemployed workers will be independent of F.

Hence, fluctuations in economic activity will not affect the welfare of workers

in this special case.

  More generally, if the firm is not risk neutral then when the firms profits

are high the payoffs to employed and tmepioyed workers will be high as well.

That is, because of the risk aversion of both   parties, profits and compensation
                                                                                 30

will be positively correlated with the degree of correlation reflecting the

relative degrees of risk aversion of the two parties.3           The point is that

economic downturns - -    caused by an exogenous shock and magnified by the
multiplier effects - -   are   "bad" for all agents in the economy. The presence of

severance pay in the contracts provides for full layoff insurance so that

unemployed workers are not worse off than their employed counterparts.          We

comment later on extensions of the model to reduce the amount of layoff

insurance it predicts.

  These comparative static effects should be contrasted with competitive models

to understand the role of imperfect competition. Long-Plosser [1983] model the

co-movement of output and employment in a multisector economy. In that model,

the correlated behavior is produced by the interaction of demand spillovers

with the ability of sectors to expand output simultaneously. As stressed by

Long-Plosser, the key element in the model is that sectors have the ability to

expand simultaneously and meet increased demand with additional output rather

than price increases.      This is brought about by their focus on productivity

shocks in one sector which allows other sectors to expand j the initial shock

is to a production process whose output is subsequently used in the production

of other commodities. Hence, the key element in the Long-Plosser model is the

presence of technological linkages between sectors.         A sector which is not

technologically connected with other sectors would not be expected to fluctuate

with the rest of the economy.

  In the imperfectly competitive economy described above, the technological

linkages stressed in Long-Plosser is absent and the stress is on the demand

spillovers in the economy. Increases in demand are met by quantity changes to
                                                                              31

the extent that there are unemployed workers in a particular sector. This

occurs for both aggregate and sector specific shocks.

   If some sectors are producing near capacity (in terms of labor utilization)

while others are not, the model would imply that some sectors will meet the

increased demand with price increases while others would respond with output

increases. From (7) and (12), price increases in one sector will spill over to

other sectors. So, we would observe prices increasing in the face of a demand

shock and sectors having idle workers expanding as well.       The comparative

statics discussed above are for the extreme case in which all sectors have idle

workers at the initial equilibrium (i.e (17) holds).

  It should be noted that similar fluctuations in output and employment could

be generated by an economy which is perfectly competitive and workers are

either employed or out of the labor force.     It is possible to construct an

equilibrium in which real wage is bid down to workers reservation wages.     In

such an economy, competitive firms would select employment at the going wage

and this employment level would fluctuate as agents change their Darticipation

decision in the face of shock to the economy. Of course, workers welfare would

be independent of the state since they would be indifferent between working and

not working and firms would always be earning zero profits. Nonetheless, the

time series for output and employment produced by the competitive and
imperfectly competitive economies would look very similar.

  There are a couple of important differences between the predictions of these

models. First, as discussed above, downturns are bad for workers and firms in

the imperfectly competitive economy while agents are indifferent to the level

of economic activity in the competitive model. Second, in both the competitive

and imperfectly competitive models there are regions in the parameter space in
                                                                             32

which an equilibrium with the labor force not fully employed can arise. The

imperfectly competitive economy is more likely to be in the underemployment

region because of the mark-up associated with p<l.     Prices being higher is

similar to having a lower endowment of M which increases the probability that

the equilibrium is in the underemployment region. It is possible to construct

versions of this model (by altering the preferences of workers so that they

only consume produced goods) so that the competitive equilibrium always entails

full employment while the imperfectly competitive equilibrium may still be one

of underemployment.    The presence of imperfect competition increases the

likelihood that we will observe the multiplier effects noted above. Of course,

once the imperfectly competitive economy crosses over to the full employment

region, then it will exhibit price fluctuations rather than quantity
fluctuations.



V. Welfare Issues

  As is common in models of imperfect competition, the equilibrium in this

economy is sub-optimal. The partial equilibrium result of underemployment of

resources carries over to this economy as well.    There is a gap between the

marginal rate of substitution and costs in this equilibrium. A planner could

produce a Pareto dominating allocation by engineering a simultaneous increase

in the level of activity in all sectors of this economy.    The decentralized

economy does not realize these gains since the private agents have no means to

coordinate their activity. The competitive equilibrium for this economy can be

determined simply by setting p—i.

 As we discuss later, there is a second type of inefficiency that arises in

the presence of multiple Nash equilibria which are Pareto ranked.     In that
                                                                             33

case, it is possible to be at an equilibrium which is Pareto dominated by

another equilibrium. Furthermore, economic downturns in this economy represent

"bad times" for workers and firms.     As a consequence, we can inquire into

government policies which can stabilize the fluctuations in the economy and

support the Pareto optimal outcomes.

  Here we will consider government policies of two distinct types: tax and

spending policies such as those considered by Hart (1982] and direct
interventions in labor markets including the share contracts discussed by

Weitzman [1983,19851. We also discuss the impact of unemployment insurance in

this economy. Before proceeding to these policies, it is useful to recall the

nature of the fundamental problem of this economy.      Prices do not provide

adequate signals for the decentralization of resources here due to the presence

of imperfect competition. As a consequence, coordination failures emerge as

the firm-union coalitions behave in a non-cooperative manner. The government

can take actions to assist in this coordination by providing a means for the

agents to cooperate.       This is close to a planning solution and may be

undesirable for reasons outside of this model. Alternatively, the government

can use its tax and expenditure policies to influence the non-cooperative

equilibrium.   That is the approach taken here where the government selects

policies which the private economy takes as given in determining the non-

cooperative equilibrium.

  Government tax and expenditure policies work here to the extent that

government spending patterns differ from those of private agents. Recall that

workers and firm spend a portion B of their income on the non-produced good.

This is income that "leaks out" of the income expenditure stream and reduces

the level of demand for produced goods in the economy.     As demonstrated by
                                                                              34

Hart, the government can therefore influence the overall level of economic

activity through a balanced budget multiplier. The government simply taxes the

workers and firms and spends the proceeds equally over all the produced goods

but does not spend any of the tax revenues on the non-produced good.

  To see how this works specifically, suppose that the government taxes income

(both profits and compensation) at the rate t and spends the income equally on

all sectors. So the total expenditure on sector s, E, is now determined by



(19) E —
            aFE    pq(l-t) + rI +tFE, P/(S-l)


This expression is similar to (15) except that the income spent on sector s by

other sectors is a proportion of income net of taxes. In addition, there is a

new term in this expression which comes from the government expenditure of

total tax revenues earned in other sectors equally on each sector. That is,

assume that the government does not spend tax dollars earned in one sector on

the output produced in that sector. As long as a<l/(S-1), (19) is an increasing

function of t. From the specification of preferences, a(S-1) + — 1.     Hence,

  < l/(S-l) as long as 3>O.     So, the government can influence the level of

economic activity from a balanced tax and spending policy because, in contrast

to private agents, it returns each dollar taxed to the system. Note that this

policy affects the slopes of the "sector reaction curves".

  To pursue a stabilization policy of this type the government needs to set its

tax and spending levels for each realization of r.           In the event that

realizations of P are not costlessly and instantaneously observable, this type

of stabilization may prove difficult and/or costly.
                                                                                 35

  To fully specify and evaluate this policy of tax and expenditures, we must be

more specific about the disposition of the commodities that the government

purchases.   This will be important in the ultimate evaluation of government

policies but the point here is that such policies can influence the overall

level of economic activity. So that an allocation which Pareto dominates the

imperfectly competitive equilibriua is obtainable by a government balanced

budget spending program and the appropriate distribution of the commodities

purchased by the government.

  As an alternative to fiscal policy, the government could undertake policies

which influence labor markets directly. That is, one can interpret the tax and

spending policies described above as operating through the demand side and

consider other policies which influence the equilibrium through input markets.

  Two such policies will be considered here: unemployment insurance (UI) and

share contracts. We know from the extant partial equilibrium contract models

that altering the level UI will affect the optimal contract. Increases in UI

make layoffs less costly to the workers-firm coalition and hence produce

underemployment.   That result will clearly hold in this model as well.      In

addition, it is important to note that the multi-sector model contains a

spillover effect not brought out in the partial equilibrium analysis.

  Suppose that the government offers unemployed workers a payment of x units of

numeraire and finances these payments through lump sum taxes. Because of the

homotheticity of preferences, these taxes and transfers have no impact on the

level of demand in each sector. Further, suppose that individual worker-firm

coalitions view their tax liability as outside their influence so that they tax

the lump sum tax and the level of x as given when they design their contract.
                                                                                   36

The conditions describing the optimal contract are again to equalize the income

of employed and unemployed workers so that

                        U +
           e
          w z -   r=   (w   x)z
As a consequence, the employment rule is to equate RL (     ) with   x +r/z. So the

introduction of the unemployment insurance reduces the cost of unemployment to

the worker-firm coalition and hence reduces the level of output and employment

by each firm for given levels of output for other firms. With x>O, exercising

market power is easier for the workers-firm coalition.

  If this UI program is instituted in only one sector, the reduction in this

sectors output will spillover to other sectors through the normality of

consumption as stressed above. That is, reaction curve (recall Figure 2) for

the sector in which UI is introduced will shift down and other sectors will

follow by contracting their output and employment. Thus UI creates lower

employment economy wide even though it is only present in one sector.             Of

course, the introduction of a UI program economy-wide will have larger effects.

  Clearly, the point is that in the presence of severance payments by firms

provided in optimal contracts, UI is not socially desirable.         This model adds

to this partial equilibrium statement the importance of spillover effects.

  As an alternative form of intervention, we can consider the government's

ability to institute a particular form of contracting structure in the labor

market.        Weitzman [1983,1985] has advocated the introduction of share

contracts as a vehicle for providing automatic stabilization of the economy.

In contrast to a wage system (in which wages are fixed, severance pay is

excluded and the employment level is chosen by firms), a share system has the

property that compensation per worker is a decreasing function of the number of

workers at the firm.        As a consequence, firms are induced to hire unemployed
                                                                             37

workers if the compensation per worker falls fast enough. Weitzman argues that

it is possible to construct a share system which has better macroeconomic

properties than the wage system. This proposition is also investigated in a

model of imperfect competition similar to the one presented here in Cooper

[1986]

  One of the weaknesses in this argument is the lack of a model predicting the

wage system as an optimal contract. Thus, even though the wage system may be

dominated by a share system, we do not know that the share system dominates an

optimal (from the viewpoint of the workers-firm) labor contract. With that

question in mind, we can introduce share contracts into the present model

(which is based on privately optimal labor contracts) to determine if they can

support a Pareto dominant equilibrium.

  To do a full analysis of this question would lead us too far afield and will

be left for future research.      It should be noted that introducing share

contracts into this model makes clear that this alternative compensation system

differs from optimal contracts in two ways.      First, the compensation rule

differs from the privately optimal rule in that it will not satisfy conditions

for efficient risk sharing.     Second, the optimal labor contract does not

specify employment on the firm's labor demand curve but instead determines

employment directly. The share system, instead, stipulates that employment is

demand determined.

  In light of these two deviations, one may wonder how share contracts can be

beneficial.   The point of the argument is that privately optimal labor

contracts are not necessarily socially optimal in the presence of imperfectly

competitive product markets.      Firm-union coalitions establish employment

without taking the effects of these decisions on others into account. Hence
                                                                                   38

their may be room for socially beneficial adjustments in the terms of

compensation schemes in individual labor contracts to stabilize employment and

output.   Of course, to the extent that share contracts do not satisfy the

conditions for privately optimal contracts, the enforcement costs of such a

compensation scheme may be prohibitive.



VI. Extensions and other Applications

 A. Multiple Equilibria

  The model presented here has a unique Nash equilibrium.               One of the

interesting features of other models of coordination failures is the

possibility of multiple equilibria which can be Pareto ranked.              While a

competitive model (satisfying the conditions of the First Fundamental Welfare

Theorem) can have multiple equilibria, these are Pareto non-comparable.

Examples of economies exhibiting multiple equilibria are presented in Heller

[1985], Kiyotaki [1985] and Cooper-John [1986].    Heller presents a method of

constructing examples of imperfectly competitive economies with multiple
equilibria by allowing a rich structure to demands -   - in   contrast to the simple

Cobb-Douglas economy studied here. Kiyotaki and Cooper-John both use some non-

convexities in technology to generate the multiplicity.

  The contracting model studied here could be amended to also generate multiple

equilibria.        This would require adjustments in either technology or
preferences, which, in light of the aforementioned papers, would lead to the

desired results.

  These examples are interesting because they generate a different

type of coordination failure.      Economies can get stuck at a low level

equilibrium with full knowledge that other, non-cooperative, equilibria exist
                                                                               39

which Pareto dominate the initial equilibrium.       Yet there are no forces of

adjustment in the non-cooperative economy. From the viewpoint of comparative

statics, as emphasized in Cooper-John, it is possible to see discontinuities in

economic activity as the exogenous variables are continuously varied. There is

thus an element of "catastrophe theory" operating here in that these jumps are

not likely to occur but are quite pronounced when the set of exogenous

parameters passes through one of the "critical points."

  There is a very simple way of altering the present model so that it displays

a continuum of equilibria. Suppose that we simply assume that the non-produced

good is absent from the model - -   so   we set both M and 48 equal to zero. As a

consequence, the level of autonomous expenditure is zero and reaction curves

have unitary slope. Hence there will be a continuum of equilibria indexed by

the level of economic activity and welfare.         This type of economy, which

resembles that analyzed by Bryant [1983], is clearly quite special.



  B. Other Preference Structures

  The model in this paper is made quite tractable by the Cobb-Douglas
preferences used here. Because these preferences generate demand curves which

are linear in income, the resulting reaction curves for the product market game

are quite easy to analyze. Hart [1982] uses homothetic preferences as well and

we could generalize the model to that setting quite easily. The Cobb-Douglas

preferences also imply that a unitary elasticity of demand.

  Suppose that we consider alternative demand structure. As long as we remain

within the class of homothetic preferences, the elasticity of demand will be

independent of income so that the mark-up of price, over marginal cost, will be

independent of the level of economic activity.        So, as in the Cobb-Douglas
                                                                            40

economy, we can decompose the problem into determining the price level and the

level of output independently.        If we allow demand to have a constant

elasticity other than unity, then the price/marginal cost margin will reflect

that elasticity and our analysis of the output game will not be altered. These

models will not generate the prediction of a procyclical price/marginal cost

margin unless the price elasticity of demand falls as income rises or the

number of firms is countercyclical.

  For the sake of tractability of the theoretical model, going beyond these

simple specifications seems hazardous.     It is possible to work on a more

general version of the problem to study the problem of existence and welfare

properties without attempting any of the calculations discussed here. The main

virtue of a more general demand structure, as demonstrated by Heller, is the

possibility of generating multiple equilibria.

  In a similar vein, one can complicate the present model with a richer

specification of technology. As noted earlier, some form of increasing returns

can generate interesting multiple equilibria. Beyond not, nothing seems to be

gained by moving away from constant returns to scale.

  C. Dynamics

  The present model is static and this is a drawback if one wishes to study

intertemporal coordination failures and make any attempt at matching time

series. An intertemporal model would also facilitate a study of propagation

effects over time from the spillover effects across sectors. Furthermore, the

role of beliefs in these results would become clearer in an intertemporal

setting.   Finally, to the extent that the number of firms per sector has been

taken as a given, an intertemporal model would force one into being more

specific about the role of entry and exit in these models.
                                                                               41

  It is not difficult to present the ideas of this paper in an overlapping

generations structure. The multisector structure can be retained following

Townsend [1980] and we may even wish to introduce some form of spatial

separation to guarantee that money is demanded. The numeraire commodity is now

clearly money and is held by individuals as the sole store of value.      Agents

would have demands only for the produced goods as money yields no direct

utility. Workers and firms use their savings from youth to finance consumption

in old age. Hence, the outsiders in the current model become the old agents,

holding nominal money balances, in the overlapping generations model. The

analysis of the static model presented above appears to hold with one important

exception.   The comparative static results associated with changes in the

endowment of the numeraire do not hold since variations in M should be

interpreted as changes in the nominal money supply.       Thus the model has to

provide some reason for changes in the nominal money supply to have real

effects.

  The overlapping generations model, as stated here, allows a dynamic
representation of this economy but does not introduce any interesting

intertemporal coordination issues.    Extensions of the model to allow for

production lags, the holding of inventories and savings/investment decisions

will be interesting as well.

  D. Contracting Under Asymmetric Information

  The model presented in this paper has the feature that workers are
indifferent about their employment status.      There is nothing in the model to

prevent contractants from fully insuring workers from layoffs.            As a
consequence, times of low output and employment are shared by both employed and

unemployed workers.   To the extent that the joint provision of public and
                                                                             42

private unemployment insurance is thought to be less than perfect, this model

would predict that states of low economic activity would be particularly bad

for unemployed workers.   Explanations for the absence of severance payments

presumably lie in the presence of asymmetric information about workers' leisure

time (see Kahn [1985]) or in moral hazard problems associated with worker

search patterns (see Ito [1984]).     It would be straightforward to include

private information about the value of leisure, r, in the model as a source of

imperfect severance payments. The search problem of unemployed workers would

be more interesting though as this generates another interaction between

aggregates and individual choice variables since the return to search depends

on aggregate variables which influence the probability of locating a trading

partner
  This model of demand spillovers is also useful in stressing the aggregate

implications of asymmetries of information at the worker-firm level. Suppose

that we introduce some asymmetric information about technology into the

contracting problem in one of these sectors.   If the structure of preferences

is chosen correctly, this asymmetric information can create a form of

underemployment.   In the model of demand spillovers, this will influence the

level of expenditures on other sectors and causes an underemployment of

resources in other parts of the economy as well.     Grossman, Hart and Maskin

[1983] discuss this for a competitive economy (see their Proposition 2) and it

holds in this imperfectly competitive economy as well.5

  E. Industry and Union Structure

  As noted earlier, this model takes as given the structure of firms and unions

and focuses on the equilibrium of a non-cooperative game. The paper provides

no information about the source of this particular structure: i.e. it excludes
                                                                              43

a theory of entry/exit and a theory of union representation. It should be made

clear that variations in the structure of firms or unions will have dramatic

effects on these results.

  Suppose that we vary the number of firms in a particular sector. Reducing

the number of firms in sector s will increase the mark-up in that sector and

will decrease the level of output in that sector. This is quite similar to the

comparative static effect of reducing autonomous expenditure on a single

sector. This reduction of output will again "spillover" into the other sectors

causing an economy wide response. There is a multiplier effect associated with

the entry and exit decisions of firms. If firms do not contemplate the effect

of their decisions on activities in other sectors, this externality may imply

that entry and exit decisions by firms are socially inefficient. (This is only

a conjecture which needs to be understood within a model of entry/exit.) Note

further that such a model would include in it a state variable (the number of

firms) whose movement would have large effects on the underlying equilibrium of

the economy.

  Furthermore, the structure of firm ownership across sectors is important. If

shareholders are dispersed in their preferences and own shares of all firms,

perhaps the activities of these shareholders can coordinate the output and

employment decisions of Linus across this multisector economy.6

  The structure of union representation has been set exogenously as well.

Union membership has been set at N even though it is possible that this is not

the optimal size of the union. Alternative mod1s of union representation and

bargaining could be analyzed as well.       To some extent these alternative

theories can be accommodated by considering variations in the bargaining weight

a. If the union has no power, then the bargaining weight is such that workers
                                                                              44

expected utility equals their value of leisure and they are indifferent between

participating in the labor market and simply enjoying their leisure.

  Instead of considering the union-firm contracting problem, we could have

analyzed a competitive ex ante contracting market in which the "price" of labor

is the expected utility from accepting a contract. In that setting, the

workforce of a firm would be endogenous. In some cases, an equilibrium would

emerge in which some workers do not join a firm and the expected utility of

workers equals the value of leisure. In other situations, firms may contract

with all available workers. These possibilities can be accomodated through an

appropriate value of the bargaining weight in the model used in this paper.

  More importantly, the model has also assumed that union representation does

not cross over firms or sectors. If a single union represents more than one

firm in a sector, that union can coordinate the employment actions of those

firms through the labor contract. The economy operates as if there were fewer

non-cooperative firms. Similarly, a union representing workers in many sectors

of the economy, can help to coordinate the output decisions and avoid some of

the coordination failures discussed here.

  A precise investigation of these issues is left for further research.

Nonetheless, it is clearly important that we better understand the factors

determining union representation and industrial structure as a basis for the

coordination failures discussed here.       There may be a wide variety of
mechanisms for coordinating decisions that have been excluded from the

analysis.   These mechanisms need to be better understood as a means of

predicting the structure of coalitions in the economy and hence the importance

of coordination failures in non-cooperative games.
                                                                              45
VII. Conclusions

  The goal of this paper has been to provide a framework of analysis for

coordination failures in imperfectly competitive economies.     In contrast to

other papers in this area, this paper includes a representation of labor

markets through a contracting framework.         This approach provides some
perspective on the manner in which adjustments in the labor market influence

the operation of product markets.     To the extent that labor contracts bind

workers and firms into a coalition that seeks to gain its share of surplus,

there are no forces at work in labor markets to move the economy towards a

efficient outcome. The model was then used to discuss some comparative static

properties of imperfectly competitive economies and to conduct some policy

experiments.

  Section VI of the paper was an attempt to provide a road map for further

research. The topics discussed in that section represent important extensions

of this framework.    The goal of this paper, in addition to analyzing the

contracting equilibrium in an imperfectly competitive economy, was to provide a

framework for considering these additional problems.
                                                                             46




                                   Footnotes




1. The term "strategic complementarities is used by ulow, Geanakoplos and
Klernperer [1985]. See Cooper-John [1986] for a discussion of its macroeconomic
implications.

2. Hart [1982] notes that these results are dependent on the labor supply
decisions of workers.

3. From (8), if both U(• ) and V(.) are strictly concave then zir and zw' must
vary in the same direction when elements of r change.

4. See Pissarides [1985] and Hosios [1986] as examples.

5. In addition, Kahn and Mookherjee [1986] present a private information model
in which the demand spillovers determine the extent to which incentive
compatibility conditions create inefficiencies in output and employment.

6. Shleifer and Vishny [1986] discuss the coordinating role of stock markets in
a model of imperfect competition with private information.
                                                                              47

                                    References


Azariadis, C. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria," Journal of
  Political Economy, 83 (1975), 1183-1202.

Baily, M.N. "Wages and Enpioyment under Uncertain Demand," Review of Economic
  Studies, 41 (1974), 37-50.

Blanchard, 0. and N. Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate Demand
  Externalities and the Real Effects of Nominal Money," NBER Working Paper
  #1770, 1985.

Bryant, J. "A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics. 98 (1983), 525-29.

Bulow, J., J. Geanakoplos and P. Klemperer. "Multimarket Oligopoly: Strategic
  Substitutes and Complements," Journal of Political Economy, 93 (1985), 488-
511.

Cooper, R. "Sharing Some Thoughts on Weitzman's The Share Economy"NBER
  Working Paper #1734, revised July 1986.

________ and A. John."         Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
  Models," Cowles Foundation Working Paper #745R, revised September 1986.

Diamond, P. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium," Journal of
  Political Economy, 90 (1982), 881-94.

Domowitz, I., R. Hubbard and B. Petersen, "Business Cycles and the Relationship
  between Concentration and Price-Cost Margins," Rand Journal of Economics. 17
(1986) 1- 17.

Drazen, A. "A Rational Expectations Keynesian Model with Price Flexibility,"
  Working Paper #2-85, Foerder Institute for Economic Research, Tel-Aviv
  University, 1985.

Grossman, S.; 0. Hart and E. Maskin, "Unemployment with Observable Aggregate
  Shocks," Journ1 of Political Economy, 91 (l983),907-928.

Hall, R. "The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost," Stanford University,
  Working Paper #E-86-24, 1986.

Hart, 0. "A Model of I.mpeTfect Competition with Keynesian Features," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics. 97 (1982), 109-38.

Heller, W. "Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with Applications to
  Effective Demand," University of California at San Diego, mimeo, 1985.

Hosios, A. "Layoffs, Recruitment and Interfirm Mobility," Journal of Labcr
  Economics.   forthcoming, 1986.
                                                                              48

Howitt, P. "Transactions Costs in the Theory of Unemployment," American
  Economic Review, 75 (1985), 88-101.

Ito, T. "Implicit Contracts with Costly Search: The Incentive Constraint in
  Severance Payments," University of Minnesota, mimeo, 1984.

Kahn, C. "Optimal Severance Pay with Incomplete Information," Journal of
  Political Economy, 93 (1985) ,435-51.

_________and D. Mookherjee, "A General Equilibrium Contracting Model with
  Keynesian Features," mimeo, 1986.

Kiyotaki,   N.  "Implications of Multiple Expectational Equilibria Under
  Monopolistic Competition," Harvard University, mimeo, 1985.

Long, J. and C. Plosser, "Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy.
  91 (1983), 39-69.

Pissarides, C. "Short-run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies,
     and Real Wages," American Economic Review, 75 (1985), 676-690.

Roberts, J.    "General Equilibrium Analysis of Imperfect Competition: An
  Illustrative Example," Stanford University, mimeo, 1984.

_____________   "Involuntary Unemployment and Imperfect Competition:A Game
  Theoretic Macro Model," Stanford University, mimeo, 1986.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, "The Role of the Stock Market in Coordinating
 Macroeconomic Activity," mimeo, 1986.

Startz,   R.   "Monopolistic  Competition as a Foundation         for Keynesian
  Macroeconomic Models," University of Washington, mimeo, 1986.

Townsend, R. "Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents," in Models of
  Monetary Econoiiiies, ed. by J. Kareken and N. Wallace, Federal Reserve Bank
  of Minneapolis, 1980, 265-304.

Weitzman, M. "Increasing Returns and the Foundations of Unemployment Theory,"
  Economic Journal, 92 (1982), 787-804.

_____________  "Some Macroeconomic Implications of Alternative Compensation
  Schemes," Economic Journal, 93 (1983), 763-83.

____________   "The Simple Macroeconomics of Profit Sharing,"American Economic
  Review, 75 (1985), 937-53.

Weiss, A. "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 88 (1980), 526-38.

Yellen, J.     "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment," American Economic
  Review,Pnpers nncl Proceec1ijig,, 74 (1984), 200-205.
