                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS OF EDUCATION:
                           PROGRESS AND POSSIBILITIES

                                       Adam M. Lavecchia
                                            Heidi Liu
                                        Philip Oreopoulos

                                       Working Paper 20609
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20609


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




We are extremely grateful to Ben Castleman, Stefano DellaVigna, Angela Duckworth, Alex Haslam,
Mitchell Hoffmann, Kory Kroft, David Laibson, Susan Mayer, Helena Skyt Nielsen, Uros Petronijevic,
Aloysius Siow, Mel Stephens, and Ryan Webb for providing helpful and detailed comments. Any
errors or omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Adam M. Lavecchia, Heidi Liu, and Philip Oreopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Behavioral Economics of Education: Progress and Possibilities
Adam M. Lavecchia, Heidi Liu, and Philip Oreopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 20609
October 2014
JEL No. D03,D87,I2,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

Behavioral economics attempts to integrate insights from psychology, neuroscience, and sociology
in order to better predict individual outcomes and develop more effective policy. While the field has
been successfully applied to many areas, education has, so far, received less attention – a surprising
oversight, given the field's key interest in long-run decision-making and the propensity of youth to
make poor long-run decisions. In this chapter, we review the emerging literature on the behavioral
economics of education. We first develop a general framework for thinking about why youth and
their parents might not always take full advantage of education opportunities. We then discuss how
these behavioral barriers may be preventing some students from improving their long-run welfare.
We evaluate the recent but rapidly growing efforts to develop policies that mitigate these barriers,
many of which have been examined in experimental settings. Finally, we discuss future prospects
for research in this emerging field.


Adam M. Lavecchia                                 Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Toronto                             University of Toronto
150 St. George Street                             150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                               Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada                                            Canada
adam.lavecchia@mail.utoronto.ca                   and NBER
                                                  philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca
Heidi Liu
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
hliu@fas.harvard.edu
"The roots of education are bitter, but the fruit is sweet" -Aristotle (384 BC-322 BC)

I. Introduction
         A six-year old does not go to school because she wants a better life. She must be
persuaded that school is fun now, or given no better option. That's because her brain is
not yet well-developed.1 While parts of her brain corresponding to motor and sensory
processing mature early, higher cognitive areas like the prefrontal cortex, which underlie
executive functions such as planning, working memory and self control, take longer to
improve.2 Without them, the six-year old is simply not conditioned to think about long-
run consequences from immediate actions.
         Over time and with experience, a remarkable process of neural circuitry
expansion and pruning occurs that makes it possible to hold information in mind before
deciding what to do with it. 3 The cortex (outer layers that primarily distinguish the
primate brain) thicken as neural connections proliferate.4 Then, rarely used connections
are selectively trimmed, improving efficiency, while others are grouped together,
improving specialization.5 Nerve cell conductivity also improves, allowing information
to pass more quickly from one part of the brain to another so that the brain becomes more
interconnected. 6 Impulses, feelings, and distractions can then be held in check while
imagining the future before reacting.
         Until recently, many neuroscientists believed this maturation process occurred
largely before puberty.7 Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated otherwise: maturation
takes more than twenty years, with the circuitry responsible for executive function being
among the very last areas to fully develop.8 9 Preferences, therefore, change with age,


1
  Excellent overviews of brain development are provided by Fuster, 2002; Romine and Reynolds, 2005;
Teffer and Semendeferi, 2012; Johnson et al., 2009; and in the book, 'The Adolescent Brain,' edited by
Reyna et al., 2012.
2
  Romine and Reynolds, 2005; Teffer and Semendeferi, 2012.
3
  Romine and Reynolds, 2005.
4
  Giedd et al., 2012.
5
  Fuster, 2012.
6
  Giedd et al., 2012; Chick and Reyna, 2012.
7
  Fuster, 2002.
8
  Giedd et al., 2012; Romine and Reynolds, 2005; Fuster, 2012; Teffer and Semendeferi, 2012
9
  Late development in executive function also helps explain a declining time preference for immediate
monetary gains against larger later gains (Giedd et al., 2012). Several researchers have found, starting as
far back as age 10 until age 30, a steady decline in people's willingness to forgo a fixed monetary future

                                                      2
and children spend most - if not all - of their school years with less interest in the future
than their future adult selves.10 The timing is unfortunate, given the many important long-
term investments that can occur during this period.
        Teenagers are particularly more susceptible to overemphasizing the present due to
their more fully developed limbic system, a mid-brain area which registers desires for
immediate rewards and pleasure.11 The limbic system is highly sensitive to monetary,
novel, and social rewards.12 It also reacts more independently from other systems when
in states of high emotional arousal or conflict -- states that occur more frequently in
teenage years.13 While brain systems associated with higher order critical thinking skills
also undergo a rapid expansion childhood, they remain unrefined and less integrated until
adulthood. Many neuroscientists suggest that the rapid development of the limbic system
relative to executive function systems contributes to the observed increase in pleasure-
seeking and risk-taking behavior.14
        Our tendency to overemphasize the present when making decisions involving
immediate desires against long-term, incremental and uncertain benefits dissipates with
age but does not go away. Even as adults, there is evidence that the tradeoff between
immediate outcomes compared to distant ones is implemented in neural systems that
yield hyperbolic discounting. 15 A substantial research literature has firmly established
that, in a variety of settings, adult responses deviate from those predicted by a time-
consistent intertemporal utility model that assumes a constant discount rate: 16 future
gains are discounted more than future losses; small changes to outcomes are discounted
more than large changes;17 small probability events, when emphasized, are discounted
less than when not emphasized; and responses depend on context, emotional state18 and




amount for a smaller immediate amount (Steinberg et al., 2009; Green, Fry, and Myerson, 1994; Stanovich
et al., 2012).
10
   Read and Read, 2004.
11
   Chapman et al., 2012; Galvan, 2012.
12
   Giedd et al., 2012.
13
   Galvan, 2012.
14
   Atkins et al., 2012; Schneider et al., 2012.
15
   McClure et al., 2004; Kable and Glimcher, 2007; 2010.
16
   Frederick et al., 2002; Stanovich et al., 2012.
17
   Frederick et al, 2002.
18
   Rick and Loewenstein, 2008.

                                                   3
perceived social identity.19 20 Sometimes we do not even try to think in the long-term,
relying instead on rules of thumb or past habits.21
        The emerging field of behavioral economics attempts to integrate research from
psychology, neuroscience, and sociology in order to better understand individual decision
making and to develop policies that address the shortcomings in our decision-making
processes. While classical economics often assumes that individuals always make correct
short- and long-run trade-offs (ex ante), behavioral economics does not. Instead, the field
acknowledges the possibility that deviations from time-consistent preferences, due to
cognitive and perceptual aspects of our brain's architecture, may lead to suboptimal
outcomes. 22 Behavioral economics seeks not to reject the standard intertemporal
decision-making model but to enrich it by incorporating more realistic assumptions that
sometimes lead to profound differences in predicted actions, including those that are not
in an individual's long-run best interest.
         The field has attracted wide and growing attention, both for helping explain
seemingly irrational outcomes and for its policy implications.23 Compared to traditional
programs with the same goals, interventions that draw from insights in behavioral
economics may be more cost-effective, given that the research suggests that even small
changes in the way choices are presented or in the way information is conveyed can lead
to large changes in behavior. A prototypical example concerns saving for retirement.
When deciding about whether to start saving for retirement, standard economic models
assume that individuals are forward looking, are able to forecast how much they will
need to save (or have access to services that help them do this), and face little difficulty
following through with their plans. Several studies note, however, that the behavior of at
least some people deviates from this model.24 Simply changing the default action, from
having to opt-into pension plans to being automatically enrolled, or requiring individuals
to make an active decision regarding their contributions, increases savings significantly.25


19
   Benjamin, Choi and Strickland, 2010.
20
   Galvan, 2012.
21
   Stanovich et al., 2012.
22
   DellaVigna, 2009.
23
   Madrian, 2014.
24
   Benartzi and Thaler, 2007.
25
   Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian, 2010; Carroll et al, 2009.

                                                     4
Other areas in which behavioral economics has been actively applied include finance,
health and law.26
        One discipline that has received less attention from behavioral economists is
education. This is surprising to us, given the field's key interest in long-run decision
making and the propensity of youth to make poor long-run decisions. Economic models
usually describe education as a well-thought-out investment: if students exert little effort
in school, it is because they feel it is optimal to do so. 27 Clearly, this outcome need not
be the case for a six-year old, and the slower development of the cortex suggests it need
not be the case for a teenager either.
        Education outcomes, ranging from performance on standardized tests to high
school and postsecondary attainment, are determined by many factors that include
parental inputs, school inputs and environmental factors. But perhaps just as important
are inputs from students themselves. Paying attention in class, doing homework,
completing assignments on time, and attending lectures or tutorials are all important
determinants of student success. While parents and teachers may play a significant role in
the extent to which these investments are undertaken, actions by students themselves
ultimately determine the effectiveness of these inputs. These investments begin at early
ages; the implication is that actions taken by as early as primary or middle school may
have an important impact on later outcomes, especially if learning is cumulative. As a
result, a serious consideration of the role of students in the production of education
outcomes, even at an early age, is fundamental to both understanding differences in
outcomes across students and for designing effective policies.
        Overall, the area of education is a fruitful environment in which researchers and
policy makers should consider possible deviations from the traditional human capital
investment model and how behavioural economics might explain these deviations. This
paper synthesizes the recent and growing literature on the behavioral economics of
education and, in doing so, encourages others to recognize opportunities for further
research. We argue that brain development over time and environmental context play an
important role in determining educational outcomes and that education itself may affect

26
   DellaVigna, 2009; Diamond and Varitiiainen, 2012; Thaler, 2005; Thaler and Sunstein, 2008; Sunstein,
2000, Hough, 2013.
27
   Becker, 1962.

                                                   5
brain development and, therefore, individuals' preferences. We discuss how policies that
make learning opportunities easier, continually remind students of long-term goals, teach
strategies to develop self-control, and encourage youth to take pride in their own skill
development are promising approaches for helping foster academic achievement.28
        With these ideas in mind, in Section II we describe a general framework for
thinking about why youth may not take full advantage of education opportunities. We
summarize specific psychological barriers that may get in the way of realizing lifetime
gains. In Section III, we identify particular educational outcomes worth encouraging,
such as attainment, attendance, and homework. Section IV reviews the recent but rapidly
growing efforts to develop policies that address behavioral barriers, many of which have
been examined in experimental settings.            We conclude in Section V by discussing
prospects and possibilities for making further progress in this emerging field.




II. Barriers to Treating Education as Investment


        In considering why some individuals may not necessarily treat education as an
investment, we find it helpful to conceptualize the process of long-term decision making
as involving two broad systems – one that is forward looking and one that is not. 29
Economists often assume that individuals only use a rational, forward-looking system to
maximize lifetime welfare given various resource constraints. While this simplifying

28
  Schneider and Caffray, 2012.
29 Recent neuroscientific evidence rejects the overly-dichotomous notion that there are separate,
competing, neural systems for processing immediate vs. delayed rewards (Kable and Glimcher, 2007;
2010; Glimcher and Fehr, 2014). Instead, it is increasingly recognized that multiple neurobiological
systems interact with each other to yield hyperbolic discounting, and this might arise from
neurobiological constraints (possibly in the interaction between multiple systems). The distinction is
not important for our policy discussion. We have chosen a framework that highlights that the
process of valueing immediate outcomes is different from the process of evaluating (much) later ones
(Glimcher, 2014). We do not require that two separate neural values systems compete with one
another, only that the systems which implement the inter-temporal tradeoff are not yet fully
developed prior to adulthood, and this leads to behaviour or preferences which change with
development. This work also distinguishes between overemphasizing the present versus
overemphasizing outcomes that happen sooner rather than later. In an 'As Soon As Possible' (ASAP)
model, subjective values of outcomes are steeply discounted relative to the soonest currently
available reward (Kable and Glimcher, 2010). Since the intertemporal decisions we focus on trade-
off immediate costs for longer-term, uncertain benefits, the implications of both models are very
similar.

                                                  6
assumption helps in many settings, research from neuroscience and psychology shows it
can lead us astray in other settings, especially in cases where youth, still in cognitive
development, are making the decisions.
           Framing the discussion in terms of the dual system approach is a useful way to
think about how the development of the brain interacts with current neuro-biolgocial
evidence for how decision-making is implemented. The current evidence suggests a
model for inter-temporal choice in which the brain produces subjective values for
different outcomes, these values can be measured on a single common scale, and the
largest-valued outcome chosen (Glimcher, 2014). However evidence for signals can be
found both in cortical areas (the medial pre-frontal cortex) and in the limbic system (the
striatum), and it is still unclear how these signals interact in the course of a decision. How
these different signals are integrated across cortex and the striatum, possibly in the face
of constraints and/or the state of development, can yield distant outcomes which are
discounted and perhaps even ignored depending on a number of factors, including
salience, stress, distractions, and age. 30 The discounting or ignorance of long-term
consequences is particularly useful for describing suboptimal education behavior. For the
remainder of the chapter, it will be helpful to keep in mind four key implications from
this model: (1) some students focus too much on the present; (2) some rely too much on
routine; (3) some students focus too much on negative identities; and (4) mistakes are
more likely to occur with many options or with little information. We discuss each
implication in turn.




1) Some students focus too much on the present


           Assessing how you feel this instant is much easier than assessing how you expect
to feel 10 years from now. Whereas System 1 quickly and intuitively gauges current
feelings, System 2 is tasked with anticipating how one will feel in the future. This means
that immediate costs associated with investments that yield future payoffs are salient and
relatively easy to asses. On the other hand, future feelings seem vague and uncertain..

30
     Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013; Mani et al., 2013.

                                                         7
The imbalance can lead to myopia, with System 1 downplaying the importance of the
future and overemphasizing the present. System 1 also evaluates probabilities based on
its assessment of what it finds to be salient and most important in the present. 31 In
contrast, System 2 is more deliberate and weighs current and future benefits differently
than System 1. The tendency to emphasize the present relative to the future varies both
across people and within individuals, depending of factors such as stress, distractions or
cognitive development.32
        The differences between System 1 and System 2 in their weighting of current and
future expected costs and benefits can potentially explain why individuals make a variety
of poor economic choices. In the System 1 and System 2 framework, individuals may act
myopically or in a manner that appears time-inconsistent: System 1 may react quickly
and decide against a trade-off with a cost today and a benefit tomorrow, especially if the
current cost is particularly salient, but a trade-off that requires the same cost tomorrow
and a benefit the following period may require more abstract and deliberate thought for
System 2 to peruse. The outcomes that result from this decision-making process are
consistent with individuals having quasi-hyperbolic preferences, with System 1 and
System 2 thinking underlying these preferences.33 Recent empirical evidence of myopic
behavior stemming from this System 1 and System 2 framework can be found in a variety
of fields. The retirement savings literature, for example, finds that many people spend
little time deciding how much to save for retirement, despite the complexity and
importance of this decision. 34 When asked to reflect on their savings decisions, many
believe that they should be saving more. A majority of them say they plan to start saving
soon, yet fail to follow through with those plans (Choi et al., 2002).
        Children and adolescents are especially prone to short-term thinking.                       For
example, Bettinger and Slonim (2007) find that more than 43 percent of children (aged 5
to 16) in their sample made choices in line with hyperbolic discounting. When asked to
choose between a $10 gift certificate to be distributed immediately after the experiment

31
   See Kahneman, 2003 and the citations therein, especially Kahneman and Tversky, 1973; and Tversky
and Kahneman, 1983.
32
   Kahneman and Frederick, 2002; Kahneman, 2003.
33
   Quasi-hyperbolic discounting is the most commonly used form of discounting to model the behavior of
individuals with time-inconsistent preferences (i.e. Laibson, 1997).
34
   Benartzi and Thaler, 2007.

                                                   8
or a larger amount (up to $25) in 2 months, these children picked the immediate reward.
When asked to evaluate a similar tradeoff where the $10 gift certificate was distributed in
two months or the same larger amount in 4 months, these children choose the later.
Bettinger and Slonim (2007) also find that more than 25 percent of children choose
options inconsistent with any type of rational behavior, but that these irrational choices
were less likely to occur among older children.
        Present-biased behavior has important implications in education.                        Doing
homework, studying for exams, researching colleges or potential opportunities for
financial aid and completing applications all involve salient up-front costs. At the same
time, temptations to procrastinate abound; games, television, friends and food are all
much more attractive than an extra hour of studying. In many cases, the potential benefits
from these actions may seem incremental, uncertain and distant. When deciding whether
to stay home and complete homework or enjoy time with friends, more salient up-front
costs may lead a student to overemphasize the costs of studying relative to the potential
future benefits.     Similarly, deciding against taking advanced (and difficult) math or
science courses in high school may seem particularly appealing to a high school senior
despite the fact that doing so would make it difficult to transition to higher-paying STEM
fields in college.35
        These examples highlight how education decisions may be sub-optimal when
viewed through the System 1 and System 2 framework. Instead of reflecting forward-
looking maximizing behavior, individuals can make decisions driven by System 1 that
are very different than those they would make had they paused more to deliberate.
Decisions may be high-stakes, such as which program of study to pursue or whether to
attend college, or they may seemingly be low-stakes, such as whether to study for an
extra hour. Over time, as the benefits of learning compound, marginal decisions on how
much to study or practice also become consequential. That many of these decisions are
made by students early in life makes myopic behavior more likely due to underdeveloped
executive functioning skills.36 37


35
  Harackiewicz et al., 2012.
36
  Castleman 2013, and Baum and Schwartz 2013, also note that the neurological systems in adolescents are
particularly likely to favor immediate rewards, which may hinder the ability of students to be forward
looking in their educational decisions.

                                                   9
        More education may itself improve executive function, thus helping minimize
subsequent sub-optimal decisions. Self-control, patience, and focus are skills that some
studies suggest can be improved, though much work remains for understanding
mechanisms and external validity. 38 Becker and Mulligan (1997) suggest that more
schooling may reduce the remoteness of students’ future preferences. They argue that
problem-solving tasks assigned to students in school teach them to imagine alternative
scenarios, in particular those involving adult lives and their future selves. Another
channel through which increased education may help students focus less on the present is
by decreasing the current disutility from costly actions such as studying or completing
                39
assignments.         If learning is cumulative, taking actions today which increase
understanding of course material or improve essential skills such as reading, writing and
numeracy, make it easier for students to understand future material.
        Interestingly, the psychology literature identifies a mechanism through which
additional schooling may make future educational investments less costly.                           With
repetition and the acquisition of relevant skills, tasks that previously relied (almost)
entirely on System 2 may migrate towards the automatic activity of System 1.
Prototypical examples include driving a vehicle, mastering chess or performing at a high-
level in sports.40 A novice chess player will find that with practice and time, analyzing
the board will become more automatic, intuitive and effortless. As it relates to education,
investments in schooling may initially appear costly and salient because they require
significant cognitive effort in addition to time. With practice and better developed skills,
however, these immediate costs may seem less daunting.


2) Some students rely too much on routine




37
   See footnote 9 for examples of empirical studies which suggest that discounting decreases with age,
particularly from adolescence until about age 30.
38
   In a complementary review article on behavioral economics of education, Koch, Nafziger, and Nielsen
2014, focus on the development and importance of these kinds of non-cognitive or soft skills. They discuss
how soft skills fit in the education production function, both in terms of influencing education outcomes
and being influenced by education.
39
   Oreopoulos and Salvanes, 2011.
40
   Kahneman and Frederick, 2002; Kahneman, 2003.

                                                   10
        While the incorrect assessment of present versus future described above results in
students optimizing poorly, relying too much on routine and automatic thinking can also
lead to sub-optimal outcomes. Our predisposition to automatically make decisions by
relying on familiar knowledge leads to new information being discounted while familiar
decisions and routines become the default.
        We often rely and benefit from routine. It makes it easier to get through daily
tasks without feeling mentally strained. It also frees up bandwidth to focus on new or
more complicated tasks. Grade school is one example of a setting in which routines form
to make daily life easier. For most children, showing up to class on weekdays becomes
routine. Students do not have to decide each day whether to go.41 When they complete a
grade, they are automatically registered for the next. When they complete elementary
school, a system is in place to help them to secondary school.
          Problems arise, however, when routines must be disrupted in order to take
advantage of opportunities for improving welfare.                 At the end of high school, for
example, students that stick with their current routine will generally find themselves out
of school (and out of work). Transitioning to college requires first deviating from one’s
daily routine to prepare to go, such as finding time to fill out forms, write entry essays,
choose a program of study, pick courses, and apply for financial aid. It also requires
changing routine, such as a new commute, study schedule, work schedule, and social
schedule. To deliberately address each of these tasks, students must resist relying on
System 1’s autopilot preferences. Failing to modify routine for any one of them may
close or limit college options.
        Another implication from following automatic thought patterns and routines is
that new information (or awareness about the existence of new information) will only be
relevant for decisions if it immediately comes to mind. Individuals may miss out on
acquiring better information not only because they do not have enough money or time,
but also because the cognitive processes underlying System 1 rely on immediate
accessibility and the ease with which facts, attributes and thoughts come to mind.42 As a
result of System 1’s automatic thinking, individuals may not even realize that they should

41
   Social norms, especially those of a student’s family and friends may also be important. We expand on
this point in the following subsection.
42
   Kahneman, 2003.

                                                   11
seek out new information. Students (or their parents) may make decisions using only
readily available information or options, even if other information seems relatively easy
to access.43 This has significant implications for many situations in education, especially
the transition to college.
         To give one example, Hoxby and Avery (2013) find that bright students from
disadvantaged backgrounds often fail to apply to selective colleges that have lower out-
of-pocket costs than less selective schools they know about. This occurs despite the fact
that information about various schools, programs and costs is available freely online.
Sending information about school availability directly to students in the form of an
information package appears to significantly increase application and enrollment rates at
selective schools, a point we expand upon in Section 3. 44 Information about college
options, tuition fees and even financial aid opportunities may be less accessible for
students from low-income families45 who are burdened by concurrent stressors associated
with poverty and who are exposed to fewer resources from parents and high school
counsellors about the transition process.46
         Even after entering college, issues of information inaccessibility persist. Scott-
Clayton (2011b) notes that information about available courses is located separately from
information about degree or program requirements and college counselors often have
insufficient time for individual students. 47 Due to this lack of convenient and timely
access to relevant information, a student must disrupt her predisposition to rely on default
choices and routine in order to choose the right courses. Moreover, the sudden lack of
routine that accompanies college means that a student must not only expend more effort
into planning his or her day, but also have enough self-control to follow up on these
tasks.



43
   Students and their families may also ignore or discount new information because of biased beliefs about
the information they already have (DellaVigna, 2009). For example, they may be overconfident that the
information they already have is correct and subsequently decide not to see new information. While we
know of no studies that explicitly test for biased beliefs in education due to overconfidence, Hoffman
(2012) finds evidence that supports this hypothesis among business experts.
44
   Hoxby and Avery, 2013; Hoxby and Turner, 2013.
45
   Avery and Kane, 2004; Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006; Scott-Clayton, 2012b; Oreopoulos and Dunn,
2013.
46
   Castleman, 2013; Levine, 2013.
47
   Baum and Scott-Clayton, 2013.

                                                    12
         With System 1’s reliance on automatic thinking and routine, differences in
exposure to information (even information freely and quickly available) may have
important implications for student behavior. Without sufficient exposure, recent efforts
by policymakers to improve the quantity and quality of information available to students
and their families about college and financial aid are ultimately limited. Policies that
expose information, compared to making it easily available, are more likely to be
effective in a variety of fields, from consumer retail behavior to health.48 For example,
experimental evidence in Chetty et al. (2009) suggests that displaying the after-tax price
of items at the grocery store can greatly affect consumers’ purchasing decisions. While
most consumers would normally have no trouble in computing the after-tax price of
items, they would have to pause to do the relevant calculation. Our reliance on System 1
and its propensity to make quick decisions and focus only on salient factors implies that
even simple optimizing decisions may not always be made. However, with a better
understanding of our tendency to rely on routine, possibilities exist to leverage this
knowledge to design more effective policies and improve individual outcomes.


3) Some students focus too much on negative identities


         Concerns about identity predominate adolescent thinking and behavior. 49 The
questions "what kind of person am I?" and “what are others like me doing?” serve as
powerful reference points for deciding how to act. These extremely salient concerns
about identity may have significant implications for how students trade-off between
immediate costs and long-term benefits from education. Akerlof and Kranton (2002)
argue that students care about the extent to which their behavior deviates from that of
their social group (e.g. based on gender, race or being athletic or studious). In this

48
   In the field of health economics, Kling et al., 2012 show that the accessibility of information about
Medicare prescription drug plans had a large effect on plan choice. Specifically, individuals in one
experimental group were sent a one page letter with the web address to the Medicare website to view
various drug plan options and prices. This group was also given information on how access and navigate
the website. Individuals in the treatment group however were sent a different one page letter that detailed
the cost of their current drug plan as well as the potential cost savings from switching to another plan.
These relatively minor differences in the way information was presented led to large differences in plan
choice and hundreds of dollars in cost savings for those in the treatment group.
49
   Akerlof and Kranton, 2000,2002, 2010; Coleman, 1961; Cusick, 1972; Everhart, 1983; Gordon, 1957;
Hall, 1904; Hollingshead, 1975; Jackson, 1968; Roderick, 1993; Willis, 1997.

                                                     13
context, investments in education, such as effort in school, depend not only on individual
benefits, such as test scores and grades, but also on social benefits, such as whether a
particular level of effort is consistent with the behavior of one’s social group. If an
individual's friends preoccupy themselves with trying to have fun while avoiding the
subject of planning for the future, that individual will feel pressure to do the same in
order to conform. System 1’s focus on the immediate present may lead students to
overemphasize the current benefits associated with gratification from one’s peer group
relative to what their future selves or even their current, more reflective selves would
prefer. 50 . Since social interactions occur daily both in and outside of school from
kindergarten and beyond, they are frequently a priority for many students. As a result,
education decisions may overemphasize the value of immediate social gratification
relative to a more deliberate consideration of long-term consequences.
         Students may also fail to anticipate that their circumstances and friends may
change. Imagining themselves with a career or family in the future may be difficult while
still in school. Students may also forgo worthwhile education opportunities, such as
going to a more selective out-of-state college, because they fear losing touch with their
friends. In particular, they may not realize that their future interests, and ultimately their
friends might change over time. This tendency is known as projection bias and may
reinforce any predisposition toward being present-biased.51
         People hold multiple identities based on their gender, race and other
characteristics. Sociologists have long demonstrated that particular identities can be made
more salient by prompting or 'priming' individuals to focus on them.52 Identities may
relate to social groups, but may also relate to attitudes, such as being 'resilient,' 'capable,'
'incapable,' or 'unworthy'.         Attitudes can also be primed, for example by reading
motivational passages or watching tragic movies.53 Priming students to focus on positive
identities related to learning and intellectual curiosity may be one approach for trying to
improve education outcomes.

50
   We expand on this point with evidence from recent studies by Bursztyn and Jensen in Section IV.
Importantly, the benefits associated with gratification from one’s peer group may either reinforce or
mitigate the tendency to focus on the present.
51
   Busse, et al., 2012; DellaVigna, 2009; Loewenstein et al., 2003.
52
   Benjamin, Choi and Stickland, 2010.
53 Dweck and Legget, 1988; Dweck and Sorich, 1999.


                                                     14
4) Mistakes are more likely with too little information or too many options


       A growing body of evidence suggests that many children and parents are not fully
informed about education costs, benefits, and options. This especially applies to those
from low-income backgrounds. Avery and Kane (2004) demonstrate that high school
students from low-income family backgrounds have very little understanding of actual
college tuition levels, financial aid opportunities, and the admissions process. A report
by the Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance (2001) notes that students
and families, as well as adult learners, are often intimidated by news stories about college
being unaffordable. These stories may contribute to the fact that individuals often greatly
overestimate the cost of higher education (Horn, Chen, and Chapman 2003). Usher
(1998) finds that low-income individuals overestimate tuition costs by an average factor
of two and underestimate the average annual income differential between high school and
university graduates. Misinformation or unawareness can lead to suboptimal outcomes,
as high school students who view all postsecondary programs as unaffordable may miss
out on significant returns. On the other hand, students only focused on university options
may struggle to complete and miss out on more enjoyable careers from vocational
schooling or other community college options.
       While more information helps individuals make better decisions, more choice
may not. Neoclassical economic models predict that giving individuals more choices
makes them at least as well off as before. Expanding an individual’s choice set increases
the likelihood that an option that best matches one’s preferences is available. This
argument, however, relies on two assumptions. First, individuals do not find it too
difficult to survey the menu of choices and identify the option that is the best fit for them.
Second, they are able to easily keep all choices in mind when making their decision (e.g.
when presented with a lengthy list of specials and entrées on a restaurant menu, you still
remember promising options on page one by the time you get to page five). Yet, as
discussed earlier, individuals have limited cognitive capacity and attention, and
evaluating an abundance of choices requires cognitive effort, which may be especially
costly if one's mental bandwidth is already burdened by other concerns.


                                             15
         Indeed, research in retail food purchases, 54 consumer credit, 55 and finance 56
suggests that people may respond unexpectedly to an abundance of choices. For example,
Iyengar et al. (2004) find a strong negative correlation between the number of mutual
funds offered in company pension plans and enrollment rates. Experimental evidence
suggests that when presented with more choice, savers are more likely to choose the
default option even if that option may not best suit their individual circumstances. 57
Overwhelmed by the number of options, individuals may rely on heuristics characteristic
of System 1 such as choosing the simplest or most familiar option or deferring their
decisions indefinitely.
         More recently, evidence that more choice doesn’t necessarily lead to better
decisions and outcomes has also been found in education. Scott-Clayton (2011b) argues
that the abundance of choices available to students in college for programs of study,
courses and schedules may be contributing to high dropout rates, especially when
combined with a lack of structure. Similarly, when students and parents are given the
option of choosing primary and secondary schools, many choose the nearest school and
sometimes fail to consider school quality.58




III. Opportunities for Improvement


         In the human capital investment model all choices are ex-ante optimal. Observed
actions like skipping class, ignoring homework, or dropping out of school stem from a
well thought-out decision in which alternative actions would likely leave one worse off.
In contrast, behavioral theory does not assume that observed actions necessarily reveal
what is ex-ante optimal; the roles of Systems 1 and 2 in decision-making imply that
students make choices that do not always maximize lifetime well-being. In some cases,
students may come to regret automatic or short-sighted decisions driven by System 1,
wishing instead that they had considered future consequences more carefully. The fact

54
   Iyengar and Lepper, 2000
55
   Bertrand et al, 2010.
56
   See also Benartzi and Thaler, 2007; Choi et al., 2004.
57
   Agnew and Skzykman, 2005
58
   Hastings and Weinstein, 2008; Ross et al., 2014.

                                                     16
that education attainment decisions may be sub-optimal, relative to what students’ future
and more deliberate selves would prefer, suggests that policies designed to address
barriers leading to these decisions have potential to improve outcomes and, ultimately,
well-being.
           How can policy makers know which behaviors are best to encourage? They
cannot. As Bernheim and Rangel (2009) note, without additional assumptions or insights,
researchers cannot distinguish at face value whether an observed behavior stems from a
suboptimal choice or from the possibility that individuals are rationally weighing their
own long-term costs and benefits. In the latter case, imposing constraints on individuals
would make them worse off, but ultimately, the goal of interventions is to help
individuals achieve their own goals, not to satisfy policymakers’ preferences. 59 In this
section, we draw attention to several domains in education where the ex-ante optimality
of choices by parents and students is suspect, in turn suggesting that policies or tools to
improve decisions and ultimately outcomes may be warranted.
           One way in which we identify instances of suboptimal choices is through the
success of “nudges.” Nudges are interventions that encourage certain outcomes, but
which do not meaningfully alter costs and restrict individual choice.60 Seemingly trivial
changes to upfront costs or to how choices are presented should not affect outcomes
under models of rational decision making and yet, as we present evidence below, they do.
Nudging opportunities likely exist because of our overreliance on System 1 thinking.
Specifically, the salience of up-front costs together with seemingly vague and distant
potential future benefits may lead students and parents to overemphasize the present.
            This section identifies potential opportunities for improvement across several
domains in education. By discussing examples where nudges have meaningfully
impacted behavior in educational contexts, we suggest that particular issues of interest to
educators – such as encouraging more parental involvement, more time doing homework
and becoming eligible for financial aid – may also serve as promising opportunities for
nudges. Although a nudge that changes behavior does not necessarily prove that the
underlying intervention improves welfare, it does require that researchers and policy


59
     Rabin, 2013.
60
     Thaler and Sunstein, 2008.

                                              17
makers seriously consider the possibility that pre-intervention decisions by students and
parents may not have been ex-ante optimal.61 On the other hand, an ineffective nudge is
not evidence that economic agents optimize in the way that the human capital investment
model predicts; it may simply be that the nudge targeted the incorrect behavioral barrier.
        While students’ ex-post regret and reflections about past behavior are not direct
evidence that ex-ante decisions are sub-optimal, it can also provide insights into why
certain choices are made and identify possible opportunities for improvement. For
example, that the majority of high school dropouts regret their decision to leave school
while also attributing their decision to “too much freedom” and “not enough rules”
suggests that the long-term consequences of their decisions may not always be at the top
of mind.62 In some cases, we argue that the large financial gains from encouraging a
particular behavior, such as graduating from high school, parental involvement or
increasing class attendance, is sufficient to be skeptical about the ex-ante optimality of
pre-intervention behavior.




a. Parental Involvement


        Parental inputs are critical in determining children’s cognitive and non-cognitive
skills as well as education attainment.63 The decisions parents make early on for their
children have consequences not only on their quality of schooling, but also on peers they
interact with and their future dispositions towards learning.          Levels of parental
involvement vary widely, with children from lower-income and minority families
receiving less involvement, on average, than their higher-income classmates.64
        Many traditional models attribute these differences to differences in returns to
education for children from different socioeconomic backgrounds. Investing in education
may be more costly for low-income parents, so choosing to invest less is optimal.


61
   Bernheim and Rangel, 2009.
62
   Bridgeland et al., 2006.
63
   Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Todd and Wolpin, 2007.
64
   Sirin, 2005.

                                               18
Another explanation is that low-income parents are less involved because they have less
information about how to effectively invest. A policy that makes it easier to acquire
information should therefore increase investment among affected parents relative to those
who were not exposed to the policy. Recent experimental evidence suggests that small
changes in the timing of information or in the way information is presented to parents can
increase parental involvement and produce significant and often long-lasting results.65
For example, Bergman (2014) finds virtually all parents who are offered text messages to
inform them of their middle school child’s incomplete homework agree to receive the
messages, and that the children of these randomly selected parents perform significantly
better than those whose parents do not receive the offer.
         Given the strong association between academic achievement and long-run
outcomes such as college attendance and earnings,66 the magnitude of the effects from
these small interventions suggests that either classroom information is difficult to obtain,
or that the value from obtaining it is not salient enough for parents to want to access it.
Stress exacerbates these barriers. Whether from money, time, or other circumstances,
added stress reduces the brain’s capacity to focus on other tasks, including parental
involvement.       As a result, simply making information more available may not be
effective because stressed-out parents are distracted.      Effective policies to increase
parental involvement, therefore, may include those that reduce stress or make it easier to
change routine.


b. High School Completion


         High school dropouts face daunting challenges over the rest of their lives. Among
recent dropouts in the United States, 16 percent are unemployed and 32 percent live
below the poverty line; those with jobs earn an average of only $12.75 per hour with the
most common jobs found in the construction, food services, and landscaping services
industries. 67 Labor-market outcomes remain bleak. Dropouts aged fifty earn an average
of $16.50 an hour. In addition to difficulties in the labor market, social outcomes are

65
   Avvisati, et al., 2014; Bergman, 2014.
66
   Chetty et al. , 2011.
67
   Messacar and Oreopoulos, 2013.

                                            19
worse for dropouts compared to any other education attainment group. More of them are
separated or divorced, unhealthy and unhappy.
        There is, of course, no single explanation why students drop out of high school:
conflicts at home, urgent financial difficulties, or unexpected pregnancies are only a few
examples. Some dropouts say they are too poorly prepared to complete high school.
Bridgeland et al. (2006) report a majority say they are unmotivated or uninspired to go to
class, but most also say they regret their decision later in life and, with the benefit of
hindsight, wish they had stayed. Present bias may be at play, as suggested by Cadena and
Keys (forthcoming), who find that adolescents classified by a surveyor as “impatient” are
more likely to dropout, even if they stated an intention to finish. This behavior is difficult
to reconcile with the human capital investment framework and suggests short-sightedness
or the salience of an immediate distaste for school may be getting in the way of realizing
larger lifetime gains.
        Compulsory schooling laws have existed for decades (and sometimes more than a
hundred years), primarily because of the belief that students wishing to leave school early
are, in fact, better off by not doing so. For example, in the United Kingdom, Prime
Minister David Cameron offers paternalistic reasons for wanting to raise the school
leaving age from sixteen to eighteen, “Think about it: with your children, would you
dream of just leaving them to their own devices, not getting a job, not training, nothing?
No – you'd nag and push and guide and do anything to get them on their way … and so
must we.”68 Many studies have exploited historical differences in compulsory schooling
laws to examine whether high school students benefited from facing more restrictive
dropout options. They often estimate substantial increases to adult annual earnings, in
the range of 10 percent from an additional year of school due to facing more restrictive
laws. 69 Other studies find non-pecuniary benefits, such as less crime, 70 lower use of
cigarettes and illicit drugs,71 improved health,72 reduced incidence of teen pregnancy,73
and improved memory and other cognitive abilities.7475

68
   Watt, 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/02/tory-housing-benefit-under-25-david-
cameron-tory-conference.
69
   Angrist and Krueger, 1991; Acemoglu and Angrist, 2001; Harmon and Walker, 1995, and Oreopoulos,
2005.
70
   Anderson, 2012; Lochner and Moretti, 2004.
71
   Mensch and Kandel, 1988.

                                                 20
         To be clear, policies that force children to stay in school by threat of fine or jail
are not nudges. Constraining all individuals towards one action relies on the strong
assumption that everyone who would behave differently without the constraint would
actually be worse off in that event. 76                 As this is unlikely, compulsory schooling
legislation often does allow for exceptions. Students are often allowed to leave if they
work full-time or are parents. Sometimes students are allowed to leave early after
explicitly agreeing they understand the long-term risks from such actions. Enforcement
is also not strict. To our knowledge, no parent has ever gone to jail under compulsory
schooling legislation and very few have been fined. However, the law serves to set
expectations and efforts to encourage youth to stay in class. Truant students are given
more attention. They or their parents are often first contacted by teachers, principals, or
caseworkers in an effort to reengage the students and address reasons behind the truancy.
More resources for addressing or enforcing truancy may also come from changes to
compulsory-schooling laws. Ideally, while past evidence suggests that many high school
dropouts (but not all) miss out on large lifetime benefits, effective approaches to keep
students interested and engaged in learning are needed to help them make better choices
to stay in school, even when dropping out is permissible.
72
   Lleras-Muney, 2005; Meghir, Palme, and Simeonova, 2013.
73
   Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2005.
74
   Banks and Mazzonna 2012.
75
   Two important caveats must be mentioned. First, estimated benefits to compulsory schooling vary
widely outside North America (Brunello, Fort, and Weber, 2009; Brunello, Weber, and Weiss, 2012;
Devereux and Hart, 2010; Grenet, 2011; Meghir and Palme, 2005; Pischke and von Wachter, 2008). One
possibility is that returns are individual-specific and even change over the life cycle. Studies that estimate
returns by looking at different samples of workers in different age brackets might produce inconsistent
results. Other explanations discussed by Grenet, 2011 are that institutional factors, like minimum wage
policies, affect returns, or that the implementation and enforcement of the laws vary across countries.
Pischke and von Wachter, 2006 suggest that the tracking of students into vocational or academic schools at
early ages in some countries will result in different returns to basic labor market skills. The other caveat is
that another recent study, Stephens and Yang, 2014, calls into question the robustness of findings from
some U.S. studies that use changes in compulsory schooling laws over time. Estimated returns become
small and statistically insignificant after trying to control for region-specific time trends. Their critique does
not apply to findings from Angrist and Krueger, 1991, who use static differences in school entry ages to
estimate returns to compulsory schooling. Perhaps regional trend controls absorb a delayed effect. At the
very least, the study suggests a need for additional research to determine whether these laws really did
generate large returns. Even small average returns from compulsory schooling may still imply sub-optimal
behaviour for some, since large and small effects are being averaged together. Under the human capital
investment model, individuals affected by the laws should either be indifferent or expect to be negatively
impacted. In this case, we should expect to find very low or even negative returns from constraining this
entire group to stay on.
76
   Alternatively, the costs to those who would not have been worse off without the constraint are smaller
than the perceived benefits for those who would have been worse off.

                                                       21
c. College Attainment


         Past and recent evidence suggests that there are still large returns to a college
degree that are also difficult to reconcile within a school investment model.77 While
benefits vary significantly across all college programs and occupations, college graduates
enjoy an earnings premium in all major occupation sectors. The empirical evidence
suggests that those at the margin of attending benefit at least as much as those from the
more general college population at large. 78 Many researchers believe skill-biased
technological change has caused a large growth in demand for college educated workers,
especially those with skills that cannot easily be automated. Other empirical research
argues that there are likely large non-monetary returns to higher education, including
higher job satisfaction and better health outcomes.79
         A possible behavioral explanation for no college experience is lack of
encouragement and approval from friends and family. Qualitative research on the college
decision-making process suggests that students develop predispositions towards higher
education at an early age based in part on parents' experiences and level of
encouragement, as well as friends' interests in going, the high school resources available
to them, and access to college information.80 Salient information from these sources – as
well as the social implications of a college-going identity – may therefore play an
important role in actual attainment.81
         Another behavioral barrier to college is having to change routine to get there.
College transition costs are typically considered too small to matter in the education-
investment model. However, there are many transition points from high school to college
that require deliberate attention around short and long-term trade-offs. Prospective
students must decide where to go, how long to go, how to afford to go, and then actually
apply. Upon gaining admission, they must choose courses, set up meetings, fill out forms,

77
   See Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2013 for one recent review of the estimates of the financial returns to
postsecondary education. See also Baum, Kurose, and Ma, 2013.
78
   Zimmerman, forthcoming.
79
   Oreopoulos and Salvanes, 2011.
80
   Cabrera and La Nasa, 2000.
81
   Demming and Dynarski, 2009; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2013.

                                                     22
and finally show up for class. While many underprivileged students express intent to go
on to college, they sometimes fail to complete application requirements.82 Some students
plan to attend college, get accepted, register for courses, yet fail to show up when their
program begins. Others attend for years only to drop out before graduating despite often
only requiring a few more credits.83
         Benefits from college appear more associated with program completion, even for
programs lasting 1 or 2 years. In the United States, earnings of workers who only
complete some college are only marginally higher than the earnings of high school
graduates. 84 Yet while college enrollment rates have risen over the past few decades,
completion rates have not followed suit. As with high school dropout, reasons for college
dropout may be from overreliance on System 1 thinking. Several promising behavioral
policies designed for increasing college completion are discussed in Section IV.


d. Program Suitability


         College-bound youth must choose where to go and what to study from a wide
array of options. Without adequate deliberation, many of them may end up in places not
best suited to their abilities or interests. Recent evidence suggests that high-achieving
students from low- and middle-income families are less likely to apply to selective
institutions to which they would likely be admitted.85 Moreover, many students may not
consider the breadth of program and school opportunities available to them (i.e.
vocational programs, relative to General Arts and Sciences programs at a local
community college), especially if they are unfamiliar with them.                               Given that
postsecondary completion rates, per-student instructional resources and career advising
services vary widely across various institutions and programs, enrolling in schools that do



82
   Avery and Kane, 2004.
83
   See Cadena and Keys, forthcoming
. Evidence that some students, especially those categorized as being “impatient” drop out of college with
one year (or less) remaining is difficult to reconcile with traditional investment models. In particular,
uncertainty about one’s personal ability or benefits and costs of going to college should be resolved by the
third or fourth year of study.
84
   Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2013.
85
   Baum and Scott-Clayton, 2013; Hoxby and Avery, 2013.

                                                     23
not best match abilities and interests can be very costly for students. Mismatch between
student interests and college services may also increase chances of dropout.


e. Homework


         Homework often involves trading off more enjoyable activities now for uncertain,
incremental benefits later. Bridgeland et al. (2006) find that high school dropouts report
that they were doing little, if any, homework prior to leaving school. More than 60
percent of these respondents indicated that they could have completed high school had
they worked harder at it and done more. At the college level, experimental evidence
suggests that completing homework assignments lowers the probability that students drop
a course and significantly increases grades without lowering performance in other
courses.86 Despite this, many students fail to complete assignments on time.87
         Empirical evidence suggests a strong negative association between impatience
and study habits, especially homework.88 As one example, we consider the amount of
self-reported study time at school or at home by students in the 1979 National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79).89 Figure 1 shows the distributions of study
times of those classified as patient or impatient using a measure of present bias
introduced by DellaVigna and Paserman (2005) and also used in Cadena and Keys
(forthcoming). In Figure 1, the average amount of time spent studying or working on
class projects is lower among impatient students. In particular, impatient students are
more likely to report spending no time studying.90 This example is consistent with the
results from a large and growing literature in psychology which finds that children who

86
   Grodner and Rupp, 2013.
87
   For example, Bergman, 2014 finds that more than 20 percent of students fail to complete assignments on
time, with completion rates work to be done at home lower than those assigned to be completed in class.
88
   See also Oreopoulos and Salvanes, 2011, who show a strong association between education attainment
and individuals self-reporting they agree people should live for today and let tomorrow take care of itself.
89
   Specifically, we consider a sample of NLSY79 respondents who report being enrolled in school or
college in 1981. The study time variable is defined as the sum of hours spent studying or working on class
projects at school, on campus or away from school during the last 7 days.
90
   These relationships still hold in regressions that control flexibly for age, gender, race, mother’s education
(4 categories), father’s education (4 categories), family income quartile as a child, poverty status as a child,
magazines in the home as a child, newspapers in the home as a child, having a library card as a child, urban
status and region indicators. In particular, NLSY79 respondents classified as “impatient” are 2.2 percentage
points more likely to report spending no time studying (8.8 versus 11 percent), and report studying 1.35
hours fewer per week (7.09 versus 8.44 hours per week) than those classified as “patient”.

                                                      24
          are better able to exhibit self-control have better study habits, are more likely to regularly
          do homework, get better grades and have higher education attainment.91 Importantly, this
          research suggests that the ability to self-regulate can be influenced and improved, leaving
          open the possibility that targeted interventions can lead to significant gains in education
          attainment.92


          Figure 1: The distribution of hours spent studying and working on class projects by impatient
          and patient students
                                         Impatient                                                Patient
               20




                                                                             20
               15




                                                                             15
Percent




                                                                   Percent
               10




                                                                             10
                5




                                                                              5
                0




                                                                              0




                    0       20      40                60     80   100             0   20    40                60      80   100
                                  Hours studying last week                                 Hours studying last week




          Notes: This sample includes all NLSY79 respondents reporting being enrolled in formal schooling in 1981. The graph
          shows the distribution of reported time spent studying or working on class projects between students classified as
          impatient (left panel) and those classified as patient (right panel). This measure of impatience was introduced by
          DellaVigna and Passerman (2005) and classifies a respondent as being impatient surveyors report that the respondent
          was “impatient or restless” in any of the annual NLSY79 waves between 1980 and 1985. The study time variable is
          defined as the sum of hours spent studying or working on class projects at school, on campus or away from school
          during the last 7 days.


          f. Attendance


                        By the time high school students decide to drop out, there is typically a long
          history of truancy and absenteeism that extends as far back as early elementary school.93
          Efforts to target early disengagement and keep students in class may therefore help
          91
             Duckworth, Quinn and Tsukayama, 2011; Duckworth and Carlson, 2013; Duckworth and Steinberg,
          2014.
          92
             Duckworth, Gendler and Gross (2014) propose a model where agents choosing between an immediately
          rewarding activity and a valued distant goal can exercise self-control in several ways. When facing such a
          choice (such as checking Facebook instead of doing homework), agents can exercise self-control by
          anticipating the temptation and choosing to remove themselves from the situation (i.e. study in an area
          without a computer, tablet or cell-phone) or by paying a cost to directly supress the urge at the time the
          choice must be made.
          93
             E.g.,Barrington and Hendricks, 1989.

                                                                             25
prevent at-risk students from falling into a downward spiral, in which missing school
causes them to fall behind in their studies, which, in turn, makes them feel even less
motivated to attend classes and puts them further behind.94 In college, absenteeism rises
sharply when attendance is mostly voluntary. Past studies estimate about one-third of
undergraduate college students regularly fail to show for class.95
        Both high school and college absenteeism are highly correlated with poor
academic performance. 96 Past studies have struggled in determining whether these
uniformly robust relationships represent direct causal influences. Dobkin et al. (2010) use
a clever regression discontinuity design, in which college instructors insist on subsequent
mandatory attendance for students with midterm grades below a specified cut-off.
Students with grades just below the cut-off and facing mandatory attendance fare
significantly better on the final exam than those with grades just above it.
        A students’ classroom environment clearly helps determine whether he desires to
attend school. Students who feel engaged, motivated, and among friends are more likely
to go (Brewster and Bowen, 2004; Catterall, 1998; Croninger and Lee, 2001; Lee and
Burkam, 2003). Students may overemphasize these factors, however, and place less
weight on the incremental and uncertain benefits from attendance. For example, the
primary reason students gave for missing class in Dobkin et al.’s study was having slept
in.
        Students may also put off attending meetings outside the classroom, such as
tutorials, after-school workshops, or advising. Unless attendance is mandatory,
participation rates in these services are often very low. Some recent studies, discussed in
detail below, suggest that mandatory tutoring or advising services are much more
promising for boosting academic performance than voluntary ones. Our System 1 and 2
framework for decision-making points to the problems of leaving students to reorganize
routines on their own. Bettinger, Boatman and Long (2013) suggest that from this lack
of structure, students manage time poorly and become disengaged.


g. College Aid Savvy

94Lamdin,   1996; Peterson and Colangelo, 1996; Strickland, 1998.
95
   Romer, 1993.
96
   Stanca, 2006.

                                                    26
        Some students receiving college financial aid could be getting more. Others fail to
qualify for aid entirely: each year, more than one million college students in the United
States who are eligible for grant aid fail to complete the necessary forms to receive it.97
Bird and Castleman (2014) estimate that nearly 20 percent of annual Pell Grant recipients
in good academic standing fail to refile a FAFSA after their freshman year, and
subsequently miss out on financial aid for the following academic year. Missing out on
financial aid opportunities lowers the expected financial return to obtaining
postsecondary credentials and, among those who do manage to apply for and receive
financial aid, some could benefit from selecting a better financial aid package. The
quality of a financial aid package is evaluated both by the quantity and the types of aid
given: for instance, a financial aid package with a higher proportion of grants rather than
loans or work-study funding is “better” because it may allow students to spend more time
studying or enjoying leisure. 98 However, Avery and Hoxby (2004) find that some
students are just as attracted to financial aid in the form of work-study and loans as they
are grants, despite the fact that grants are less costly. The authors also find that some
students are attracted by superficial aspects of financial aid offers, such as calling grants
“scholarships,” and forgo better opportunities as a result.
        An aversion to holding debt may also lead to students missing out on financial aid
opportunities.     In the human capital investment framework, the inability to borrow
enough is the main reason why individuals who would benefit from attending college
might not attend. This liquidity constraint can arise because the financial benefits of
college occur in the future, while the costs of college must be paid in the present. Recent
studies suggest that increasing numbers of students may face credit constraints, even
when they have access to government aid.99 Yet, an inability to borrow is not the same as
a preference not to borrow.          Students are considered debt averse if they prefer more
school, can borrow to go, but end up not going in order to avoid incurring debt. Such
behavior occurs because immediate (psychological) discomfort from holding debt can



97
   Council of Economic Advisors: National Economic Council, 2009.
98
   Avery and Hoxby, 2004; Bettinger, 2004; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2003.
99
   Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2013.

                                                   27
lead to students underinvesting in education.100 In one study of postsecondary financial
aid applicants in Latin America, Caetano et al. (2011) find that survey respondents are
about ten percent less likely to choose arrangements labeled as “debt” or “loan” contracts,
as opposed to other financially equivalent contracts without these labels. Baum and
Schwartz (2013) argue that students with no alternative means of financing
postsecondary education, particularly those from low-income or minority backgrounds,
may be more likely to be reluctant to finance college with loans.
        In addition to educational underinvestment, debt aversion may lead students to
engage in suboptimal study strategies, such as working part-time when that time could be
used for homework. It can also affect enrollment decisions and career choices. For
example, law school applicants who were offered tuition waivers conditional on finding
employment in the public sector, compared to tuition loans that are waived after finding
employment in the public sector, were far more likely to both enroll in the program and
have a public sector job.101 Students, therefore, showed a strong preference to remain out
of debt both while in school and after graduation.


h. College Cost Savvy


        Low-income students and their parents are more likely to overestimate costs of
attending college. 102 Reports in the popular media that describe a crisis in student
borrowing or that highlight extreme examples of students graduating with high debt
levels may contribute to and further exacerbate the over-estimates of attending college
among low-income families.103 But why don’t families discount these extreme examples
about the costs of obtaining postsecondary credentials? One reason may be that these
reports are particularly easy to recall when beginning to think about the college
application process and this accessibility may lead to sub-optimal decisions.



100
    See Scott-Clayton, 2012a, 2012b. Aversion to holding debt may also be viewed in the standard rational
economic framework if the variance to post-college earnings is high and risk aversion is sufficiently high
(Baum and Schwartz, 2013).
101
    Field, 2009.
102
    Kane and Avery, 2004, Usher, 1998.
103
    Jabbar, 2011; Avery and Turner, 2012.

                                                    28
        Lower-income families are also less likely to take advantage of government
incentives to save for postsecondary education. The benefits of tax incentives for
education saving, such as the 529 account in the United States, are highest for those with
high incomes. 104 Use of Registered Education Savings plans (RESPs) in Canada is also
concentrated among high-income and high-wealth families, despite the fact that the
accounts were originally intended to lower the postsecondary among low-income
families.105 Students from low-income families who open an RESP account qualify for up
to $2,000 without any additional contribution, yet a large fraction of eligible students fail
to do so.        Making it easier to complete the application increases take-up rates
                 106
substantially.




IV. Policies and Programs to Address Behavioral Barriers


        This section reviews the growing literature of interventions designed to overcome
behavioral barriers in education.      Earlier we classified barriers into four general
categories: 1) some students focus too much on the present, 2) some rely too much on
routine, 3) some focus too much on negative identities, and 4) mistakes are more likely
with many options or with little information. We selected interventions based on their
likelihood of helping with at least one of these barriers. Some of them target a specific
event, like helping complete an application. Some target a one-time change in school
environment, like introducing more regular tests. Other interventions target recurring
barriers and thus occur in multiple doses, like reminding students each week to attend
tutorials.   Whether a one-time or continuous intervention is preferred or warranted
depends on a number of factors, especially cost and effectiveness.                 One-time
interventions are not always cheaper. For example, a motivational presentation to think
about the future is more expensive than a weekly email linking to motivational videos.
With regard to the effectiveness of a behavioral intervention, a key determinant is the
timing between it and when the actual decision being targeted needs to be made. In the

104
    Dynarski, 2004.
105
    Milligan, 2005.
106
    Nayar, 2013.

                                             29
case of applying to college, reminding students in Grade 11 will not be as effective as
reminding them in Grade 12. Inviting students to an after-school presentation on college
application completion will not be as effective as inviting them to complete the form
now, in class. Follow-up interventions may also be necessary in order to sustain
behavioral changes or to reinforce habits; as such, research on the duration of these
behavioral changes will be valuable.
           In most cases, the studies we discuss below use random assignment as the source
of variation, allowing for convincing and straightforward causal inference. We also
describe programs designed to address behavioral barriers that have been proposed but
not yet rigorously tested or that are currently being evaluated and whose preliminary
results seem promising. Our goal is to both review the evidence accumulated to date, as
well as to encourage other researchers to develop and test new policies that leverage these
ideas. We mention key examples in the text. Tables 1 to 5 provide a more comprehensive
list.     Whenever possible we report the estimated effects of interventions for binary
dependent variables in percentage points while results for outcomes such as test scores or
grades are reported in standard deviations. In cases where grades are not standardized we
report effects in terms of change in GPA points and note the baseline average. Unless
otherwise indicated, all reported effects are statistically significant at conventional levels.


a. Interventions that aim to offset immediate costs with immediate benefits


           One approach to address present bias is simply to remind students to think more
about their future. For example, in an online study with at-risk undergraduate students
from McGill University, a random sample was asked to take about two hours to
participate in a goal-setting exercise in which they wrote down specific long-term goals
and proposed intermediate steps to achieve them. 107 The end-of-year Grade Point
Average for students assigned to the exercise was half a point higher than control
students assigned to a basic personality test, a 0.7 standard deviation difference. While a
seemingly trivial exercise, “interrupting” individuals at the cusp of a decision involving
short- and long-run trade-offs and encouraging them to think deliberately may effectively

107
      Morisano et al., 2010.

                                              30
deter them from overemphasizing the present. Requiring students to regularly write or
think about their future appears to be a promising avenue for additional research.
         Another approach for addressing present bias is to offer immediate incentives that
offset immediate costs.108 Parents often adopt this strategy in offering small rewards (like
television or dessert) for future-enhancing behaviour (like doing homework or eating
vegetables). Yet, some social scientists advise caution on the use of external incentives
to motivate behavior.109 Students, they note, can be intrinsically motivated to learn based
on own desires for self-improvement, fun, and challenge, or they can be extrinsically
motivated to do an unwanted task in order to attain a wanted outcome attached to it.110 A
concern is that, by offering external incentives to make immediate tasks seem more
worthwhile, students may become subsequently reliant on them or the incentive itself
may become less attractive over time. Ideally, extrinsic incentives complement intrinsic
motivation so that the extrinsic goal is self-endorsed and students recognize the
importance of the behaviour and appreciate the added incentive. Students may also come
to internalize the incentivized behavior if their own self-confidence or self-identity from
doing it improves. For example, conditions attached to a scholarship or non-monetary
award, such as a minimum GPA or required courses, may increase student effort if the
student views the scholarship or award program as part of his or her identity.
         Studies on the effectiveness of offering immediate incentives for improving
grades or attendance yield mixed results. Table 1 summarizes these. One of the earliest
experiments offered Grade 3 to 6 students in rural Ohio $15 for obtaining grades above a
proficiency cut-off in four subjects.111 Math scores increased by 0.15 standard deviations
in the year incentives were offered, but this effect dissipated the year after, with no
effects found in Reading, Social Science, and Science. Using an array of award schemes
for primary and middle school students in an impressive variety of settings, Fryer (2011)
found very modest or no effects. One exception was an experiment in Dallas, in which
Grade 2 students were paid to read books rather than to do well on tests. Reading scores
improved by 0.25 standard deviations, suggesting that incentivizing learning inputs, like


108
    Hershfield et al, 2011.
109
    Ryan and Deci, 2010.
110
    Grades are themselves a type of extrinsic incentive to study and learn.
111
    Bettinger, 2010.

                                                      31
reading or homework time, may be more promising than incentivising learning outputs
like grades.
           The effects of financial incentives may be sensitive to context, such as the age of
students or timing of payments. For instance, Levitt et al. (2012) find that an incentive
offered immediately before a test and awarded minutes after improves performance,
whereas offering the same incentive awarded a month later does not.                    Perhaps
performance incentives are more effective when awarded soon after the exertion of effort
required to achieve them.112
           Participation incentives compared to grade incentives target lower performing
students and generally show more promise. Dearden et al. (2009) evaluate a program in
the United Kingdom offering low-income high school students money for staying in
school beyond the minimum dropout age.                  The fraction in school for at least two
additional years increased from 61 to 68 percent. Ford et al. (2012) examine The Future
to Discover program in New Brunswick, which provided high school students, starting in
Grade 9, 'learning accounts' that accumulated to $8,000 by time of graduation and could
only be used for college-related expenses. College enrollment and graduation increased
by 8 percentage points for students randomly offered these accounts compared to a
control group. Annual information and reminders about the learning accounts, plus
verification that students and parents understood the program, may have increased
salience and interest.
           Many colleges and universities offer financial incentives in the form of merit
scholarships. One of the more rigorous studies of an existing program exploits a
regression discontinuity design to look at West Virginia's PROMISE scholarship and
finds substantial increases in four and five-year graduation rates (Scott-Clayton, 2011).
The PROMISE scholarship provides a tuition waiver to students who maintain a
minimum GPA and course load. Students who receive the scholarship are more than 6
percentage points more likely to receive at least a 3.0 GPA through college (46 versus 40
percent) and are 7 percentage points more likely to graduate within 4 years than students
who just missed out on receiving the award (33 versus 26 percent). Importantly, the
effects on GPA disappear in the final year of college, when the scholarship cannot be

112
      Levitt, List, Neckermann and Sadoff, 2012.

                                                   32
renewed, suggesting that students are motivated to work harder as a result of the financial
incentive.
           Experimental evidence on the effectiveness of college merit scholarships is less
impressive.       Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos (2009), for example, test the effects of
offering $1000 to $5,000 awards for first year undergraduates to attain grade averages
above 70 percent, with and without additional mentorship support. Females offered both
the scholarship incentive and mentor support receive grades 0.30 standard deviations
higher by the end of the first and second year compared to a control group. The second
year results are important, as they suggest sustained effort or learning, even after
incentives are removed, yet the program had no significant long-term impact on females
offered only the scholarship and no impact on males. A follow-up experiment offering
large course-based incentives for incrementally higher grades above 70 percent, plus
mentorship support, failed to generate significant long-term effects.113
           An alternative type of merit aid targets course credit accumulation for students
already enrolled in college in an effort to encourage on-time completion and retention.
The lower (or non-existent) grade thresholds make these programs more expensive since
a larger fraction of students achieve the credit target, including those who would have
achieved it without the incentive. Several recent experiments suggest these kinds of
merit-awards can increase retention. Barrow et al. (2014) find significant effects on
credit accumulation from an experiment paying college students in Louisiana for
enrolling at least half-time and attaining C-averages or better. Similar experiments were
initiated in other states, all targeting low-income college students using credit
accumulation incentives and grade targets no greater than C averages. Results show
small but significant increases in cumulative earned credits by the first or second term.114
MacDonald et al. (2009) also find significant increases in GPA and retention from a
Canadian experiment offering community college students $750 for each of three
semesters for obtaining a GPA above 2.0, maintaining a full course load, and accessing a
minimum amount of student services. Graduation rates were 3 percentage points higher



113
      Angrist, Oreopoulos and Williams, 2014.
114
      Miller et al, 2011; Richburg-Hayes, Sommo, and Welbeck, 2011.

                                                    33
for the treatment group (27 versus 24 percent) and 9 percentage points higher among
students from low-income backgrounds (34 versus 25 percent).
           Significant latitude exists in designing immediate incentives to offset immediate
costs, including the type of incentive, the target population, and whether it encourages
performance outputs or specific inputs. The current research does not generate obvious
conclusions on the potential of these approaches (Table 1 summarizes this research).
Impacts have generally been modest or nonexistent, although they have not been
negative, as some would predict given that extrinsic rewards could potentially crowd out
intrinsic motivation. Thus far, the research literature has mainly focused on offering
money, with one exception being Springer, Rosenquist and Swain (2014), who find large
effects on tutorial attendance from offering middle-school students certificates of
completion signed by the district superintendent, compared to the monetary gift
certificates given to control students. Non-monetary incentives might appeal to students
in ways that monetary ones do not.
           Present bias arises not just from an immediate preference for leisure but also an
immediate preference for spending money. College financial aid is typically distributed
only at the beginning of the semester and deposited into a bank account. Once the
challenges and distractions that accompany the start of a college semester begin, students
may forget that these funds are intended to last for the whole year. The Aid Like A
Paycheck program seeks to combat this short-sightedness by changing the way financial
aid is delivered. After first paying off tuition and fees, students receive their remaining
aid in equal biweekly installments tied to academic requirements. Researchers are
looking at whether the program affects work hours, grades, and, ultimately, graduation.115




115
      Ware, Weissman and McDermott, 2013.

                                              34
       Table 1: Interventions that aim to offset immediate costs with immediate benefits

  Authors            Treatment                   Data               Research Design                 Findings

Panel A: Primary, middle or high schools

Angrist and      Achievement            Administrative data for    Field experiment        Eligibility for the cash
Lavy (2009)      Awards                 high school seniors        (randomization at the   reward increase the
                 demonstration:         from 40 low-               school level)           probability of passing the
                 $1500 for passing      performing Israeli                                 matriculation exam by (i)
                 the Israeli high       schools                                            5.2 percentage points for
                 school matriculation                                                      boys and girls (29 versus
                 exam                                                                      24 percent) (not
                                                                                           significant); (ii) 10.5
                                                                                           percentage points for girls
                                                                                           (39 versus 29 percent); (iii)
                                                                                           -2.2 percentage points for
                                                                                           boys (18 versus 20 percent)
                                                                                           (not significant).

Bettinger        $15 ($20) for each     Administrative data for    Field experiment        Eligibility for the
(2012)           proficient             third, fourth, fifth and   (randomization at the   Coshocton Incentive
                 (advanced) score in    sixth grade students in    school-grade level)     Program (i) increased math
                 each state reading,    Coshocton, Ohio                                    test scores by .15 standard
                 math, writing,                                                            deviations; (ii) increased
                 science, and social                                                       reading test scores by .01
                 studies test                                                              standard deviations (not
                                                                                           significant); (iii) increased
                                                                                           social science test scores
                                                                                           by .02 standard deviations
                                                                                           (not significant); (iv)
                                                                                           increased science test
                                                                                           scores by -.04 standard
                                                                                           deviations.

Dearden et al.   Education              Survey data for low-       OLS and Propensity      Eligibility for the EMA (i)
(2009)           Maintenance            income high school         Score Matching          increased full-time grade
                 Allowance (EMA):       students in England                                12 enrollment by 4.5
                 (i) ~$50 per week                                                         percentage points (74
                 for each week of                                                          versus 69 percent); (ii)
                 Grade 12 or 13                                                            increase full-time grade 13
                 attendance; (ii)                                                          enrollment by 6.7
                 ~$75 bonuses for                                                          percentage points (68
                 term completions                                                          versus 61 percent).
                 (iii) $75-$200 for
                 course completion




                                                         35
Fryer Jr.    (i) $2 payment for      Administrative data       Field experiment        (i) Earning by Learning:
(2011)       each book read in       from 203 public                                   (a) .012 standard deviation
             Dallas public           schools in Chicago,                               increase in reading scores,
             schools (Earning by     Dallas and New York                               (b) .079 standard deviation
             Learning); (ii)         City                                              increase in math scores; (ii)
             payment for                                                               NYC Spark: (a) -.026 to
             performance on a                                                          .004 standard deviation
             series of tests in                                                        increase in reading scores,
             NYC public schools                                                        (b) -.031 to .062 standard
             (NYC Spark); (iii)                                                        deviation increase in math
             payment for grades                                                        scores; (iii) Paper Project:
             in 5 core courses in                                                      (a) -.006 standard deviation
             Chicago (Paper                                                            increase in reading scores,
             Project)                                                                  (b) -.010 standard
                                                                                       deviation increase in math
                                                                                       scores. No main effect
                                                                                       estimates above are
                                                                                       significant.



Jackson      Texas Advanced          Administrative data       Difference in           Eligibility for the APIP led
(2010)       Placement Incentive     from 57 Texas high        differences using       to: (i) a 2.4 percent
             Program (APIP):         schools for the 1994 to   schools that do not     increase in the percentage
             pays students           2005 period               adopt the APIP as the   of 11th and 12th graders
             between $100 and                                  control group           taking AP exams; (ii) a
             $500 for taking and                                                       13.5 percent increase in the
             passing AP exams;                                                         number of students scoring
             substantial financial                                                     above 1100 (24) on the
             incentives for                                                            SAT (ACT); (iii) a 5
             teachers                                                                  percent increase in the
                                                                                       number of students
                                                                                       attending college.

Kremer,      The Girl’s              Administrative data for   Field experiment        Eligibility for the
Miguel and   Scholarship             6th grade girls at                                scholarship increased test
Thorton      Program                 Kenyan primary                                    scores by .13 standard
(2009)       (Keyna):Girls who       schools                                           deviations during the
             place in the top 15%                                                      program year.
             of all girls in the
             program (treatment)
             schools on
             standardized tests
             received a
             scholarship to cover
             school fees and
             supplies for 2 years




                                                      36
Levitt, List,   (i) Incentives to       Administrative data for   Field experiment   (i) .08 to .17 standard
Neckermann      improve test score      more than 7,000                              deviation improvement in
and Sadoff      performance framed      elementary and high                          test scores for incentives
(2012)          as gains and losses;    schools from three                           framed as losses relative to
                (ii) pecuniary vs.      school districts near                        those framed as gains; .25
                non-pecuniary           Chicago                                      standard deviation
                rewards; (iii)                                                       improvement in test scores
                immediate vs. non-                                                   for non-financial incentives
                immediate rewards                                                    relative to financial
                                                                                     incentives for elementary
                                                                                     school students; (iii) non-
                                                                                     immediate awards have no
                                                                                     effect on test scores



Riccio et al.   Opportunity NYC:        Administrative and        Field experiment   Students in 4th grade at
(2013)          Various health,         survey data for more                         random assignment: effects
                workforce, and          than 11,000 children in                      on math proficiency (i) 2.1
                education incentives    New York                                     percentage points in Year 1
                directed at children                                                 (not significant) (73 versus
                including: (i) $25                                                   71 percent); (ii) 1.7
                per month for 95%                                                    percentage points in Year 2
                school attendance;                                                   (not significant) (80 versus
                (ii) $300 to $600 for                                                79 percent).
                passing or
                proficiency on                                                       Students in 7th grade at
                standardized exams                                                   random assignment: effects
                (amount varies for                                                   on math proficiency: (i) 0.8
                primary/middle/high                                                  percentage points in Year 1
                school students);                                                    (not significant) (60 versus
                (iii) $25 per parent-                                                59 percent); (ii) -1.6
                teacher conference                                                   percentage points in Year 2
                attended (up to 2 per                                                (not significant) (62 versus
                year)                                                                64 percent).



Rodreiguez-     Quantum                 Administrative and        Field experiment   Eligibility for the QOP: (i)
Planas (2012)   Opportunity             survey data from low-                        increased high school or
                Program (QOP):          achieving students                           GED completion by 4.3
                $1.25 per hour          from low performing                          percentage points (71
                devoted to              high schools entering                        versus 67 percent) (not
                prescribed              in Grade 9 in 1995 in                        significant); (ii) increased
                educational and         the United States                            postsecondary education
                developmental                                                        enrollment by 5 percentage
                activities + a lump                                                  points (36 versus 31
                sum payment                                                          percent).
                matching their
                earnings paid upon
                obtaining a high
                school diploma or
                GED and enrolled
                in postsecondary
                education or


                                                         37
                training

Springer,       Students who            Administrative data for    Field experiment   Students randomly
Rosenquist      attended 25 percent     more than 300 primary                         assigned to receive the
and Swain       and 75 percent of       and middle school                             non-monetary award
(2014)          their allotted          students                                      (certificate) attended 43
                supplemental                                                          percent more tutoring
                education services                                                    hours than control group
                (SES) tutoring                                                        students (60 versus 17
                hours received (i) a                                                  percent).
                signed certificate of
                recognition from the                                                  Students randomly
                district                                                              assigned to receive the
                superintendent; OR                                                    monetary award attended 6
                (ii) $25 plus an                                                      percent more tutoring
                additional $50 upon                                                   hours than control group
                completing 100                                                        students (23 percent versus
                percent of allotted                                                   17 percent) (not
                hours                                                                 significant).

Panel B: Postsecondary education

Angrist, Lang   The Student             Administrative data for    Field Experiment   Students randomly
and             Achievement and         first year students at a                      assigned to the SFP
Oreopoulos      Retention Project       large public Canadian                         treatment arm (i) .01
(2009)          (STAR) (i) GPA          university                                    standard deviation increase
                based scholarship                                                     in first-year GPA (not
                (SFP); (ii)                                                           significant); (ii) -.02
                mentoring from                                                        standard deviation increase
                upper-year                                                            in second-year GPA (not
                undergraduates                                                        significant). Students
                (SSP); (iii) SFP +                                                    randomly assigned to the
                SSP                                                                   SFP + SSP treatment arm
                                                                                      (i) .23 standard deviation
                                                                                      increase in first-year GPA;
                                                                                      (ii) .08 standard deviation
                                                                                      increase in second-year
                                                                                      GPA (not significant).

Angrist,        $100 reward for         Administrative data for    Field experiment   Students randomly
Oreopoulos      course grades of 70     first and second-year                         assigned to the treatment
and Williams    percent + $20 for       students at a large                           group (i) earned first-year
(2014)          each percentage         public Canadian                               GPAs -.021 standard
                point higher than       university                                    deviations higher than
                this                                                                  those for the control group
                                                                                      (not significant); (ii)
                                                                                      earned a second-year GPA
                                                                                      .107 standard deviations
                                                                                      higher than those for the
                                                                                      control group (not
                                                                                      significant).




                                                         38
Barrow et al.   For each of two          Administrative data for   Field experiment       Students randomly
(2014)          semesters, (i) $250      low-income parents                               assigned to the treatment
                for at least half-time   beginning community                              group (i) earned 3.345
                enrollment; (ii)         college in Louisiana                             more credits (10.7 versus
                $250 for a “C-“                                                           7.4 credits) during first
                average or better at                                                      year; (ii) earned first-year
                the end of                                                                GPAs 0.068 points higher
                midterms; (iii) $500                                                      (2.23 versus 2.17 GPA)
                for maintaining a                                                         (not significant).
                “C-“ average; (iv)
                optional counselling

Castleman       (i) Florida              Administrative data for   Differences-in-        Students eligible for FMS
(2014)          Medallion Scholars                                 differences design     were 3 percentage points
                (FMS) scholarship:                                                        more likely to graduate
                75% of public                                                             with a BA five years after
                college tuition and                                                       high school (not
                fees paid for                                                             significant) (41 versus 38
                students with a 3.0                                                       percent).
                high school GPA
                and at least 20 on                                                        Students eligible for FAS
                the ACT (or 970 on                                                        were 10 percentage points
                the SAT); (ii)                                                            more likely to graduate
                Florida Academic                                                          with a BA five years after
                Scholars (FAS)                                                            high school (54 versus 44
                scholarship: 100%                                                         percent).
                of public college
                tuition and fees paid
                for students with a
                3.5 high school
                GPA and at least 28
                on the ACT (or
                1270 on the SAT)

Cohodes and     John and Abigail         Administrative data for   Regression             Eligibility for the MA
Goodman         Adams Scholarship        Massachusetts public      discontinuity design   scholarship (i) increased
(2014)          Program (MA): MA         high school students      on 10th grade test     the likelihood of enrolling
                public school tuition    (Massachusetts            scores                 in a college immediately
                waived for students      Department of                                    by 1.7 percentage points
                who score in the top     Elementary and                                   (80 versus 78 percent); (ii)
                25th percentile of       Secondary Education,                             decreased the likelihood of
                their school district    National Student                                 graduating from a college
                and attain minimum       Clearing House)                                  within 6 years by 2.5
                absolute                                                                  percentage points (69
                benchmarks on the                                                         versus 66 percent).
                statewide 10th grade
                test; must maintain
                3.0 GPA in college




                                                         39
Cha and Patel    $1,800 for earning a    Administrative data for    Field experiment     Students randomly
(2010)           grade of “C” or         low-income Ohio                                 assigned to the treatment
                 better in 12 or more    college students with                           group earned 2.0 more
                 credits or $900 for a   children and eligible                           credits (15.4 versus 13.4
                 “C” or better in 6 to   for TANF                                        credits).
                 11 credits. All
                 payments made at
                 the end of each
                 semester


Cornwell, Lee    Georgia Hope: Full      Administrative data for    Difference in        Eligibility for the Georgia
and Mustard      tuition/fees at GA      all undergraduate          differences using    Hope scholarship (i)
(2005)           public colleges for     students enrolled at the   non-Georgia          decreased the likelihood of
                 students with a 3.0     University of Georgia      residents as the     freshman full course load
                 high school GPA;                                   control group        enrollment by 4.2
                 must maintain a 3.0                                                     percentage points (85
                 GPA in college                                                          versus 81 percent); (ii)
                                                                                         decreased the likelihood of
                                                                                         completing a freshman full
                                                                                         course load by 6.0
                                                                                         percentage points (70
                                                                                         versus 64 percent).

De Paola,        (i) $1,000 for          Administrative data        Field experiment     Students randomly
Scoppa, and      students with the 30    from first-year                                 assigned to the $1,000
Nistico (2012)   highest cumulative      business students at                            reward treatment (i) scored
                 scores on all exams;    the University of                               .19 standard deviations
                 (ii) $350 for           Calabria                                        higher on exams; (ii)
                 students with the 30                                                    earned 2.335 more credits
                 highest cumulative                                                      (20.8 versus 18.5 credits).
                 scores on all exams
                                                                                         Students randomly
                                                                                         assigned to the $350
                                                                                         reward treatment (i) scored
                                                                                         .16 standard deviations
                                                                                         higher on exams; (ii)
                                                                                         earned 2.194 more credits
                                                                                         (20.7 versus 18.5 credits).

Dynarski         Arkansas (AR):          Survey (census, 1          Difference in        The fraction of the age 22
(2008)           $1000 to $2500 for      percent PUMS) data         differences design   to 34 population with a
                 tuition and fees at     for all 22 to 34 year      using other states   college degree increased by
                 AR colleges for         olds in 2000               (not GA or AR) as    2.98 percentage points in
                 students with at                                   the control group    states that enacted merit
                 least 19 on the ACT                                                     scholarship programs (GA
                 and a 2.5 core high                                                     and AR) (37 versus 34
                 school GPA;                                                             percent).
                 Georgia: full
                 tuition/fees at GA
                 public colleges for
                 students with a 3.0
                 high school GPA;
                 must maintain a 3.0



                                                          40
                GPA in college


Ford et al.     Future to Discover     Administrative data       Field experiment        Eligibility for Learning
(2012)          (FTD): “Learning       from high schools in                              Accounts increased
                Accounts” up to        two Canadian                                      postsecondary enrollment
                $8,000 in funds for    provinces                                         by 8 percentage points (71
                college related                                                          versus 63 percent)
                expenses

Leuven,         (i) $600 for           Administrative data       Field experiment        Students in the $600
Oosterbeek,     completion of all      from first-year                                   treatment arm were 4.6
and van der     first-year             business and                                      percentage points more
Klaauw          requirements; (ii)     economics students at                             likely to complete first-
(2010)          $200 for completion    the University of                                 year requirements (24
                of all first-year      Amsterdam                                         versus 19.5 percent) (not
                requirements                                                             significant).

                                                                                         Students in the $200
                                                                                         treatment arm were 0.7
                                                                                         percentage points more
                                                                                         likely to complete first-
                                                                                         year requirements (20
                                                                                         versus 19.5 percent) (not
                                                                                         significant).

Leuven et al.   (i) $1250 for the      Administrative data       Field experiment        Students randomly
(2011)          student with the top   from first-year           (pre-randomization      assigned to the treatment
                microeconomics         business students at      students could select   groups (i) were 6.8
                exam score; (ii)       the University of         which treatment arm     percentage points more
                $3750 for the          Amsterdam                 ($1250,$3750,$6250)     likely to attend the first
                student with the top                             they wanted to be       tutorial meeting (81 versus
                microeconomics                                   eligible for)           74 percent); answered
                exams score; (iii)                                                       0.895 ($1250 incentive),
                $6250 for the                                                            1.246 ($3750 incentive),
                student with the top                                                     and -0.629 ($6250
                microeconomics                                                           incentive) more questions
                exam score.                                                              correctly on the 35
                                                                                         question final exam.

MacDonald et    $750 each of three     Administrative data for   Field experiment        Students randomly
al. (2009)      semesters for (i)      at-risk community                                 assigned to the treatment
                obtaining a 2.0 GPA    college students in                               group earned GPAs (i)
                or higher; (ii) meet   Ontario, Canada                                   0.07 points higher during
                eligibility                                                              the first semester of college
                requirements for the                                                     (2.18 versus 2.11) (not
                following semester;                                                      significant); (ii) 0.12
                (iii) completing at                                                      points higher during the
                least 12 hours of                                                        second semester (2.06
                tutorial, case                                                           versus 1.88); (iii) 0.01
                management or                                                            points higher during the
                career workshops                                                         third semester (2.10 versus
                                                                                         2.09) (not significant).
                                                                                         Larger effects were
                                                                                         observed for women and


                                                        41
                                                                                       older students.

Miller et al.   $1,000 each of four   Administrative data for   Field experiment       Students randomly
(2011)          semesters for (i)     low-income students                              assigned to the treatment
                obtaining a 2.0 GPA   starting at the                                  group (i) earned 0.0 more
                or higher; (ii)       University of New                                first semester credits
                enrolling full        Mexico                                           (baseline average of 12.8
                time;(iii)                                                             credits) (not significant);
                completing two                                                         (ii) earned 0.6 more second
                extra advisor                                                          semester credits (8.7 versus
                meetings per                                                           8.1 credits) than students in
                semester                                                               the control group.

Ritchburg-      Up to $1300 each of   Administrative data for   Field experiment       Students randomly
Hayes,          two or three          New York City                                    assigned to the treatment
Sommo and       semesters, paid in    community college                                group (i) earned 0.6 more
Welbeck         installments for      students between ages                            first semester credits (8.7
(2011)          achieving (i)         22 and 35 who also                               versus 8.1 credits); (ii)
                registration; (ii)    required remediation                             were 7.4 percentage points
                continued mid-                                                         more likely to enroll full
                semester                                                               time (60 versus 53
                enrollment; (iii) a                                                    percent); (iii) experience
                2,0 GPA in at least                                                    no difference in GPA than
                6 credits.                                                             students in the control
                                                                                       group.

Scott-Clayton   West Virginia's       Administrative data       Regression             Eligibility for the
(2011a)         PROMISE               from public colleges in   discontinuity design   PROMISE scholarship
                scholarship: WV       West Virginia             on ACT score           increases the likelihood
                public college                                                         that a student (i) maintains
                tuition waiver for                                                     a 3.0 GPA in college by
                students we earn a                                                     6.3 percentage points (46
                3.0 high school                                                        verss 40 percent); (ii)
                GPA and an ACT                                                         graduates with a BA within
                score of 21 or                                                         4 years by 6.7 percentage
                higher + maintain a                                                    points (43 versus 37
                3.0 college GPA                                                        percent).
                (with credit
                requirements)

Sjoquist and    Arkansas (AR):        Survey (census, 5         Difference in          The fraction of the age 22
Winters         $1000 to $2500 for    percent PUMS) data        differences design     to 34 population with a
(2012a)         tuition and fees at   for all 22 to 34 year     using other states     college degree increased by
                AR colleges for       olds in 2000              (not AR or GA) as      0.9 percentage points (not
                students with at                                the control group      significant) in states that
                least 19 on the ACT                                                    enacted merit scholarship
                and a 2.5 core high                                                    programs (GA and AR) (35
                school GPA;                                                            versus 34 percent).
                Georgia: full
                tuition/fees at GA
                public colleges for
                students with a 3.0
                high school GPA;
                must maintain a 3.0



                                                       42
                 GPA in college

Sjoquist and     25 state-based merit   Survey data from the   Difference in           The fraction of the age 24
Winter           aid programs with      2000 census (1% and    differences design      to 30 population with a
(2012b)          requirements on        5% PUMS) and the       using non-merit         college degree increased by
                 high school GPA,       2000 to 2010           scholarship states as   -0.2 percentage points (not
                 ACT/SAT scores,        American Community     the control group       significant) in states that
                 college credit         Survey                                         enacted merit scholarship
                 enrollment, and                                                       programs (38.6 versus 38.8
                 college GPA                                                           percent).




b) Interventions that help reduce inertia and change routine


           Relying on routine usually makes our lives easier by reducing cognitive costs of
decision making, but sometimes it can lead us astray as we ignore other available
opportunities. In this subsection, we review policies and programs designed to change
routines or encourage students and parents to reconsider their default plans. Tables 2, 3,
and 4 summarize this research, respectively categorized by whether interventions target
students, parents, or environment.


           i. Text messages, Email reminders, Mailings, and Videos


           Many students who commit to attending a particular college in spring are nowhere
to be found on campus the following fall. Whether due to forgetfulness regarding
paperwork, a lack of true interest, or anxiety regarding a new environment, as many as 20
percent of recent high school graduates in the United States who accept offers of
admission fail to actually enroll after their senior year. This phenomenon is commonly
known as summer melt. 116 In a study of approximately 5,000 recent high school
graduates who had indicated intent to go to college, Castleman and Page (2014c) asked
whether low-cost reminders could effectively reduce summer melt. Some students were
randomly assigned to receive text messages in the summer between high school and
college informing them of tasks required by their intended college and offering additional
assistance if needed. These students were 3 percentage points more likely to ultimately

116
      Castleman and Page , 2014a; Castleman, Arnold and Wartman, 2012.

                                                       43
enroll at a two-year college (but not four-year college) than students who received no
intervention (23 versus 20 percent). Treatment effects were concentrated among those
with less definite college plans and less access to college-planning supports.117
         Another example of a low-cost intervention with minimal personal contact comes
from Hoxby and Turner (2013), who focus on high-achieving students from low-income
family backgrounds.           The authors were interested in this group's tendency to
disproportionately apply to less selective colleges, despite being able to get into better
schools. Across the United States, 39,000 students were randomly selected into a
treatment or control group. The treatment group received a package of information about
more selective colleges, an application fee waiver, and encouragement to apply. The
package listed differences in graduation rates across schools, instructional resources of
various selective colleges, instructions on how to apply, and expected out-of-pocket costs
of attending. Students from the treatment group applied to more colleges, and were 40
percentage points more likely to apply to a selective college118 (92 versus 52 percent) and
5 percentage points (9 versus 4 percent) more likely to enroll in a selective school.
Importantly, Hoxby and Turner (2013) find no evidence that students induced to attend
more selective colleges are persisting at lower rates than their control group peers,
suggesting that the high-achieving, low-income students who were induced to apply to
and enroll in more selective colleges by the intervention were not underprepared.
         Providing information about education’s benefits can also increase motivation to
attend. Jensen (2010) surveys students from the Dominican Republic and finds that while
the measured returns to schooling are high, the returns perceived by students are
extremely low. Students presented with information on the higher measured returns
reported increased perceived returns several months later and an increase in schooling by
0.20 years, on average.



117
    A similar strategy can be adopted in targeting potential high school dropouts. For example, in August of
each year, retired teachers and guidance counselors attempt to telephone Grade 11 and 12 students in
Toronto not yet registered for the upcoming school year, but not yet graduated. They do not leave voice
mail, but rather keep trying until they speak with the student. In 2011, of the 1,667 students contacted, the
callers reached all but 15 and convinced 864 to come back. Of those, 300 graduated that year (Hammer,
2012).
118
    Here, we define “selective college” as an institution 5 percentiles above schools for which the student
was prepared to attend. See Hoxby and Turner, 2013.

                                                     44
       How information is presented or who is targeted matter as well. Dinkelman and
Martinez (2013) examined effects from showing Grade 8 Chilean students DVDs of
young disadvantaged adults describing their path towards college or vocational schools.
While the presentation increased understanding about financial aid, there was little
change in students’ expectations of overall educational attainment. In Finland, Kerr,
Pekkarinen, Sarvimaki and Uusitalo (2014) evaluate an experiment in which high school
seniors across 97 randomly chosen schools were provided with information about
average earnings and employment outcomes for graduates across a variety of
postsecondary programs. While they find evidence of information updating, they find no
impact on school choice or program of study.


       ii. Personal Assistance


       Text messages, email reminders, mailings, and video presentations cost little, but
are also easy to ignore. A more intensive approach to helping students with inertia is
personal assistance, in the form of one-on-one help from someone trusted and someone
with experience. These opportunities to speak directly to students offer an important
social component to nudge attempts and can be tailored to individual circumstances. By
making the application process more convenient and appealing, personal assistance
reduces procrastination. Offering help to "get it done now" in an existing interaction
minimizes disruption and lowers opportunity costs of time. Personal assistance could
also help reduce anxiety about making mistakes; it speeds up and simplifies the process,
avoiding the need for detailed instructions and review. Offering assistance may increase
perceptions about the value in the help being offered: personal encouragement may
empower individuals to more fully consider the possibility of change.




                                           45
            Table 2: Interventions to Help Reduce Inertia and Change Routine for Students

  Authors            Intervention                  Data               Research                         Findings
                                                                       Design

Panel A: Text messages, Email reminders, Mailings, and Videos

Castleman       12 text message          Administrative data      Field         Community college students randomly
and Page        reminders about re-      from the National        experiment    assigned to receive text message
(2014b)         filing the FAFSA to      Student                                reminders were 12 percentage points (19
                renew financial aid      Clearinghouse and                      percent) more likely to persist into their
                after the freshman       uAspire (a non-profit                  sophomore year (baseline persistence
                year                     organization) for 808                  rate of 64 percent). The intervention had
                                         college students in                    no effect on 4-year college students
                                         Boston and                             (baseline persistence rate of 87 percent).
                                         Springfield,
                                         Massachusetts

Castleman       Text message              Administrative data      Field              Students randomly assigned to receive
and Page        reminders and             from Texas,              experiment         text message reminders were 3 percentage
(2014c)         mentoring support to      Massachusetts and                           points more likely to enroll in a two year
                complete college          Pennsylvania                                college (23 versus 20 percent). Treatment
                enrollment process                                                    effects were largest for students with
                                                                                      moderate high school GPAs and less
                                                                                      defined college plans

Dinkleman       15 minute                 Survey and               Field              Students randomly assigned to receive
and Martinez    informational video       administrative data      experiment         treatment were 6 percentage points more
(2014)          on the higher             for more than 6000       (randomization     likely to be enrolled in college-
                educational               eight grade students     at the school      preparation high school (66 versus 60
                experience of 13          in Chile                 level)             percent). Effects were largest for students
                adults, including                                                     randomly assigned to take DVDs home to
                information on                                                        view with their families.
                eligibility for
                financial aid

Hoxby and       Mailed semi-              Administrative data      Field              Treated students (i) applied to 2.2 more
Turner (2013)   customized                from 12,000 high         experiment         colleges (6.9 versus 4.7 schools); (ii) 40
                information on            school seniors in the                       percentage points more likely to apply to
                college options plus      US                                          a selective college (92 versus 52 percent);
                application fee waiver                                                (iii) 5 percentage points more likely to
                for high-achieving,                                                   enroll in a selective school (8.8 versus 3.5
                low-income students                                                   percent).



Jensen (2010)   Information on the        Survey data from 8th     Field              Students randomly assigned to receive
                difference in earnings    grade boys in the        experiment         information on the returns to education (i)
                between university,       Dominican Republic       (randomization     were 4.1 percentage points more likely to
                secondary and                                      at the school      enroll in school for grade 9 (59 versus 55
                primary school                                     level)             percent); (ii) completed 0.2 more years of
                educated men                                                          schooling (10 versus 9.8 years of
                between the ages of                                                   schooling). Treatment effects were



                                                          46
                30 and 40                                                           largest for the least poor students.



Kerr et al.     Information session       Survey and              Field             The college application and enrollment
(2014)          on the earnings           administrative data     experiment        behavior of students randomly assigned to
                differences between       for the 3500 Finnish    (randomization    the information treatment was no different
                various                   graduating high         at the school     than control group students.
                postsecondary             school students         level)
                degrees and program

McGuigan,       Information on the        Survey data for more    Field             Students randomly assigned to the
Mcnally and     potential earnings        than 12000 high         experiment        treatment group were (i) 3.9 percentage
Wyness          benefits and net costs    school students at 56   (randomization    points less likely to believe that the costs
(2012)          of attending college,     schools in London       at the school     of higher education are a barrier to
                as well as information                            level)            attending (7.8 versus 11.7 percent); (ii)
                on financial aid                                                    3.3 percentage points more likely to
                options. Treated                                                    believe that university graduates have
                students also received                                              better labor force outcomes (83.7 versus
                a postcard and a 5                                                  80.4 percent); (iii) 0.6 percentage points
                minute video on the                                                 more likely to express university
                same topic                                                          application intentions (59.6 versus 59
                                                                                    percent) (not significant).

Nguyen          Information on the        Administrative and      Field             Students randomly assigned to receive
(2008)          returns to education      survey data for         experiment        information on the returns to education
                delivered through (i)     primary school          (randomization    through national statistics scored .24
                presenting national       students in             at the school     standard deviations higher on
                statistics on the         Madagascar              level)            standardized tests.
                average returns to
                education; (ii) a role                                              Students randomly assigned to receive
                model; (iii) national                                               information on the returns to education
                statistics and a role                                               through a mentor score .08 standard
                model                                                               deviations higher on standardized tests
                                                                                    (not significant).



Oreopoulos      Short video on the        Survey data from         Field           Among students unsure about
and Dunn        potential earnings        1,600 low-income         experiment      their education attainment,
(2013)          gains from                high school students                     random assignment to treatment
                postsecondary             (5 high schools) in                      led to a (i) 24.1 percentage point
                education (PSE), costs    Toronto, Canada                          decrease in the belief that costs are
                of PSE, eligibility for                                            a barrier to attending college (37.6
                financial aid and a                                                versus 61.7 percent; (ii) 15
                personalized financial                                             percentage point increase in
                aid calculator to                                                  community college aspirations (23
                estimate financial aid                                             versus 8 percent); (iii) 23
                                                                                   percentage point increase in
                                                                                   university aspirations (65 versus
                                                                                   42 percent)

Panel B: Personal Assistance




                                                         47
Avery (2013)    Tutoring and college     Administrative data    Field        Students randomly assigned to the
                application assistance   from the College       experiment   College Possible program were (i) 30
                                         Possible Program                    percentage points more likely to apply to
                                                                             a 4-year college; (ii) 44 percentage points
                                                                             more likely to apply to a selective
                                                                             institution; (iii) 15 percentage points more
                                                                             likely to enroll in a 4-year college.

Berman, Ortiz   Counselling on           Administrative data    Field        Students randomly assigned to receive
and Bos         college options, costs   from the Los Angeles   experiment   treatment were (i) 5 percentage points
(2008)          and application          Unified School                      more likely to write the SAT (83 versus
                procedure                District                            78 percent); (ii) 2 percentage points more
                                                                             likely to apply to a college (96 versus 94
                                                                             percent); (iii) 5 percentage points more
                                                                             likely to enroll at a state-college (55
                                                                             versus 50 percent); (iv) no more likely to
                                                                             be enrolled in college overall.

Bettinger,      (i) Personalized         Administrative data    Field        Students randomly assigned to the
Long,           advice in completing     from H&R Block in      experiment   FAFSA Treatment group were (i) 16
Oreopoulos      FAFSA (FAFSA             Ohio and North                      percentage points more likely to complete
and             Treatment Group);        Carolina, the                       a FAFSA (56 versus 40 percent); (ii) 11
Sanbonmatsu     (ii) Personalized        Department of                       percentage points more likely to be
(2012)          financial aid            Education and the                   enrolled in college and receive financial
                estimates and            National Student                    aid (41 versus 30 percent); (iii) 9.4
                encouragement to         Clearing House                      percentage points more likely to be
                complete the FAFSA                                           enrolled full time (31 versus 22 percent);
                on their own                                                 (iv) 8 percentage points more likely to be
                (Information Only                                            enrolled in college for 2 years (36 versus
                Treatment Group)                                             28 percent). Students randomly assigned
                                                                             to the Information Only Treatment group
                                                                             had outcomes similar to those in the
                                                                             control group.

Carrell and     Personalized             Administrative data    Field        Students randomly assigned to receive
Sacerdote       mentoring and            from New Hampshire     experiment   coaching were (i) 5.4 percentage points
(2013)          assistance in            high schools                        more likely to enroll in college (57.2
                completing financial                                         versus 51.8 percent); (ii) 5.6 percentage
                aid and college                                              points more likely to enroll in a 4-year
                application forms                                            college (28.3 versus 22.7 percent); (iii) no
                                                                             more likely to enroll in a 2-year college;
                                                                             (iv) 13 percentage points more likely to
                                                                             be enrolled in college 2 years after high
                                                                             school (47 versus 34 percent).

Castleman,      Counselling to relieve   Administrative data    Field        Students randomly assigned to receive
Arnold and      information and          from 7 high schools    experiment   counselling were (i) 15 percentage points
Wartman         financial barriers to    in Rhode Island                     more likely to be enrolled in college full
(2012)          mitigate summer melt                                         time (47 versus 32 percent); (ii) 15
                                                                             percentage points more likely to be
                                                                             enrolled in a 4-year college (41 versus 26
                                                                             percent); (iii) no more likely to be
                                                                             enrolled in a 2-year college; (iv) 19
                                                                             percentage points more likely to have
                                                                             followed through with intentions from

                                                        48
                                                                               senior year (56 versus 37 percent).



Castleman,      Counselling to low-     Administrative data     Field          Students randomly assigned to receive
Page and        income high school      from high schools in    experiment     counselling were (i) 3.3 percentage points
Schooley        graduates to mitigate   Massachusetts and                      more likely to enroll in college in the fall
(2014)          summer melt             Georgia                                (86 versus 82.7 percent); (ii) 5 percentage
                                                                               points more likely to be enrolled in
                                                                               college in their sophomore year (71
                                                                               versus 66 percent).

Panel C: Coaching and Advising



Borghans,       Advice from             Survey data from        OLS and        Meeting with a high school counsellor is
Golsteyn and    counselling while in    more than 4000 high     Instrumental   associated with a reduction in the
Stenberg        secondary school on     school graduates in     Variables      likelihood that a student wishes they had
(2013)          college program         the Netherlands                        chosen a different program by 2
                choices                                                        percentage points (20 versus 22 percent).
                                                                               Male students and those with parents
                                                                               from low socioeconomic statues are
                                                                               affected the most by high school
                                                                               counselling.

Bettinger and   Coaching to improve     Administrative data     Field          Students randomly assigned to
Baker (2014)    college completion      from 8 public and       experiment     InsideTrack were 4 percentage points
                                        private colleges from                  more likely to complete college (35
                                        InsideTrack                            versus 31 percent).

Cook et al.     Mandatory intensive     Administrative data     Field          Students randomly assigned to receive
(2014)          math tutoring and       for 106 at-risk ninth   experiment     treatment scored (i) .51 standard
                weekly social-          and tenth grade high                   deviations higher on standardized math
                cognitive skill         school students in                     tests (TOT .65 standard deviations); (ii)
                training                Chicago                                earned .43 standard deviations higher
                                                                               math GPAs (TOT .58 standard
                                                                               deviations); (iii) -.06 standard deviations
                                                                               higher on standardized reading tests (not
                                                                               significant).




          Bettinger et al. (2012) offer an example of the power of personal assistance with
an experiment that takes place in H&R Block offices, which provide income tax
preparation services primarily for lower- and middle-income families across the United
States. Families in Ohio and North Carolina were randomly assigned into one of three
groups. The first group was given personalized assistance in completing the FAFSA;
after preparing the family’s tax return, H&R Block professionals offered families the
opportunity to complete the application, a process which typically took an additional ten
minutes. Using software which took advantage of information on the family’s tax return

                                                        49
to pre-populate most of the FAFSA questions, treatment recipients were not only guided
through the application process, but also provided with a financial aid estimate and
tuition estimates at nearby colleges. A second treatment group was provided with the
same information and aid estimates as the first, but were left to complete the FAFSA on
their own.
         Relative to the control group, FAFSA application rates and college enrollment
rates did not increase for students whose families received the Information Only
Treatment. The full personal assistance treatment, however, was very effective: On
average, graduating high school students whose families received the FAFSA Treatment
were 16 percentage points (56 percent versus 40 percent) more likely to have filed the
FAFSA than those in the comparison group, and were 8 percentage points (35 versus 27
percent) more likely to attend college for at least two years. This suggests that those
induced to enroll were not underprepared for college.119
         A number of studies explore the potential for personal assistance to help with
other aspects of the college application process. We mention three key ones here. First,
Avery (2013) evaluates the College Possible program, a comprehensive mentoring
intervention that targets disadvantaged students in Minnesota. In addition to free tutoring
services designed to help students improve their ACT scores, College Possible provides
students with personalized assistance in choosing a college and completing paperwork.
Students randomly assigned to receive treatment were 30 percentage points more likely to
apply to four-year colleges and submitted almost five more applications, on average, than
students in the comparison group. The results also suggest that program participants were
induced to apply to four-year colleges relative to two-year colleges. If these low-income
students were prepared to attend four-year colleges but would otherwise have applied to
two-year schools, then the College Possible program may be alleviating information
constraints about programs at four-year institutions, leading students to be matched with
programs that better meet their abilities and interests. Indeed, students eligible for the


119
   Building on the positive effects of targeted personal assistance, the U.S. Department of Education’s
FAFSA Completion Project notifies high schools of students who have not completed a FAFSA. Such
information allows guidance counsellors to provide targeted assistance, ask students until they complete the
form, or offer positive (e.g. a discounted prom ticket) or negative incentives (e.g. can't go to the prom
without filling out a FAFSA).

                                                    50
program were 15 percentage points more likely to enroll in a four-year college than those
in the control group.
         Second, Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) study the effects of a program designed to
increase college enrollment rates among New Hampshire high school seniors who had
demonstrated an interest in applying to a postsecondary program, but who failed to begin
the application process by January of their senior year. Students randomly assigned to a
treatment group received personalized assistance to help complete college applications,
with all of their application fees paid for. Students offered this service had college
enrollment rates 15 percentage points higher than the comparison group (65 versus 50
percent), with the majority of the effect concentrated among female students. The
percentage of students attending college for at least two years also increased.120
         Finally, Castleman et al. (2012) evaluate an intervention in seven urban Rhode
Island schools that randomly offered active college counseling to high school graduates
during the summer before college in seven urban schools. Program recipients received
assistance from counselors throughout the summer to secure additional financial aid,
complete necessary paperwork and alleviate any other concerns about going to college.
The authors found that eligibility for the program increased college enrollment rates by
15 percentage points (60 versus 45 percent). Similarly strong effects were found for full-
time enrollment at four-year colleges.


         iii. Coaching and Advising


         The examples above demonstrate how a program's application process can itself
prevent individuals interested in the program from taking it up, and how personal
assistance can be a very effective tool to help. The approach could also be useful in
many other settings besides college applications, such as helping students choose courses
to place them on an academic track or towards timely graduation, helping them open an
education savings plan, helping them with good time management, or reminding them to


120
   A similar project is underway in Canada, in which a three class workshop is incorporated into the Grade
12 curriculum at low-college-transition schools: First, students are assisted in picking programs they are
interested in and can get into; Second, they apply in class, for free, and third, they are assisted in applying
for financial aid.

                                                      51
utilize student services. As a specific example, Bettinger and Baker (2014) evaluate the
InsideTrack program, where mostly non-traditional college students were randomly
assigned a coach whose job was to contact and motivate students regularly (through
email, text, and phone) to help set goals and develop a strategy towards achieving them.
Coaches were proactive, providing outreach without waiting for students to ask. Students
offered the program for one school year were about 5 percentage points more likely to
persist the following year and 4 percentage points more likely to complete their degree
after two years (35 versus 31 percent). While the mechanisms behind these effects are
not entirely clear, coaching could be helping to address several behavioral barriers
discussed in Section II.121
          However, making similar coaching services available does not guarantee
participation because students may procrastinate, ignore the opportunity, or not believe in
its effectiveness; the proactive outreach of the coaches – and other forms of mandatory
assistance – may be important for addressing these limitations. In Chicago, disadvantaged
Grade 9 and 10 students were randomly provided with mandatory intensive tutoring,
during school-hours, along with weekly social-cognitive skill training. 122 Students
participated in one hour of tutoring, as part of their everyday class schedule. While the
weekly skill training sessions were voluntary, because they took place during the school
day, they were preferred over the alternative of going to class. Had the tutoring been
voluntary or the training less convenient, it is not likely that participation would have
remained above 70 percent. As a result of the program and its high participation rate,
math test scores increased remarkably by 0.65 standard deviations.


       iv. Helping Parents


      The assumption that parents make education investment decisions on behalf of their
children is common in economics. However, everyday concerns related to parents' own


121
    Some schools are beginning to consider mobile nudges as a means to provide electronic coaching advice
and motivation. The University of Washinton Tacoma, for example, offers students a personalized mobile
support system called 'Persistence Plus,' which "helps keep students on track by delivering a mobile
"nudge", a daily text message that reminds them about quizzes and tests, helps with time, stress, and
performance management, and encourages appropriate behavioral responses". (Fuhrman, 2014).
122
    Cook et al, 2014.

                                                   52
jobs and careers, household finances and other family responsibilities may distract them
from paying more deliberate attention to their children's educational progress. In this
context, parents may fail to incorporate low-stakes but important investments, such as
asking about their children's day at school or encouraging daily homework completion in
their children's daily routines.         This can occur even if parents realize that greater
involvement can improve their child’s academic outcomes. If the path to more parental
involvement were simpler or more salient, perhaps behavior would change. Below we
present some examples of interventions that adopt this approach.
         Avvisati, Gurgand, Guyon and Maurin (2014) test whether an intervention that
encourages parents to incorporate greater involvement in their child’s middle school as
part of their daily routine improves behavior and academic performance.                          Prior to
randomization, middle school parents in a Parisian suburb were asked whether they
wanted to volunteer to participate in a series of seminars in which parental interest in the
daily activities at their child’s school, homework completion and supervision were
stressed as factors of student success.              The authors then randomly assigned some
volunteer parents to participate in these seminars while other volunteer parents received
no intervention.123 Eligibility to attend the seminars led to substantial increases in parent
involvement, as reported by parents and corroborated by teachers (who were not aware
which parents were assigned to treatment), as well as on student behavior. Treated
parents scored .27 standard deviations higher on an overall parenting score. Students of
treated parents accumulated 25 percent fewer absences and were less likely to be
disciplined for misbehaving than untreated students. Additionally, the increase in parental
involvement led to significant improvements in academic outcomes. Students in the
treatment classes overall had French (language) grades that were .12 standard deviations




123
   As a result of the timing of the randomization, some students of parents who both volunteered and were
assigned to receive treatment were placed in classrooms with students from non-volunteer, non-treated
parents. Other students of volunteer parents who were not assigned to participate in the seminars were also
in classrooms with non-volunteer, non-treated students. This allowed the authors to test whether peer
effects led to change in the behavior of non-treated students who happened to be in the same classroom as
volunteer, treated students. Interestingly, the authors find evidence of peer effects: classmates in the
treatment classes were 2.4 percentage points less likely to be punished for disciplinary reasons and 4.6
percentage points more likely to earn higher behavior marks.

                                                    53
higher than that of the control group, although test scores did not significantly
improve.124
        In Los Angeles, parents with middle and high school children were randomly
selected to participate in a pilot that informed them of missing homework and absences
through email and text messages. Parents selected for this treatment were more likely to
report accurate beliefs about their children's missed assignments, as well as 7.9
percentage points (23 versus 15 percent) more likely to attend parent-teacher conferences
compared to those in a comparison group. Impressively, this inexpensive intervention
improved student GPAs by .23 standard deviations, as well as attendance, assignment
completion, in-class work habits, and cooperation.125




124
    Kraft and Rogers, 2014, examine a related program in which teachers sent parents weekly one-way
communication about advice on what students needed to improve in class (as opposed to messages that
focused on what students were doing well in class). The probability a student earned course credit by 9
percentage points (96 versus 87 percent).
125
    Bergman, 2013.

                                                    54
          Table 3: Interventions to Help Reduce Inertia and Change Routine for Parents

  Authors            Intervention             Data             Research                          Findings
                                                                Design

Avvisati et      Three meetings,         Administrative     Field             Treated parents are 3.4 percentage points
al. (2014)       focused on how          data from 6th      experiment        more likely to contact the school regularly
                 parents can help        grade students     (randomization    (82 versus 79 percent) and 6.7 percentage
                 their children do       from a school      done after        points more likely to monitor their child’s
                 well in school (with    district outside   consent;          homework (27 versus 21 percent).
                 an emphasis on          of Paris,          randomization
                 homework                France             at class level    Children of parents eligible for the
                 completion), every                         so can get peer   intervention accumulate 25 percent fewer
                 2-3 weeks from                             effects)          absences and achieve French grade .12
                 November to                                                  standard deviations higher than those of non-
                 December                                                     treated students

Banergi et al.   Three interventions     Survey data        Field             ML treatment mothers were 3 percentage
(2013)           in rural India (i)      from 480           experiment        points more likely to review their child’s
                 ML: mother literacy     villages in two                      school work (25 versus 22 percent).
                 and numeracy            Indian states                        CHAMPS treatment mothers were 6.5
                 intervention; (ii)                                           percentage points more likely to review their
                 CHAMPS: teaching                                             child’s school work (28.5 versus 22 percent).
                 mothers about
                 education system                                             Children of treated mothers scored .037 to
                 and how to help                                              .069 standard deviations higher on numeracy
                 their children; (iii)                                        tests than children of untreated mothers
                 ML + CHAMPS

Benhassine       Small “labeled cash     Survey data        Field             Students of families randomly assigned to
et al. (2013)    transfer” (LCT) to      for more than      experiment        receive LCTs were (i) 5.1 percentage points
                 fathers of children     47000 primary                        less likely to drop out of school after 2 years
                 in poor rural           school                               (2.5 percent versus 7.6 percent); (ii) 7.9
                 communities             students in 5                        percentage points more likely to complete
                                         Moroccan                             primary school (72.3 percent versus 64.4
                                         regions                              percent).

Bergman          Biweekly                Administrative     Field             Students whose parents were eligible for
(2013)           calls/texts/emails to   data from 462      experiment        treatment experienced (i) a .23 standard
                 middle and high         students in                          deviation increase in GPA, sensitive to past
                 school parents about    grades 6-11 at                       GPA as a control; (ii) marginal increase in
                 missed assignments      a school in                          test scores; (iii) improvement in classroom
                 and tests               Los Angeles                          behavior (iv) 6 percentage points less likely
                                                                              to exhibit (teacher reported) unsatisfactory
                                                                              classroom behavior (20 versus 26 percent);
                                                                              (v) 6.9 percentage points more likely to
                                                                              exhibit (teacher reported) excellent classroom
                                                                              behavior (41 versus 34 percent).

                                                                              Treated parents were 7.9 percentage points
                                                                              more likely to attend parent-teacher
                                                                              conferences (23 versus 15 percent).




                                                            55
Bursztyn and    Solicited whether       Survey data      Framed field     Treated parents willing to give up about 6%
Coffman         parents would be        from 210         experiment       of monthly income to keep the CCT with
(2012)          willing to choose a     families with                     monitoring. When offered an alternative
                cash transfer (CT)      adolsecent                        technology that sent text messages to the
                program over their a    children in                       parent when the child was absent from
                CCT program that        Brazil                            school, parents were willing to switch from
                included a feature                                        the CCT to the CT.
                which monitored
                children’s school
                attendance

Harackiewicz    Parents were mailed     Administrative   Field            Students of parents eligible for treatment
et al. (2012)   two mailed              and survey       experiment       enrolled in nearly 1 more semester of STEM
                brochures and the       data from                         courses than students of untreated parents
                link to a website       Wisconsin                         (8.31 versus 7.50 semesters).
                that discussed the      10th and 11th
                value of STEM           grade students                    Treated parents were 17 percent more likely
                courses                 and their                         to value STEM courses and 17 percent more
                                        families                          likely to have conversations about the
                                                                          importance of advanced STEM courses with
                                                                          their children.

Kraft and       Daily phone             Administrative   Field            Students of parents eligible for treatment (i)
Dougherty       calls/text messages     data from 6th    experiment       increased homework completion by 5.9
(2013)          to parents of 6th and   and 9th grade    (randomizatio    percentage points (85 versus 79 percent); (ii)
                9th grade students at   charter school   n at the class   increased in-class participation by 0.59 times
                MATCH charter           students in      level)           per-day (6.84 versus 5.25 times per day).
                school in Boston.       Boston
                Messages focused
                on what child did
                that day, what
                assignments and
                homework was
                assigned and ways
                for the child to
                improve.

Kraft and       Weekly                  Administrative   Field            Students of parents who received messages
Rogers          calls/emails/text       data for 435     experiment       highlighting positive behavior were 4.5
(2014)          messages to parents     summer                            percentage points more likely to earn course
                of high school          program high                      credit (91.7 versus 87.2 percent) (not
                students                school                            significant)
                highlighting (i) what   students
                the student was                                           Students of parents who received
                doing well                                                improvement messages were 8.8 percentage
                behaviorally or                                           points more likely to earn course credit (96
                academically; OR                                          versus 87.2 percent).
                (ii) what the student
                needed to improve
                on




                                                         56
       Harackiewicz et al. (2012) tested an intervention that sent parents brochures
promoting the career benefits from studying science, technology engineering and
mathematics courses (often referred to as STEM courses). Parents were also directed to
a web site and given advice on how to discuss these benefits with their children. On
average, grade 10 and 11 students of parents randomly assigned this information
increased their enrollment in STEM courses by nearly a semester. Additionally, parents
reported increased positive perception of STEM courses and indicated that the materials
provided helped them discuss the importance of course selection with their children.
Students of college educated parents were the most likely to respond to the treatment by
taking additional advanced STEM courses; given that these students are more likely than
their peers to have passed foundational STEM courses early in high school, it is possible
that the most prepared students were also the students more encouraged to enroll.
       Beyond the classroom, behavioral economists are now examining interventions
that could be brought into the home. For example, Ariel Kalil and Susan Mayer are
currently studying how disadvantaged parents might more frequently engage in
educational play with their child. Parents with children in Chicago preschools are given
electronic tablets with education games installed.       Some are randomly provided
information about the importance of educational play, then asked to select a preschool
staff member to help “keep score” on playtime spent with the child. Parents also receive
advice for scheduling playtime and awards of recognition for meeting goals. More
explicitly, Banerji, Berry and Shotland (2013) examine the effects of training parents in
rural India about concrete ways to engage with their child’s learning. Treated mothers
were 6.5 percentage points (24 to 52 percent) more likely to review their children’s
school work, though math test scores for children of these parents only marginally
improved.


       v. Changing Defaults and Adding Structure


       The interventions discussed above address students' tendency to stick to routine
by providing salient reminders, information, or personal assistance to help consider other
options. Another approach is to change routine externally by changing default options or


                                           57
by imposing more structure.126 One clear example of this comes from the ACT college
entrance exam. Before Fall 1997, students who took the ACT were allowed to send their
test scores to three schools for free, with each additional report costing $6. Nearly 80
percent of ACT takers sent exactly three reports. After Fall 1997, students were allowed
to send an additional (fourth) free report, while the cost of additional reports remained the
same. Pallais (2013) finds that after allowing students to send four reports for free, less
than 20 percent of ACT takers sent three test score reports and more than 70 percent sent
exactly four reports, suggesting that the default number of free reports dominated student
application behavior. Allowing an additional free report also changed types of schools
some students applied to. Specifically, low-income students submitted more applications
and were more likely to apply to a selective institution. With only three default
submissions, some students for whom applying to a selective school would have been a
realistic option may have decided not to apply in order to retain three safer options.
           As another example of changing defaults, Oreopoulos and Ford (in progress)
propose helping all Grade 12 students from disadvantaged high schools to apply to at
least one postsecondary program in class, for free. They develop an experiment in
Canada in which a three class workshop is incorporated into the Grade 12 curriculum at
low-college-transition schools: first, students receive assistance in picking programs they
are interested in and can get into; second, they apply in class, for free; and third, they
receive assistance in applying for financial aid. The slogan of the program is "Keep Your
Options Open”; by exiting high school with both an offer of acceptance from a program
the student helped choose and a financial aid package, the idea of going to college
becomes less abstract. The path becomes more salient and easier to take.
           Encouraging students to follow better routines can also occur through imposing
more structure. Elementary and secondary school students follow a clearly defined path
to graduation, including taking mandatory courses and completing frequent tests.
College programs, on the other hand, often expect students to independently determine
what they need to learn through homework, readings and attending lectures. Attending
class and doing coursework is optional in many cases; the expectation is that students are
already able to prioritize school work in spite of the many demands on their time and

126
      Scott-Clayton, 2011 provides a focus on the need for more structure in community colleges.

                                                      58
tempting alternatives to studying. In some cases, adding structure to coursework and
academic programs may actually “free up” students’ time to be more productive. The
additional freedoms that accompany going to college, such as living independently for
the first time, parties, or non-academic extra-curricular activities may lead students to
procrastinate. Although adding more structure to academic programs, either through
mandatory attendance or homework, reduces flexibility in students’ schedules, it may
also make procrastination seem more costly and improve course performance. Structure
may also help students get a clearer picture of what behaviors are necessary to be
successful in college.
       With these ideas in mind, the Guttman Community College was established in
2012 in New York with an all new academic curriculum and core structure to improve
students' chances of graduation. Entering students commit to attending full time and are
required to attend a three-week Summer Bridge Program in August that sets academic
expectations, encourages students to understand their strengths and challenges as a
learner, builds social networks, introduces the school's electronic resources, and provides
a refresher in reading, writing, and mathematics. All students take the same courses in
the first year, including an interdisciplinary liberal arts and science course, ethnography,
statistics, and composition. Each student is assigned a “student success advocate,” whose
job is to help with the college transition in first year. Students choose a major by the end
of their first year, with a set curriculum. Scheduling of writing assignments and tests are
coordinated among faculty throughout the year.
       Another way to restructure the college environment is to create resources for
student support, coupled with incentives so that students actually utilize them. Students
participating in the Accelerated Study in Associate Program (ASAP) across several City
University of New York (CUNY) campuses are required to 1) enroll full time, 2) take
developmental courses, 3) graduate within three years, 4) take a noncredit seminar about
goal setting and academic planning, 5) attend tutoring frequently, 6) meet with an
assigned advisor at least twice a month, 7) meet with a career and employment specialist
once a semester and 8) take block-scheduled classes so that students have similar
classmates and faculty can coordinate across courses. In exchange for fulfillment of



                                            59
these requirements, the program waives tuition fees, provides free public transportation
passes, pays for all textbooks, and offers social activities.127
      ASAP students are 9.5 percentage points more likely than the comparison group to be
enrolled in college by the end of their second year (58.3 versus 67.8 percent). They earn
7.6 more total credits (37.6 versus 30.0) and are 5.7 percentage points more likely to have
completed an associate’s degree after two years than students in the control group (14.5
versus 8.7 percent). Results at the third year are expected to show even larger effects,
given that program participants are required to graduate within three years. Though these
results are encouraging, determining which aspects of ASAP contribute the most to
student success will be important for allocating scarce resources in the most effective
way.128
          Changing the class environment to incorporate more structure can also improve
student outcomes through both creating a regular routine and by limiting the potential for
procrastination. For example, courses with assignments or exams due only at the end
lead many students to wait until the end to study. Frequent, mandatory assignments can
combat these tendencies to procrastinate. Moreover, these relatively low-stakes
assignments provide the opportunity for students to be given regular feedback on their
performance, allowing confidence to be built by successes and making the benefits of
learning more salient. Grodner and Rupp (2013) test whether mandatory regular
homework assignments improve academic performance for undergraduate students in
North Carolina. Students randomly selected into a treatment group were required to
submit regular homework assignments that were worth 10 percent of their final grade.
The remaining 90 percent was comprised of marks on four exams, each worth 22.5
percent of their final grade. Students in the control group were evaluated only based on
the four exams (each worth 25 percent); the homework assignments were voluntary and
ungraded. The authors find that students who were required to complete homework
assignments scored between 3.5 and 5.7 percent higher on tests than students in the
control group.



127
   Scrivener and Weiss, 2013.
128
   Oreopoulos, Brown, and Lavecchia, 2014 evaluate a similar program offered to disadvantaged high
school students and estimate large impacts on high school graduation and college enrollment.

                                                  60
       Aside from the temptation to procrastinate on homework, college students are also
tempted to avoid coming to class altogether. As we discussed earlier, absenteeism is
common in many college programs and courses; those that take place early in the
morning find it especially difficult to encourage regular attendance. Dobkin et al. (2010)
find that a mandatory attendance policy in one class raises overall academic performance.
In their quasi-experimental design, students were informed after their midterms that
attendance would become mandatory for those who scored below the median. This
policy increased attendance by 28 percentage points for students scoring just below the
median on the midterm. Those at the margin of being required to attend class also
increased final exam scores by more than .46 standard deviations compared to those who
just missed the requirement. Notably, grades in other courses were not affected.




                                            61
Table 4: Interventions to Help Reduce Inertia and Change Routine by Changing Defaults and
                                     Adding Structure

  Authors            Intervention                     Data                 Research                 Findings
                                                                            Design

Ariely and      Students allowed to         Administrative data from    Field            (i) Students allowed to choose
Wertenbroch     choose and commit to        an executive-education      experiment       assignment deadlines, on
(2002)          deadlines for               course at MIT               (randomization   average, chose to pre-commit
                assignments vs.                                         done at course   to less-flexible, evenly spaced
                traditional firm                                        section level)   deadlines; (ii) Students
                deadlines                                               and lab          required to submit at evenly
                                                                        experiment       spaced deadlines performed
                                                                                         better on a proof-reading task
                                                                                         than those with flexible
                                                                                         deadlines.

Dobkin, Gil     Mandatory attendance        Administrative data from    Regression       (i) The mandatory attendance
and Marion      policy for students         three large undergraduate   Discontinuity    policy increased attendance
(2010)          scoring below the           economics classes           Design           rates by 28 percentage points;
                median on the class                                                      (ii) A 10 percentage point
                midterm                                                                  increase in attendance led to a
                                                                                         .16 standard deviation
                                                                                         increase in final exam scores.

Duckworth       Mental Contrasting          Administrative data from    Field            Students randomly assigned
et al. (2011)   with Implementation         school and PSAT records     experiment       to the MCII intervention
                Intentions (MCII)           for 66 tenth grade                           completed 56 more PSAT-
                intervention: students      students at a selective                      prep questions than students
                are asked to (i)            high school                                  in the control group (140
                articulate a goal,                                                       versus 84).
                including why
                achieving it is positive;
                (ii) named a critical
                obstacle to achieving
                the goal; (iii) outline
                strategies for how they
                intended to deal with
                the obstacle.

Grodner and     Mandatory homework          Administrative data from    Field            3.5 to 5.7 percent increase in
Rupp (2013)     assignments worth 10        an undergraduate            experiment       test scores for students
                percent of the final        economics class in North                     assigned to the mandatory
                course grade                Carolina                                     homework group

Oreopoulos,      Comprehensive               Administrative data for    Difference-in-   Eligibility for the Pathways
Brown and        intervention for at-risk    more than 6000             differences      to Education Program
Lavecchia        high school students        disadvantaged high                          increases: (i) 5-year high
(2014)           including: mandatory        school students in                          school graduation rates by
                 (free) tutoring             Toronto, Ontario                            15 percentage points (60
                 sessions, one-on-one                                                    percent versus 45 percent);
                 and group mentoring,                                                    (ii) college enrollment rates
                 free public transit                                                     by 19 percentage points (57
                 tickets (conditional on                                                 percent versus 38 percent);

                                                             62
                 school attendance), up                                                      (iii) math and English test
                 to $4000 for college                                                        scores by .15 standard
                 tuition and fees,                                                           deviations
                 college application
                 assistance and fee
                 waivers.

Pallais (2013)   Before 1997, college        American Freshman            OLS and            Before 1997, more than 70
                 applicants were able to     Survey                       difference-in-     percent of ACT takers sent
                 send 3 free ACT score                                    differences        exactly 3 reports. After
                 reports to schools for                                                      1997, fewer than 20
                 free. After 1997, 4 free                                                    percent sent exactly 3
                 reports were allowed                                                        reports and 70 percent sent
                 with additional reports                                                     exactly 4 reports.
                 costing $6.
                                                                                             After 1997 students applied
                                                                                             to colleges with 0.35 to
                                                                                             0.50 points higher on the
                                                                                             ACT.

Pennebaker       Daily online testing       Administrative data from      OLS                Students in course sections
et al. (2013)    with personalized          an undergraduate              (comparing         with daily online testing (i)
                 feedback                   psychology course at the      "treated"          scored 6 percentage points
                                            University of Texas at        students with      higher on tests in the
                                            Austin                        those from prior   psychology course (77 versus
                                                                          cohorts)           71 percent grade); (ii) scored
                                                                                             marginally higher on other
                                                                                             courses taken the following
                                                                                             semester. Results were
                                                                                             strongest for low-income
                                                                                             students.

Scriviner        Comprehensive              Administrative data from      Field              Students randomly assigned
and Weiss        community college          6 CUNY colleges               experiment         to the treatment group (i) 9.5
(2013)           program intervention:                                                       percentage points more likely
                 mandatory full-time                                                         to be enrolled in college after
                 enrollment, mandatory                                                       two years (67.8 versus 58.3
                 block classes, "quick"                                                      percent); (ii) accumulated 7.6
                 graduation, financial                                                       more credits by the end of the
                 assistance, mentoring                                                       second year of college (37.9
                 and career counselling                                                      versus 30.4 credits); (iii) 5.7
                                                                                             percentage points more likely
                                                                                             to complete their associate’s
                                                                                             degree after two years (14.5
                                                                                             versus 8.7 percent)

Stanca           Mandatory attendance       Survey data from an           OLS and IV         A one percentage point
(2006)           policy on college          undergraduate economics       with panel data    increase in lecture attendance
                 course performance         course at the University of                      was associated with a 0.1
                                            Milan                                            percent increase in test scores.




                                                            63
         Aside from required assignments, the timing of due dates may also be important
for improving academic performance. Many college courses cluster deadlines at the end
of the term, but giving students three to four months to finish their assignments may
exacerbate tendencies to procrastinate. Students who are aware of this tendency may
want tools that help them commit to certain deadlines,129 while students who are not short
sighted and have no procrastination problems may prefer traditional end of term
deadlines that provide the most scheduling flexibility. To test whether students have a
preference for pre-commitment for assignment deadlines, Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002)
randomly assigned multiple sections of a semester-long course to one of two conditions.
In the choice condition, students in one section of the course were allowed to choose their
own deadlines for three papers. Students were free to choose any deadline but were
required to commit to these dates by the end of the first week of the term. As the control
group, students in the other section were given fixed, evenly spaced deadlines for the
same papers. Surprisingly, students in the choice group chose to commit to submitting
their assignments in relatively evenly spaced intervals throughout the term. On average,
students chose to submit the first paper 42 days before the end of the term, the second 26
days before the end of the term and the third 10 days early. The fact that students chose to
constrain themselves through earlier deadlines suggests that at least some of them
attempted to mitigate their expected procrastination.
         To test whether allowing students more flexibility to choose deadlines improves
performance, the authors hired proofreaders for a three-week field experiment, in which
they were randomly assigned to one of three groups. The first group was asked to submit
one proofread document at the end of each week. The second group was allowed to
submit their documents anytime, as long as they were all submitted by the end of three
weeks. Finally, similar to the choice condition in the first study, a third group committed
to self-imposed deadlines for the documents. As in the previous study, the authors found
that participants assigned to the third group chose deadlines that were spread out. These
proofreaders also performed better on the tasks than those randomly assigned to submit
all three tasks by the end of the third week (group 2). However, those who were allowed


129
   For example, this would be the case if students were sophisticated time-inconsistent discounters (i.e.
Laibson, 1997).

                                                     64
to choose their own deadlines performed worse than those who were required to submit a
task weekly (group 1), suggesting that some were unable to choose deadlines “optimally”
to maximize their performance. Altogether, these results suggest that setting fixed
deadlines can improve academic outcomes, especially for students who have a tendency
to procrastinate. These results may also be particularly relevant for increasingly prevalent
online courses, which encounter higher dropout rates than traditional courses.130


c. Interventions that strengthen positive identities


        The need for social interaction and the need to feel liked are powerful influences
on behavior.131 These influences can have negative consequences, such as when hard-
working students are harassed for making less future-oriented classmates feel bad,132 or
when peers collectively focus on enjoying the present, reinforcing each others’ present
bias. One approach to mitigate negative social influences is to help students focus on
more positive identities.        Sociologists have repeatedly demonstrated that individuals
behave differently when prompted or “primed” to think of themselves as associated with
one group compared to another.133 For instance, in Cohen et al. (2006), seventh-graders
from a school with a large proportion of low-income and minority students were
randomly assigned to one of two groups. In the treatment group, students were asked at
the start of the semester to consider and write about which value was most important to
them. In the control group, students chose a “least important” value, but explained why
those values might be important to other people. Treated African-American students had
significantly higher fall semester grades than those in the control group, closing the racial
achievement gap by 40 percent with an increase of more than 0.25 GPA points on a 4
point scale.
        In another experimental study, university freshmen in a treatment group read
results from an upperclassman survey that emphasized that feeling out of place in college
during one’s first year was a common, temporary phenomenon. The treated freshmen

130
    Price and Shireman, 2013.
131
    E.g. Akerlof and Kranton, 2002, 2010.
132
    A more specific example is the case of 'Acting White', where black peers impose costs on their members
trying to do well at school (Austen-Smith and Fryer, 2005).
133
    Steele, 1997; Steele and Aronson, 1995; Mangels et al., 2012.

                                                   65
were then asked to write an essay and record a video for future freshmen, in which they
related the survey results to their present experience. In contrast, freshmen in the control
group read a survey and wrote an essay and speech on how college could change their
pre-existing political attitudes. The African American participants in the treatment group
showed steady improvements in GPA across the four years of college, reducing the racial
gap in GPA between African Americans and European Americans by 52% overall –
without any intermediate interventions.134 Reducing students’ immediate concerns about
their social identity or feeling out of place can lead to significant long-term gains.
           Students may also identify themselves as failures, or less able than others. A
substantial amount of research by Carol Dweck (2007) and others suggests that the
beliefs about themselves that people bring to new situations and opportunities can affect
how much they learn and how well they do. Students who think that most of the factors
contributing to success are innate also are more likely to become discouraged from initial
setbacks, or avoid more challenging tasks after initial successes. In contrast, students
who assume that effort matters most view failure more as an indication that they do not
currently know enough, and should learn more, or that they have to increase the amount
of time and effort spent on that activity. As an example of the consequences of these
different mindsets, Wilson and Lindville (1982) randomly assigned 40 Duke University
freshmen to watch pre-taped videos and read accounts of upperclassmens’ initial
academic struggles in adjusting to college life. Upperclassmen in the videos recalled
having a low GPA during their own freshmen year, but that their grades began to improve
later in their college careers as they grew accustomed to the increased workload and
academic expectations at the university.       In contrast, students in the control group
watched videos of the same upperclassmen in which the older students described their
academic and non-academic interests.          The authors found that students randomly
assigned to the treatment group were 20 percentage points less likely to drop out of
college by the end of their sophomore year (from a baseline dropout rate of 25 percent).
Students in the treatment group also earned better grades; their GPAs increased by 0.34
points (on a 4 point scale) from the first semester of their freshmen year to the end of



134
      Walton and Cohen, 2011.

                                              66
their sophomore year, while the GPAs of those in the control group were unchanged. 135
Similar results have been replicated in other settings.136
         Another approach to improving students’ academic identities at younger ages is to
reduce negative subjective experiences by teaching that the brain is malleable and that
through hard work, intelligence can be improved. Blackwell et al. (2007) tested this
intervention in an experimental setting on 7th grade students in New York City.
Specifically, once a week for 8 weeks, students randomly selected into a treatment group
were taught that intelligence is not fixed and that through effort, intellectual ability can
improve. Students in the control group were only taught study skills. As is common with
middle school students, the GPAs of those in the control group fell from 2.7 to about 2.4
(on a 4 point scale) between the spring of 6th grade and the spring of 7th grade. The
grades of students assigned to the treatment group, however, remained unchanged, which
corresponds to a .55 standard deviation increase relative to the control group. Yeager and
Walton (2011) discuss how these seemingly small interventions can have such large and
lasting effects. They argue that timely interventions which reinforce students’ academic
identities can improve outcomes by decreasing the likelihood that small failures cause
students to believe that academic success is unachievable. This, in turn, mitigates the
potential that a self-reinforcing cycle of disbelief in one’s abilities leads to even worse
academic performance. We describe other studies that examine the effect of reinforcing
students’ academic identities on various outcomes in Table 5.




135
    In particular, if the treatment led relatively weaker, less prepared students to drop out, the average
preparedness of students in the control group would have been higher than the treatment group, biasing the
effect on GPA downward.
136
    Wilson and Lindville, 1985 replicate the findings from their initial study for a larger sample of freshmen
students at the University of Virginia. See Yeager and Walton, 2011 and the citations therein for other
replications and similar interventions.

                                                     67
                      Table 5: Interventions that strengthen positive identities

 Authors            Intervention                    Data                Research             Findings
                                                                         Design

Aronson et    Participants were taught     Administrative data       Field         African-American students
al. (2002)    that intelligence is not a   from 109 Stanford         experiment    randomly assigned to the
              finite endowment and         University                              treatment group earned GPAs
              that it can grow with        undergraduate students                  that were (i) 0.27 points
              effort. They were also                                               higher than those assigned to
              asked to write a pen-pal                                             an unrelated pen-pal treatment
              letter to a fictitious,                                              (3.32 versus 3.05 GPA); (ii)
              struggling middle school                                             0.22 points higher than those
              student explaining that                                              assigned to the control group
              intelligence is malleable.                                           (3.32 versus 3.10 GPA).
                                                                                   Effects were smaller and
                                                                                   insignificant for white
                                                                                   students.

Blackwell,    8 sessions over 8 weeks      Administrative data       Field         .55 standard deviation GPA
Trzeniewski   teaching students that the   from 91 7th grade         experiment    increase from the spring of 7th
and Dweck     brain is malleable and       students in New York                    grade to the spring of 6th
(2007)        that intelligence grows      City                                    grade for students randomly
(Study 2)     with effort                                                          assigned to receive the
                                                                                   treatment, relative to the
                                                                                   control group.

Bursztyn      Students given the           Administrative and        Field         Students randomly assigned
and Jensen    opportunity to sign up for   survey data for more      experiment    to have their sign up decision
(2014)        a free SAT prep course       than 800 low-income                     disclosed to their classmates
              were told that their         high school students in                 were 11 percentage points
              decision to sign up for      Los Angeles                             less likely to sign up for the
              the course would be kept                                             course (61 versus 72 percent).
              private from everyone
              except their classmates                                              Among students taking two
              OR private from                                                      honors classes, those
              everyone, including their                                            randomly assigned to have
              classmates                                                           their sign up decision
                                                                                   disclosed were (i) 25
                                                                                   percentage points less likely
                                                                                   to sign up they happened to
                                                                                   be in a non-honors class
                                                                                   during the experiment (54
                                                                                   versus 79 percent); (ii) 25
                                                                                   percentage points more likely
                                                                                   to sign up if happened to be in
                                                                                   an honors class during the
                                                                                   experiment (97 versus 72
                                                                                   percent).

Bursztyn      Students using an in-        Administrative data on    OLS           Disclosing the names of top
and Jensen    class, computer-based        prep question                           performers is associated with
(2014)        learning system to           performance for 13000                   one fewer correct answer per
              prepare for high school      remedial math and


                                                        68
                exit exams given access      English students in 200                 day (7 versus 8 per day).
                to information on the top    high schools.
                three performers in their                                            For students in the top
                class (and school). The                                              quartile of performance
                names of top performers                                              before the disclosure change,
                for the course were                                                  making the names of top
                revealed part-way                                                    performers public is
                through the semester and                                             associated with 3 fewer
                without prior notice.                                                correct answers per day (9.5
                                                                                     versus 12.5 per day).

Cohen,          Targeted reaffirmations      Administrative data       Field         Students randomly assigned
Garcia,         of personal adequacy and     from a seventh grade      experiment    to the treatment group earned
Apfel and       self-integrity               school                                  a fall semester GPA 0.3
Master                                                                               points higher than the control
(2006)                                                                               group (on a 4 point scale).
                                                                                     Treatment effects were largest
                                                                                     for African American
                                                                                     students; those for white
                                                                                     students were small and
                                                                                     insignificant.

Dee (2014)      To test whether              Administrative data for   Frame field   Student-athletes randomly
                stereotype threat due to     91 students and           experiment    assigned to the stereotype
                being a student-athlete      student-athletes at                     condition scored .84 standard
                affects academic             Swarthmore College                      deviations lower on a
                performance, participants                                            standardized (GRE) test.
                were primed by asking
                whether their athletic
                commitments interfered
                with academic
                commitments prior to
                writing a test

Gollwitzer,     Participants are asked to    Classroom data from       Field         Treated participants scored
et al. (2011)   write about potential        49 German elementary      experiment    slightly more than 1 point
                barriers to completing a     school students and 63                  higher (6.23 versus 5.13 out
                foreign language quiz        U.S. middle school                      of 10) on the vocabulary quiz.
                successfully                 students



Good,           In three treatment           138 middle school         Field         Students randomly assigned
Aronson and     conditions, middle school    students in rural Texas   experiment    to the malleable intelligence
Inzlicht        students were either                                                 condition scored 8 percentage
(2003)          taught that (i)                                                      points higher on a
                intelligence is malleable;                                           standardized math test (82
                (ii) academic struggles                                              versus 74 percent).
                are common at the
                beginning of middle                                                  Students randomly assigned
                school (attribution                                                  to the attribution condition
                condition); (ii) a                                                   scored 11 percentage points
                combination of the first                                             higher on a standardized math
                two interventions                                                    test (85 versus 74 percent).



                                                          69
                                                                                   Students randomly assigned
                                                                                   to receive both interventions
                                                                                   scored 10 percentage points
                                                                                   higher on the standardized
                                                                                   math test (84 versus 74
                                                                                   percent).

Morisano et   Web-based program that        Administrative data for   Field        Students randomly assigned
al. (2010)    asked participants to         85 undergraduates at      experiment   to the treatment group (i)
              write about their ideal       McGill University,                     earned a GPA .48 standard
              future, their goals           with GPAs below 3.0                    deviations higher that the
              towards this future, and                                             control group, one semester
              the concrete steps for                                               after the intervention (2.91
              achieving these goals                                                versus 2.46 GPA); (ii) All
                                                                                   students in the treatment
                                                                                   group took a full course load
                                                                                   while only 80% of students in
                                                                                   the control group did so.

O’Rourke et   An educational game that      Administrative data on    Field        Children randomly assigned
al. (2014)    emphasized that               performance in the        experiment   to experimental condition
              intelligence is malleable.    educational game                       (which emphasized that
              Children are awarded          Refraction for more                    intelligence is malleable (i)
              points for effort,            than 15000 children                    persisted in the game for 29
              persistence and strategy.                                            more seconds (median 118
                                                                                   versus 89 seconds); (ii)
                                                                                   completed 1.2 more levels of
                                                                                   the game, on average (6.7
                                                                                   versus 5.5 levels).

Walton and    College freshmen were         Administrative data for   Field        African-American students
Cohen         asked read reports from       92 freshmen students at   experiment   randomly assigned to the
(2011)        fictitious upperclassmen      a large university                     control group experienced a
              who described that            campus                                 0.3 GPA point increase (3.65
              feeling out of during                                                versus 3.35 GPA).
              one’s first-year of college
              was a temporary
              phenomenon. Students
              were then asked to record
              a video detailing their
              experiences for future
              students.

Wilson and    Students were shown           Administrative data for   Field        Students randomly assigned
Lindville     booklets and videos of        40 freshmen students at   experiment   to the treatment group (i)
(1982)        upperclassmen who             Duke University                        were 20 percentage points (80
              described that struggles                                             percent) less likely to drop
              during freshman year                                                 out of college by the end of
              were temporary and that                                              their sophomore year; (ii)
              academic performance                                                 experienced a 0.34 GPA
              would likely improve in                                              increase (2.92 versus 2.58
              subsequent years.                                                    GPA). Students in the control
                                                                                   group experienced no GPA
                                                                                   increase (2.82 versus 2.87



                                                         70
                                                                              GPA).

Wilson and   Students were given       Administrative data for   Field        Students randomly assigned
Lindville    information that grades   80 freshmen students at   experiment   to the treatment group
(1985)       in freshman year are      the University of                      experienced GPA increases of
             typically low but         Virginia                               approximately 0.2 GPA
             improve throughout                                               points (2.8 versus 2.6 GPA)
             one’s college career.                                            from the first to second
                                                                              semester of their freshman
                                                                              year.




d) Interventions that simplify options and combat the paradox of choice


   Helping students and parents navigate situations with an abundance of information or
choices can also lead to improved outcomes. Often, simplifying how information is
conveyed can help students and their families focus on the criteria that matters most. This
can be especially helpful in the domain of school choice. Even at the primary and high
school levels, evaluating and selecting a school requires comparing hundreds of options
on several criteria (i.e. test score performance and non-academic features of the school).
Faced with navigating complex information on numerous options, parents may simply
choose the path of least resistance, such as enrolling their child in the closest school.
Hastings and Weinstein (2008) examine whether simplifying how information on school
quality is presented affects the choices parents make. Parents at Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Public School District schools randomly selected into a control group received the
district’s standard information package on school quality – a 100 page book with
descriptions of each school in the district. Parents at treated schools were given a
simplified one-page information sheet ranking schools by their previous year’s test score
performance.      The authors find that parents in the treatment group were 6 to 7.5
percentage points more likely than parents in the control group to choose a school other
than their child’s default school. Importantly, this simplified information led parents to
choose higher quality schools; on average test scores of schools that parents in the
treatment group selected score .1 standard deviations higher than those selected by the
control group. Students in the treatment group also subsequently perform better than
their control group peers, suggesting that simplifying the way information is presented



                                                    71
can improve academic outcomes through better matching students with schools that best
fit their abilities and interests.




VI. Conclusion


        By taking into account our frequent difficulty in making short and long-run
tradeoffs, behavioral economics has made significant inroads in many different domains.
Education represents a relatively new avenue for behavioral economics, one that holds
many opportunities. Since executive brain function, which helps focus on the future and
control impulses, does not mature fully until an individual’s mid-twenties, children and
adolescents are even more susceptible than adults to “behavioral barriers” which may
lead them to miss out on education opportunities. We categorize these barriers into four
categories: 1) some students focus too much on the present, 2) some rely too much on
routine, 3) some students focus too much on negative identities, and 4) mistakes are more
likely with many options or with little information.
        The immaturity of a child's brain also provides opportunities. Students may be
more responsive to interventions that target behavioral barriers. This review presents
some very promising examples: An online goal-setting exercise raised semester grades
by 0.7 standard deviations; setting up a college fund of $8,000 for disadvantaged Grade
9 students increased college graduation rates by 8 percentage points; text messaging
college-bound students preparation advice in their summer after high school increased
enrollment by 3 percentage points; help for 10 minutes completing the college financial
aid application increased enrollment by 8 percentage points; informing parents through
email of middle school children's absences and missed assignments raised GPA by 0.2
standard deviations; mandatory college class attendance increased final exam scores by
0.6 standard deviations; asking Grade 7 students to write about which value was most
important to them and why increase end of semester GPA by 0.25 points; and teaching
middle school students intelligence is not fixed and that through effort, intellectual ability
can improve increased grades by 0.6 standard deviations.



                                             72
       Opportunities abound to simplify applications or schedules, make them more
salient, remind students and parents of education opportunities, and motivate them to
want to learn. The area is ripe for inquiry. The examples we’ve presented here suggest
that interventions shaped by behavioral theory are likely cost-effective and easy to
implement, while delivering significant results. They are exciting, testable and tenable.
And for a six-year-old who struggles to get to school, and then, to sit still, they may have
the potential to make a real difference – even if she doesn’t know it yet.




                                             73
References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua D. Angrist. 2001. "How Large are Human-Capital Externalities?
Evidence from Compulsory-Schooling Laws." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, edited by
Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, p. 9-74. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance. 2001. "Access Denied: Restoring the
Nation's Commitment to Equal Educational Opportunity." Washington, D.C.: Department of
Education.

Agnew, Julie R., and Lisa R. Szykman. 2005. "Asset Allocation and Information Overload: The
Influence of Information Display, Asset Choice and Investor Experience." Journal of Behavioral
Finance 6 (2): 57-70.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. “Economics and Identity.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115(3): 715-753.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2002. “Identity and Schooling: Some Lessons for the
Economics of Education.” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(4): 1167-1201.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2010. “Identity Economics: How Identities Shape Out
Work, Wages, and Well-Being”. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Anderson, D. Mark. 2014. “In School and Out of Trouble? The Minimum Dropout Age and
Juvenile Crime.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2): 318-331.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “The Effect of Age at School Entry on
Educational Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two
Samples.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 87(418): 326-336.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The Effects of High Stakes High School
Achievement Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Review, 99(4):
1384-1414.

Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and Services for
College Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 1(1): 1-29.

Angrist, Joshua, D., Philip Oreopoulos, and Tyler Williams. 2014. “When Opportunity Knocks,
Who Answers? New Evidence on College Achievement Awards.” Journal of Human Resources,
49(3): 572-610.

Ariely, Dan, and Klaus Wertenbroch. 2002. “Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance: Self-
Control by Precommitment.” Psychological Science, 13(3): 219-224.

Austen-Smith, David, and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. 2005. “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White’.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2): 551-583.

Atkins, Sharona M., Michael F. Bunting, Donald J. Bolger, and Michael R. Dougherty. 2012.
"Training the Adolescent Brain: Neural Plasticity and the Acquisition of Cognitive Abilities." In
The Adolescent Brain: Learning, Reasoning, and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna,

                                                74
Sandra B. Chapman, Michael R. Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association.

Avery, Christopher and Thomas J. Kane. 2004. “Student Perceptions of College Opportunities:
The Boston COACH Program.” In C. M. Hoxby (Ed.), College Choices: The Economics of
Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For It, p. 355-394. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Avery, Christopher, and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too
Much - Or Not Enough?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 165-192.

Avery, Christopher. 2013. “Evaluation of The College Possible Program: Results from a
Randomized Controlled Trial.” NBER Working Paper 19562, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Avvisati, Francesco, Marc Gurgand, Nina Guyon, and Eric Maurin. 2014. "Getting Parents
Involved in Deprived Schools." Review of Economic Studies, 81(1): 57-83.

Banerji, Rukmini, James Berry, and Marc Shotland. 2013. “The Impact of Mother Literacy and
Participation Programs on Child Learning: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in India.”
Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL).

Banks, James and Fabrizio Mazzonna. 2011. “The Effect of Education on Old Age Cognitive
Abilities: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Economic Journal, 122(560): 418-
448.

Barrington, Byron L. and Bryan Hendricks. 1989. “Differentiating characteristics of high school
Graduates, Dropouts and Nongraduates.” Journal of Educational Research, 82(6): 309-319.

Barrow, Lisa, Lashawn Richburg-Hayes, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Thomas Brock. 2014.
“Paying for Performance: The Education Impacts of a Community College Scholarship Program
for Low-Income Adults.” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(3): 563-599.

Baum, Sandy, and Saul Schwartz. 2013. “Student Aid, Student Behavior, and Educational
Attainment.” The George Washington University Graduate School of Education and Human
Development.

Baum, Sandy, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2013. “Redesigning the Pell Grant Program for the
Twenty-First Century.” The Hamilton Project.

Baum, Sandy, Charles Kurose, and Jennifer Ma. 2013. "How College Shapes Lives:
Understanding the Issues," Trends in Higher Education Working Paper Series, October 2013.

Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. "The Endogenous Determination of Time
Preferences." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3): 729-758.

Becker, Gary. 1962. "Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis." Journal of Political
Economy, 70(2): 9-49.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler. 2007. "Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings
Behavior." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3): 81-104.

                                               75
Benhassine, Najy, Florrencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Victor Pouliquen. 2013.
“Turning a Shove into a Nudge? A ‘Labeled Cash Transfer’ for Education.” NBER Working
Paper 19227, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and A. Joshua Strickland. 2010. “Social Identity and
Preferences.” American Economic Review, 100(4): 1913-1928.

Bergman, Peter. 2014. "Parent-Child Information Frictions and Human Capital Investment:
Evidence from a Field Experiment." Working paper.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel. 2009. “Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice
Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(1): 51-104.

Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman 2010.
“What's Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field
Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1): 263-306.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David I. Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2010. "Simplification
and Savings." NBER Working Paper 12659, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim. 2007. "Patience Among Children." Journal of Public
Economics, 91(1-2): 343-363.

Bettinger, Eric. 2004. “How Financial Aid Affects Persistence.” In Caroline M. Hoxby (Ed.),
College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It ,p. 207-237.
University of Chicago Press.

Bettinger, Eric. 2010. “Need-based aid and student outcomes: The effects of the Ohio College
Opportunity Grant.” Working paper.

Bettinger, Eric, and Rachel Baker. 2014. "The Effects of Student Coaching in College: An
Evaluation of a Randomized Experiment in Student Mentoring." Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis, 36(1):, 3-19.

Bettinger, Eric. 2012. “Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial Incentives on Elementary School
Test Scores.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3): 868-698.

Bettinger, Eric, Angela Boatman and Bridget Terry Long. 2013. “Student Supports:
Developmental Education and Other Academic Programs.” The Future of Children, 23(1): 93-
115.

Bird, Kelli, and Benjamin L. Castleman. 2014. “Here Today, Gone Tomorrow? Investigating
Rates and Patterns of Financial Aid Renewal Among College Freshman.” EdPolicy Works
Working Paper Series No. 25, May 2014.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. “The More the Merrier? The
Effect of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(2): 669-700.


                                               76
Blackwell, Lisa S., Kali H. Trzesniewski and Carol S. Dweck. 2007. “Implicit Theories of
Intelligence Predict Achievement Across and Adolescent Transition: A Longitudinal Study and
an Intervention.” Child Development, 78(1): 246-263.

Boatman, Angela, Brent Evans and Adela Soliz. 2014. “Applying the Lessons of Behavioral
Economics to Improve the Federal Student Loan Programs: Six Policy Recommendations.”
Report prepared for the Lumina Ideas Summit: New Models of Student Financial Support.

Borghans, Lex, Bart H.H. Golsteyn, and Anders Stenberg. 2013. “Does Expert Advice Improve
Educational Choice?” IZA Discussion Paper No. 7649.

Brewster, Ann B. and Gary L. Bowen. 2004. “Teacher Support and the School Engagement of
Latino Middle and High School Students at Risk of School Failure.” Child and Adolescent Social
Work Journal, 21(1): 47-65.

Bridgeland, John M., John J. DiIulio Jr., and Karen B. Morison. 2006. The Silent Epidemic:
Perspectives of High School Dropouts. Civic Enterprises.

Brunello, Giorgio, Fort, Margherita and Gugielmo Weber. 2009. “Changes in Compulsory
Schooling, Education, and the Distribution of Wages in Europe.” Economic Journal, 119(536):
516-539.

Brunello, Giorgio, Gugielmo Weber, and Christoph T. Weiss. 2012. “Books are Forever: Early
Life Conditions, Education and Lifetime Income”. IZA Discussion Paper No. 6386.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen. 2014. “How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational
Investments?” Working paper.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen. 2014. “Should Schools Recognize or Award
Achievement?” Working paper.

Busse, Meghan R., Devin G. Pope, Jaren C. Pope, and Jorge Silva-Risso. 2012. “Projection Bias
in the Car and Housing Markets.” NBER Working Paper 18212, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Cabrera, Alberto F. and Steven M. La Nasa. 2000. Understanding the College-Choice Process.
New Directions for Institutional Research,: p. 5–22.

Cadena, Brian C. and Benjamin J. Keys. 2013. “Human Capital and the Lifetime Costs of
Impatience.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.

Caetano, Gregorio, Harry A. Patrinos, and Miguel Palacios. 2011. “Measuring Aversion to Debt:
An Experiment among Student Loan Candidates.” Working Bank Policy Research Working
Paper No. 5737.

Carrell, Scott E., and Bruce Sacerdote. 2013. “Late Interventions Matter Too: The Case of
College Coaching New Hampshire.” NBER Working Paper 19031, National Bureau of Economic
Research.




                                              77
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David I. Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick.
2009. "Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (4): 1639-
1674.

Castleman, Benjamin L. 2013. “Prompts, Personalization, and Pay-offs: Strategies To Improve
The Design and Delivery of College and Financial Aid Information.” The George Washington
University Graduate School of Education and Human Development.

Castleman, Benjamin L. 2014. “The Impact of Partial and Full Merit Scholarships on College
Entry and Success: Evidence from the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program.” EdPolicy
Works Working Paper No. 17, February 2014.

Castleman, Benjamin L., Karen Arnold, and Katherine Lynk Wartman. 2012. “Stemming the
Tide of Summer Melt: An Experimental Study of the Effects of Post-High School Summer
Intervention on Low-Income Students’ College Enrollment.” Journal of Research on Educational
Effectiveness, 5(1): 1-17.

Castleman, Benjamin L., and Lindsay C. Page. 2014a. “A Trickle or a Torrent? Understanding
the Extent of Summer “Melt” Among College-Intending High School Graduates.” Social Science
Quarterly, 95(1): 202-220.

Castleman, Benjamin L. and Lindsay C. Page. 2014b. “Freshman Year Financial Aid Nudges:
An Experiment to Increase FAFSA Renewal and College Persistence.” EdPolicy Works Working
Paper Series No. 29, June 2014.

Castleman, Benjamin L. and Lindsay C. Page. 2014c. “Summer Nudging: Can Personalized Text
Messages and Peer Mentor Outreach Increase College Going Among Low-Income High School
Graduates?” EdPolicy Works Working Paper Series No. 9, January 2014.

Castleman, Benjamin L., Lindsay C. Page, and Korynn Schooley. 2014. “The Forgotten
Summer: Does the Offer of College Counseling After High School Mitigate Summer Melt
Among College-Intending, Low-Income High School Graduates?” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 33(2): 320-233.

Catterall, James S. 1998. “Risk and Resilience in Student Transitions to High School.” American
Journal of Education, 106(2): 302-33.

Chapman, Sandra B., Jacquelyn F. Gamino, and Raksha Anand Mudar. 2012. "Higher-Order
Strategic Gist Reasoning in Adolescence." In The Adolescent Brain: Learning, Reasoning, and
Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Sandra B. Chapman, Michael R. Dougherty and
Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145-1177.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2011. “The Long-Term Impacts of
Teachers: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” NBER Working Paper
17699, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chick, Christina F., and Valeria F. Reyna. 2012. "A Fuzzy Trace Theory of Adolescent Risk
Taking: Beyond Self-Control and Sensation Seeking." In The Adolescent Brain: Learning,

                                              78
Reasoning and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Sandra B. Chapman, Michael R.
Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Choi, James J., David I. Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2002. "Defined
Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance." In Tax
Policy and the Economy, edited by James Poterba. Cambridge, MA.

Choi, James J., David I. Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2004. “Plan Design and 401(k)
Savings Outcomes.” National Tax Journal, 57(2): 275-298.

Cohen, Geoffrey L., Julio Garcia, Nancy Apfel, and Allison Master. 2006. “Reducing the Racial
Achievement Gap: A Social-Psychological Intervention.” Science, 313(5791), 1307-1310.

Cohodes, Sarah, and Joshua Goodman. 2014. “Merit Aid, College Quality and College
Completion: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics,6(4): 251-285..

Coleman, James S. 1961. The Adolescent Society. New York: The Free Press.

Cook, Philip J., Kenneth Dodge, George Farkas, Roland G. Fryer Jr., Jonathan Guryan, Jens
Ludwig, Susan Mayer, Harold Pollack, and Lawrence Steinberg. 2014. “The (Surprising)
Efficacy of Academic and Behavioral Intervention with Disadvantaged Youth: Results from a
Randomized Experiment in Chicago. NBER Working Paper 19862, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Cornwell, Christopher, Kyung Hee Lee, and David B. Mustard. 2005. “Student Responses to
Merit Scholarship Retention Rules.” Journal of Human Resources, 40(4): 895-917.

Council of Economic Advisors: National Economic Council. 2009. “Simplifying Student Aid:
The Case for an Easier, Faster and More Accurate FAFSA.” Washington, D.C.: Executive Office
of the President.

Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2008. "Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the
Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Journal of Human Resources,
43(4): 738-782.

Cusick, Philip. 1973. Inside High School. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston

Dearden, Lorraine, Carl Emmerson, Christine Frayne, and Costas Meghir. 2009. “Conditional
Cash Transfers and School Dropout Rates.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(4): 827-857.

Deci, Edward L., and Richard M. Ryan. 2010. "Self-Determination." In Corsini Encyclopedia of
Psychology, edited by I.B. Weiner and W.E. Craighead, 1-2. New York: Wiley.

Dee, Thomas. 2014. “Stereotype Threat and the Student Athlete.” Economic Inquiry, 52(1): 173-
182.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2005. “Job Search and Impatience.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 23(3): 527-588.



                                               79
DellaVigna, Stefano 2009. Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field. Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 47(2): pp. 315-372.

Demming, David, and Susan Dynarski. 2009. “Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase
the Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor.” NBER Working Paper 15387, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

De Paola, Maria, Vincenzo Scoppa, and Rosanna Nistico. 2012. “Monetary Incentives and
Student Achievement in a Depressed Labor Market: Results from a Randomized Experiment.”
Journal of Human Capital, 6(1): 56-85.

Devereux, Paul J., and Robert A. Hart. 2010. “Forced to be Rich? Returns to Compulsory
Schooling in Britain.” Economic Journal, 120(549): 1345–64.

Diamond, Peter, and Hannu Vartiainen (eds). 2007. Behavioral Economics and its Applications.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Dinkleman, Taryn, and Claudia Martinez A. 2014. “Investing in schooling in Chile: The role of
information about financial aid for higher education.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2):
244-257.

Dobkin, Carlos, Ricard Gil, and Justin Marion. 2010. “Skipping class in college and exam
performance: Evidence from a regression discontinuity classroom experiment.” Economics of
Education Review, 29(4): 566-575.

Duckworth, Angela L., Heidi Grant, Benjamin Lowe, Gabriele Oettingen and Peter M. Gollwitzer.
2011. “Self-regulation strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: benefits of mental
contrasting and implementation intentions.” Educational Psychology, 31(1): 17-26.

Duckworth, Angela L., Patrick D. Quinn and Eli Tsukayama. 2012. “What No Child Left Behind
Leaves Behind: The Roles of IQ and Self-Control in Predicting Standardized Achievement Test
Scores and Report Card Grades.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 104(2): 439-451.

Duckworth, Angela L., and Stephanie M. Carlson. 2013. "Self-Regulation and School Success."
In Self-Regulation and Autonomy: Social and Developmental Dimensions of Human Conduct,
edited by B.W. Sokol, F.M.E. Grouzet and U. Mueller, 208-230. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Duckworth, Angel L., Tamar Szabó Gendler and James J. Gross. 2014. “Self-Control in School-
Age Children.” Educational Psychologist, 49(3): 199-217.

Duckworth, Angela L. and Laurence Steinberg. 2014. “Understanding and cultivating self-
control.” Working paper.

Dweck, Carol S. 2007. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York: Random House.

Dweck, Carol S., and Ellen L. Leggett. 1988. “A Social-Cognitive Approach to Motivation and
Personality.” Psychological Review, 95(2): 256-273.




                                               80
Dweck, Carol S., and Lisa A. Sorich. 1999. “Mastery-oriented thinking.” In Laurence C.R.
Snyder (ed.), Coping: The Psychology of What Works, New York: Oxford, University Press, p.
232-251.

Dynarski, Susan M. 2004. “Who Benefits from the Education Saving Incentives? Income,
Educational Espectations and the Value of the 529 and Coverdell.” National Tax Journal,. 57(2):
359-383.

Dynarski, Susan, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2006. “The Cost of Complexity in Federal Student
Aid: Lessons from Optimal Tax Theory and Behavioral Economics.” National Tax Journal,
59(2): 319-356.

Dynarski, Susan. 2008. “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor.” Journal of Human
Resources, 43(3): 924-937.

Everhart, Robert B. (1983). Reading, writing, and resistance: Adolescence and labor in a junior
high school. Boston, MA: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Field, Erica. 2009. “Educational Debt Burden and Career Choice: Evidence from a Financial Aid
Experiment at NYU Law School.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 1-21.

Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O'Donoghue. 2002. "Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature, 40 (2): 351-401.

Fryer Jr., Roland G. 2011. “Financial incentives and student achievement: evidence from
randomized trials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(5): 1755-98.

Fryer Jr., Roland G., Steven D. Levitt, John List and Sally Sadoff. 2012. “Enhancing the Efficacy
of Teacher Incentives Through Loss Aversion: A Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper
18237, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fudenberg, Drew, and David K. Levine. 2006. "A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control."
American Economic Review, 96(5): 1449-1476.

Fuhrman, Toni. “Keeping Students on Track with a Mobile ‘Nudge’.” Campus Technology. July
17, 2014. Accessed August 23, 2014.
http://campustechnology.com/Articles/2014/07/17/Keeping-Students-on-Track-With-a-Mobile-
Nudge.aspx?Page=1.

Fuster, Joaquin M. 2002. "Frontal lobe and cognitive development." Journal of Neurocytology,
31 (3-5): 373-385.

Galvan, Adrianna. 2012. "Risky Behavior in Adolescents: The Role of the Developing Brain." In
The Adolescent Brain: Learning, Reasoning, and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna,
Sandra B. Chapman, Michael R. Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association.

Giedd, Jay N., Michael Stockman, Catherine Weddle, Maria Liverpool, Gregory L. Wallace,
Nancy Reitano Lee, Francois Lalonde, and Rhloshel K. Lenroot. 2012. "Anatomic Magnetic
Resonance Imaging of the Developing Child and Adolescent Brain." In The Adolescent Brain:


                                               81
Learning, Reasoning, and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Sandra B. Chapman,
Michael R. Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Good, Catherine, Joshua Aronson, and Michael Inzlicht. 2003. “Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat.” Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24: 645-662.

Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2011. “When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work
to Modify Behavior.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4): 191-210.

Gordon, Wayne C. 1957. The Social System of the High School. Chicago: The Free Press.

Green, Leonard, Astrid F. Fry, and Joel Myerson. 1994. "Discounting of Delayed Rewards: A
Life-Span Comparison." Psychological Science, 5(1): 33-36.

Hall, G. Stanley (1904). Adolescence. New York: Appleton.

Glimcher, Paul W. 2014. "Value-Based Decision Making," Chapter 10 in Neuroeconomics
(Second Edition), Paul W. Glimcher and Ernst Fehr (eds.), Academic Press, New York.

Glimcher, Paul W., and Ernst Fehr (2014), Neuroeconomics (Second Edition), Academic Press,
New York.

Grenet, Julien. 2011. “Is Extending Compulsory Schooling Alone Enough to Raise Earnings?
Evidence from French and British Compulsory Schooling Laws.” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 115(1): 176-210.

Grodner, Andrew, and Nicholas G. Rupp. 2013. “The Role of Homework in Student Learning
Outcomes: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal of Economic Education, 44(2): 93-109.

Hammer, Kate. “TDSB uses a personal touch to bring dropouts back to school.” The Globe and
Mail, May 31, 2012. Accessed August 23, 2014.
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/tdsb-uses-a-personal-touch-to-bring-dropouts-
back-to-school/article4219643/.

Harackiewicz, Judith M., Kenneth Barron, Paul R. Pintrich, Andrew J. Elliot, and Todd M.
Thrash. 2002. "Revision of achievement goal theory: Necessary and illuminating." Journal of
Educational Psychology, 94: 638-645.

Harmon, Colm, and Ian Walker. 1995. “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling for the
United Kingdom.” American Economic Review, 85(5): 1278-1286.

Hastings, Justine S. and Jeffrey M. Weinstein.. 2008. Information, School Choice, and Academic
Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1373-
1414.

Hershfield, Hal E., Daniel G. Goldstein, William F. Sharpe, Jesse Fox, Leo Yeykelis, Laura L.
Carstensen, and Jeremy N. Bailenson. 2011. “Increasing Saving Behavior Through Age-
Progressed Renderings of the Future Self.” Journal of Marketing Research, 48: S23-S37.



                                                82
Hoffman, Mitchell. 2012. “How is Information (Under-) Valued? Evidence from Framed Field
Experiments.” Working Paper.

Hollingshead, August B. 1975. Four factor index of social status. Unpublished manuscript.
Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Hough, Douglas E. 2013. Irrationality in Health Care: What Behavioral Economics Reveals
About What We Do and Why. Palo Alto: Stanford Economics and Finance.

Horn, Laura J., Chen, Xianglei, and Chris Chapman. 2003. “Getting Ready to Pay for College:
What Students and Their Parents Know About the Cost of College Tuition and What They Are
Doing to Find out” (NCES report no. 2003–030). Washington, D.C.: National Center for
Education Statistics.

Hoxby, Caroline M., and Christopher Avery. 2013. “The Missing "One-Offs": The Hidden
Supply of High-Achieving, Low-Income Students.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Hoxby, Caroline M., and Sarah Turner. 2013. “Expanding College Opportunities for High-
Achieving, Low Income Students.” SIEPR Discussion Paper 12-014, Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research.

Iyengar, Sheena S. and Mark R. Lepper. 2000. “When Choice Is Demotivating: Can One Desire
Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6): 995-1006.

Jabbar, Huriya. 2011. “The Behavioral Economics of Education: New Directions for Research.”
Educational Researcher, 40(9): 446-452.

Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2010. “A Little Now for a Lot Later: A Look at a Texas Advanced Placement
Incentive Program.” Journal of Human Resources, 45(3): 591-639.

Jackson, Philip W. 1968. Life in Classrooms. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.

Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 515-548.

Johnson, Sara B., Robert W. Blum, and Jay N. Giedd. 2009. "Adolescent maturity and the brain:
the promise and pitfalls of neuroscience research in adolescent health policy." Journal of
Adolescent Health, 45 (3): 216-221.

Kable, Joseph W., and Paul W. Glimcher. 2007. " The neural correlates of subjective value during
intertemporal choice," Nature Neuroscience 10, 1625 - 1633.

Kable, Joseph W., and Paul W. Glimcher. 2010. "An "As Soon As Possible" Effect in Human
Intertemporal Decision Making: Behavioral Evidence and Neural Mechanisms," Journal of
Neurophysiology, May 2010, 103(5), 2513 - 2531.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1973. "On the Psychology of Prediction." Psychological
Review, 80(4): 237-251.

Kahneman, Daniel. 2003. "Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral
Economics." American Economic Review, 93(5): 1449-1475.

                                              83
Kahneman, Daniel, and Shane Frederick. 2002. "Representativeness revisited: Attribute
substitution in intuitive judgment. " In Heuristic and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment
(T. Gilovich, D. Griffin and D. Kahneman, eds.), p. 49-81. New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.

Kamenica, Emir. 2012. “Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives.” Annual Review of
Economics, 4: 427-452.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala, Tuomas Pekkarinen, Matti Sarvimaki and Roope Uusitalo. 2014. “Educational
Choice and Information on Labor Market Prospects: A Randomized Field Experiment.” Working
Paper.

Kling, Jeffrey. R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee C. Vermeulen and Marian V. Wrobel.
2012. “Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127(1): 199-235.


Koch, Alexander, Julia Nafziger, and Helena Skyt Nielson. 2014. “Behavioral Economics of
Education.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, forthcoming.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Shaun M. Dougherty. 2013. “The Effect of Teacher-Family
Communication on Student Engagement: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.”
Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 6(3): 199-222.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Todd Rogers. 2014. “Teacher-to-Parent Communication: Experimental
Evidence from a Low-Cost Communication Policy.” In Progress.

Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thorton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 437-456.

Laibson, David I. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(2): 443-477.

Lamdin, Douglas J. 1996. “Evidence of student attendance as an independent variable in
education production functions.” Journal of Educational Research, 89(3): -162.

Lee, Valerie E. and Robert C. Croninger. 1998. “Elements of social capital in the context of six
high schools (mimeo.).”

Lee, Valerie E. and David T. Burkham. 2003. “Dropping out of high school: The role of school
organization and structure.” American Educational Research Journal, 40(2): 353-393.

Leuven, Edwin, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Bas van der Klaauw. 2010. “The Effect of Financial
Rewards on Students’ Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 8(6): 1,243-1,265.

Leuven, Edwin, Hellel Oosterbeek, Joep Sonnemans, and Bas van der Klaauw. 2011. “Incentives
versus Sorting in Tournaments: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal of Labor Economics,
29(3): 637-658.


                                                84
Levine, Philip. B. 2013. “Simplifying Estimates of College Costs.” Washington, D.C.: The
Hamilton Project: Policy Memo 2013-06.

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, Suzanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff. 2012. “The Behavioralist
Goes to School: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Improve Educational Performance.” NBER
Working Paper 18165, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The relationship between education and adult mortality in the
United States.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(1): 189-221.

Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The effect of education on crime: Evidence from
prison inmates, arrests, and self reports.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.

Lochner, Lance, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2012. “Credit Constraints in Education.” Annual
Review of Economics, 4: 225-256.

Loewenstein, George, Ted O'Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Projection Bias in
Predicting Future Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1209-1248.

MacDonald, Heather, Lawrence Bernstein, and Cristofer Price. 2009. “Foundations for Success:
Short-Term Impacts Report.” Report to the Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation.

Madrian, Brigitte C. 2014. "Applying Insights from Behavioral Economics to Policy Design."
Annual Review of Economics, 6: 663-668.

Mangels, Jennifer A., Catherine Good, Ronald C. Whiteman, Brian Maniscalo, and Carol S.
Dweck. 2012. “Emotion blocks the path to learning under stereotype threat.” Social Cognitive
and Affective Neuroscience, 7(2): 230-241.

Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao, "Poverty Impedes
Cognitive Function," Science 30 August 2013 Vol. 341 no. 6149 pp. 976-980

McClure, Samuel M., David I. Laibson, George Loewenstein, and Jonathan D. Cohen. 2004.
"Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary Rewards." Science, 306
(5695): 503-507.

McCoach, D. Betsy, and Del Siegle. 2001. “A comparison of high achievers' and low achievers'
attitudes, perceptions, and motivations.” Academic Exchange Quarterly, 5(2): 71-76.

McGuigan, Martin, Sandra McNally and Gill Wyness. 2012. “Student Awareness of Costs and
Benefits of Educational Decisions: Effects of an Information Campaign.” CEE Discussion Paper
139, Centre for the Economics of Education.

Meghir, Costas, and Maarten Palme. 2005. “Educational Reform, Ability and Family
Background.” American Economic Review, 95(1): 414-24.

Meghir, Costas, Maarten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova. 2013. “Education, Cognition and Health:
evidence from a social experiment.” NBER Working Paper 19002, National Bureau of Economic
Research.



                                              85
Mensch, Barbara S. and Denise B. Kandel. 1988. “Dropping Out of High School and Drug
Involvement.” Sociology of Education, 61(2): 95-113.

Messacar, Derek, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2013. “Staying in School: A Proposal for Raising High
School Graduation Rates.” Issues in Science and Technology: pp. 55-61.

Miller, Cynthia, Melissa Binder, Vanessa Harris, and Kate Krause. 2011. “Saying on Track: Early
Findings from a Performance-Based Scholarship Program at the University of Mexico.” MDRC
Report, August.

Milligan, Kevin. 2005. “Who uses RESPs and Why.” In C. M. Beach, R. W. Boadway, & R.
McInnis (eds.), Higher Education in Canada. p. 467-494. McGill-Queen's University Press.

Morisano, Dominique, Jacob B. Hirsh, Jordan B. Peterson, Robert O. Pihl, and Bruce M. Shore.
2010. “Setting, elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance.”
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(2): 255-264.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means So Much.
New York: Times Books: Henry Hold and Company, LLC.

Nayar, 2013. "SmartSaver: Final Evaluation Report." Online report accessed August 31, 2014.
http://www.theomegafoundation.ca/documents/SmartSAVER%20Final%20Evaluation%20Repor
t.pdf.

Nguyen, Trang. 2008. “Information, Role Models and Perceived Returns to Education:
Experimental Evidence from Madagascar.” MIT Working Paper.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2005. “Canadian Compulsory Schooling Laws and their Impact on
Educational Attainment and Future Earnings.” Statistics Canada Analytical Studies Branch
Research Paper No. 251.

Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of
Schooling.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 159-184.

Oreopoulos, Philip and Ryan Dunn. 2013. “Information and College Access: Evidence from a
Randomized Field Experiment.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(1): 3-26.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic. 2013. “Making College Worth it: A Review of
Research on the Returns to Higher Education.” NBER Working Paper 19053, National Bureau of
Economic Reserach.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Robert S. Brown and Adam M. Lavecchia. 2014. “Pathways to Education:
An Integrated Approach to Helping At-Risk High School Students.” NBER Working Paper
20430, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Reuben Ford. 2014 "Life After High School: An experiment to help all
high school seniors during class through the college application process," In progress.

O’Rourke, Eleanor, Kayla Haimovitz, Christy Ballwebber, Carol S. Dweck, and Zoran Popovic.
2014. “Brain Points: A Growth Mindset Incentive Structure Boosts Persistence in an Educational


                                              86
Game.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems -
CHI 2014.

Pallais, Amanda. 2013. “Small Differences That Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College.”
Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Pischke, Jorn-Steffen and Till von Wachter. 2008. “Zero Returns to Compulsory Schooling in
Germany: Evidence and Interpretation.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 592-598.

Price, Joshua A. and Robert M. Shireman. 2013. “Go to Class! Participate! Study! How might
altered incentives - including cash rewards - affect student success in college?” The George
Washington University, Graduate School of Education and Human Development.

Rabin, Matthew. 2013. "Healthy Habits: Some thoughts on the role of public policy in healthful
eating and exercise under limited rationality " In Behavioural Public Policy, edited by Adam
Oliver, p. 115-147. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Read, Daniel, and Nicoleta L. Read. 2004. "Time discounting over the lifespan." Organizational
Behavior of Human Decision Processes, 94(1): 22-32.

Riccio, James, Nadine Dechausay, Cynthia Miller, Stephen Nunez, Nandita Verma, and Edith
Yang. 2013. “Conditional Cash Transfers New York City: The Continuing Story of the
Opportunity NYC – Family Rewards Demonstration.” MDRC Report, September.

Richburg-Hayes, Lashawn, Colleen Sommo, and Rashida Welbeck. 2011. “Promoting Full-Time
Attendance among Adults in Community College: early Impacts from the Performance-Based
Scholarship Demonstration in New York.” MDRC Report, May.

Rick, Scott, and George Loewenstein. 2008. "The Role of Emotion of Economic Behavior." In
Handbook of Emotions, edited by Michael Lewis, Jeannette Haviland-Jones and Lisa Feldman
Barrett, p. 138-156. New York: Guilford Publications.

Roderick, Melissa. 1993. The Path to Dropping Out. Westport MA: Auburn House.

Rodriguez-Planas, Nuria. 2012. “Longer-Term Impacts of Mentoring, Educational Services, and
Learning Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Trail in the United States.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(4): 121-139.

Romer, David. 1993. “Do Students Go to Class? Should They?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 7(3): 167-174.

Romine, Cassandra B., and Cecil R. Reynolds. 2005. "A Model of the Development of Frontal
Lobe Functioning: Findings from a Meta-Analysis." Applied Neuropsychology, 12(4): 190-201.

Ross, Rebecca, Shannon White, Josh Wright, and Lori Knapp. 2013. “Using Behavioral
Economics for Postsecondary Success.” New York: ideas42.

Schneider, Sandra L., and Christine M. Caffrey. 2012. "Affective Motivators and Experience in
Adolescents' Development of Health-Related Behavior Patterns." In The Adolescent Brain:
Learning, Reasoning, and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Sandra B. Chapman,
Michael R. Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

                                              87
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2012a. “What Explains Trends in Labor Supply Among U.S.
Undergraduates.” National Tax Journal, 65(1): 181-210.

Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2011b. “The Shapeless River: Does a Lack of Structure Inhibit Students'
Progress at Community Colleges.” CCRC Working Paper No. 25, Community College Research
Center.

Scrivener, Susan, and Michael J. Weiss. 2013. “More Graduates: Two-Year Results from an
Evaluation of Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) for Developmental Education
Students.” MDRC Policy Brief, December.

Sirin, Selcuk R. 2005. "Socioeconomic Status and Academic Achievement: A Meta-Analytic
Review of Research." Review of Educational Research, 75(3): 417-453.

Sjoquist, David L., and John V. Winters. 2012a. “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor
Revisited.” Journal of Human Resources, 47(1): 270-285.

Sjoquist, David L. and John V. Winters. 2012b. “State Merit-Based Financial Aid Programs and
College Attainment.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 6801, Institute for the Study of Labor.

Sloman, Steven A. 1996. "The Empirical Case for Two Systems of Reasoning." Psychological
Bulletin, 119(1): 3-22.

Sloman, Steven A. 2002. "Two Systems of Reasoning." In Heuristics and Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin and Daniel
Kahneman, p. 379-396. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Springer, Matthew G., Brooks Rosenquist and Walker A. Swain. 2014. “Monetary and Non-
Monetary Student Incentives for Tutoring Services: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Working
paper.

Stanca, Luca. 2006. The Effects of Attendance on Academic Performance: Panel Data Evidence
for Introductory Microeconomics. Journal of Economic Education, 37(3): 251-266.

Stanovich, Keith E., and Richard F. West. 2000. "Individual Differences in Reasoning:
Implications for the Rationality Debate." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23: 645-726.

Stanovich, Keith E., Richard F. West, and Maggie E. Toplak. 2012. "Judgment and Decision
Making in Adolescence: Separating Intelligence From Rationality." In The Adolescent Brain:
Learning, Reasoning and Decision Making, edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Sandra B. Chapman,
Michael R. Dougherty and Jere Confrey. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Steele, Claude M. 1997. “A Threat in the Air: How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and
Preference.” American Psychologist, 52(6): 613-629.

Steele, Claude M., and Joshua Aronson. 1995. “Stereotype threat and the intellectual test
performance of African-Americans.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5): 797-
811.



                                              88
Steinberg, Lawrence, Sandra Graham, Lia O'Brien, Jennifer Woolard, Elizabeth Cauffman, and
Marie Banich. 2009. "Age Differences in Future Orientation and Delay Discounting." Child
Development, 80(1): 28-44.

Stinebrickner, Ralph, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. 2003. “Working during School and Academic
Performance.” Journal of Labor Economics, 21(2): 473-491.

Stephens, Jr., Melvin, and Dou-Yan Yang. 2013. “Compulsory Education and the Benefits of
Schooling.” NBER Working Paper 19369, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Strickland ,Vinnie. 1998. "Attendance and grade point average: A study." Report No. SP038147.
Fast Lansing, MI: National Center for Research on Teacher Learning. (ERIC Document
Reproduction Service No. ED423224).

Sunstein, Cass. 2000. “Behavioral Law and Economics.” In Cambridge Series on Judgement and
Decision Making, edited by Hal Arkes, Lola Lopes and Jonathan Baron,. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Teffer, Kate, and Katerina Semendeferi. 2012. "Human prefrontal cortex: Evolution, development
and pathology." In Progress in Brain Research, edited by Michel A. Hofman and Dean Falk, eds.,
p. 191-218. Elsevier B.V.

Thaler, Richard, and Hersh M. Shefrin. 1981. "An Economic Theory of Self-Control." Journal of
Political Economy, 89(2): 392-406.

Thaler, Richard. 2005. “Advances in Behavioral Finance.” Vol. 2, The Roundtable Series in
Behavioral Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Thaler, Richard, and Cass Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth and
Happiness. New York: Penguin Books.

Todd, Petra E., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2007. "The Production of Cognitive Achievement in
Children: Home, School and Racial Test Score Gaps." Journal of Human Capital, 1(1): 91-136.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1983. "Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The
Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment." Psychological Review, 90(4): 293-315.

Usher, Alex. 1998. "Income-Related Barriers to Post-Secondary Education, Council of Ministers
of Education." Canada Working Paper as part of Postsecondary Education Project, Learner
Pathways and Transitions.

Walton, Gregory M., and Geoffrey L. Cohen. 2011. “A Brief Social-Belonging Intervention
Improves Academic and Health Outcomes of Minority Students.” Science, 331(6023): 1447-1451.

Ware, Michelle, Evan Weissman, and Drew McDermott. 2013. “Aid Like A Paycheck:
Incremental Aid to Promote Student Success.” MDRC Policy Brief, September.

Watt, Nicholas. 2013. "Cameron promises 'land of opportunity' where young people must earn or
learn." The Guardian.

Willis, Paul. 1977. Learning to Labour. Westmead: Saxon House.

                                              89
Wilson, Timothy D., and Patricia W. Linville. 1982. “Improving the Academic Performance of
College Freshman: Attribution Therapy Revisited.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42(2): 367-376.

Wilson, Timothy D., and Patricia W. Linville. 1985. “Improving the performance of college
freshmen with attributional techniques.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49(1):
287-293.

Yeager, David S., and Gregory M. Walton. 2011. “Social-Psychological Interventions in
Education: They’re Not Magic.” Review of Educational Research, 81(2): 267-301.

Zimmerman, Seth. 2013. “The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal
Students.” Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.




                                               90
