                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE EVOLUTION OF BANK SUPERVISION:
                             EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATES

                                      Kris James Mitchener
                                       Matthew Jaremski

                                       Working Paper 20603
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20603


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




We thank Jessica Hardwick, Lea Halloway, and Amanda Razon for invaluable research assistance
and Mark Carlson, David Wheelock, Charles Calomiris, and Paul Rhode for comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kris James Mitchener and Matthew Jaremski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Bank Supervision: Evidence from U.S. States
Kris James Mitchener and Matthew Jaremski
NBER Working Paper No. 20603
October 2014
JEL No. E44,G28,N11

                                            ABSTRACT

We use a novel data set spanning 1820-1910 to examine the origins of bank supervision and assess
factors leading to the creation of formal bank supervision across U.S. states. We show that it took
more than a century for the widespread adoption of independent supervisory institutions tasked with
maintaining the safety and soundness of banks. State legislatures initially pursued cheaper regulatory
alternatives, such as double liability laws; however, banking distress at the state level as well as the
structural shift from note-issuing to deposit-taking commercial banks and competition with national
banks propelled policymakers to adopt costly and permanent supervisory institutions.


Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

Matthew Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu
                  The Evolution of Bank Supervision: Evidence from U.S. States

        It is surprising how little is actually known about when and why formal bank supervisory
institutions came into existence. For example, existing research on their early evolution in the
United States simply summarizes the environment for particular years (e.g., Weldon 1910) or
presents a limited number of case studies (e.g., Gruchy 1937). More recent studies have
examined supervision in later periods (Agarwal et al. 2011; Mitchener 2005, 2007; White 2011),
but they have not attempted to provide a long-term quantitative assessment of the evolution of
bank supervisory institutions.1 We aim to fill this lacuna by analyzing the factors that led to the
creation of formal bank supervisory institutions in the United States at the state level, where such
institutions are defined as government agencies established specifically for the purpose of
supervising banks. We examine their evolution in light of theory as well as modern policy
objectives, such as the reduction of systemic risk and the monitoring of bank balance sheets and
management behavior.
        The federalist structure of the United States implies that powers, such as the chartering of
commercial banks, primarily reside with individual states. Supervision of banks chartered by
states naturally followed from this delegation of powers, and meant that bank supervision
initially developed at this jurisdictional level. We thus focus on when and why U.S. states
established banking departments designed to both charter and supervise state financial
institutions. We trace their evolution from the early years of the republic through the beginning
of the twentieth century – a critical period that laid down the foundations of the bank supervisory
system observed today. To do so, we assemble a unique data set spanning 1820-1910 from
archival and census records that provides information on the date of adoption of formal
institutions as well as on state-specific factors influencing that decision. Using these data and
additional information on supervisory characteristics, we also examine whether states made
progressive improvements to the quality of their supervisory institutions. Since implementation

1
 Another notable recent contribution is Grossman (2010), which describes the evolution of the banking industry and
discusses the role central banks have played in bank supervision (with extended case studies on Sweden, England,
and the United States). Our analysis is complementary in that it analyzes the evolution of bank supervision prior to
central banking and formally measures its determinants.

                                                         2
dates and supervisory characteristics varied considerably across states, we are able to exploit
both the cross-state and time differences to identify factors that drove the adoption of state bank
supervision.
         It took more than 100 years to fully develop formal supervisory institutions as well as
what policymakers today would consider as modern supervisory priorities.2 Consistent with
Rajan’s (2009) view that financial regulation has been procyclical, we find that formal
supervisory institutions (i.e., state banking departments) rose from the ashes of banking crises.
Six states created government banking agencies immediately after the Panic of 1837, six states
put them in place after the Baring Crisis of 1890 and Banking Panic of 1893, and 17 made
changes after the Panic of 1907. No other interval had as many new departments established. The
pattern indicates that formal bank supervision was likely a response to bank failures: the high
sunk costs of establishing formal bank supervisory institutions likely delayed states from
preemptively installing them.
         The introduction of the National Banking Act and taxes on state bank notes in the 1860s
also appears to have shaped the development of modern supervisory institutions and priorities.
Commercial banks shifted the composition of their liabilities from notes to deposits,
simultaneously drawing more individuals (and potential voters) into the banking sector and
increasing the potential for systemic bank runs.3 The shift also potentially allowed banks to
increase their loan portfolios relative to bond purchases thus more closely tying economic
activity to bank health (Calomiris and Mason, 2008). Our econometric results suggest that state
legislatures refocused their attention on the safety of depositors and installed relatively more
costly state banking departments. As deposit taking grew in importance relative to note issuance,
supervision shifted more purposefully toward maintaining the safety and soundness of banking
systems.




2
  Some of the delayed adoption is an artifact of new states that were created late in the period, but there were still
many older states (e.g., Indiana, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina) that did not install formal
supervision until after 1890.
3
  While note holders were exposed to bank failure, notes had to be fully backed by collateral and losses were
generally low. Issuance of greenbacks and silver-backed money during the postbellum period also limited the
amount of bank notes that individuals would need to hold in order to carry out transactions.

                                                            3
        States also reacted to the threat of national banking itself. Rather than allowing banks to
charter under the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, states offered an alternative
regulatory and supervisory environment by establishing formal institutions. The entry rate of
national banks is positively correlated with the adoption of state banking departments and of
publishing regular banking reports. Therefore, unlike other studies that find the competition
between banking systems led to regulatory laxity, the competition might also have been
beneficial.
        By the beginning of the twentieth century and prior to the founding of the Federal
Reserve System, most states had established separate regulatory agencies charged with bank
supervision and required banks to regularly submit balance sheet information. Our empirical
evidence further indicates that states that moved earlier to create an independent banking
authority devoted more resources toward supervision. Early adopters were more likely to publish
highly detailed and regular bank reports, spend more on supervision expenses, and carry out
more examinations per bank. Some of these states had also given their examiners the power to
shut down banks that were deemed unsafe. Because enforcement problems, compliance, and
competition with federal regulatory agencies persisted long after the founding of the Federal
Reserve System, these quality differentials may have had lasting implications for systemic
stability.


II. Theoretical Arguments for Supervision
        In its broadest form, prudential supervision can be defined as government regulation and
monitoring of the banking system to ensure its safety and soundness. Prudential supervision
often works in conjunction with legislated rules and requirements. For example, supervisory
authorities might deny charters to banks that do not have sufficient paid-in capital, monitor banks
to ensure compliance with capital or reserve requirements or disclosure rules, or ensure speedy
resolutions to failed institutions. While much has been written about branching restrictions,
double liability laws, and deposit insurance in the U.S., considerably less is known about how
and why supervision evolved.




                                                 4
         Public and private interest theories of regulation suggest at least three explanations for
the special treatment of banks: externalities, efficiency, and vested interests. When large
numbers of banks fail they often impose external costs on the economy, reducing lending and
aggregate investment. Moreover, as banks fail and disintermediation occurs, the costs of credit
can rise for firms due to the loss in information about the quality of investment projects
(Bernanke 1983). Since commercial banks are conduits through which the money supply
changes, a large number of failures can also impact the macroeconomy by altering the money
supply (Friedman and Schwartz 1963). Prudential regulation and supervision could therefore
potentially reduce the incidence of failures and “contagious runs,” and limit macroeconomic
externalities.
         A second public-interest argument for regulating and supervising banks has to do with
the efficient transfer of savings from lenders to borrowers. As in other industries, market
structure can affect the price and provision of services. In banking, this translates to lending rates
and risk-return tradeoffs that are influenced by the competitive structure of the industry. While
government policies often limit entry and increase the monopoly power of existing banks by
making chartering costly (imposing requirements on paid-in capital or controlling who can
receive licenses to operate), formal supervision could arise to ensure product and price
competition and to enforce legal restrictions on bank activity.4 Absent intervention, market
structure in banking could evolve in a way that leads to an inefficient or suboptimal allocation of
capital and services, either geographically or in terms of sectoral allocation, resulting in slower
economic growth.5
         Efficiency theory further suggests that bank supervision may enhance welfare given
costly state verification (Townsend 1979), monitoring costs, the opacity of bank decision making
(Chen 2001, Meh and Moran 2010), and incentive problems. When present and without
monitoring, managers may take on more risk than what is optimal from a depositors’ perspective


4
  In the historical context of the United States, Davis (1965), Sylla (1969), James (1976), and Sullivan (2009) argue
that the high capital requirements of national banks and taxes on state bank notes after 1865 enabled geographically-
segmented unit banks to obtain considerable monopoly power.
5
  The special status often conferred to banks is sometimes confounded with a government’s desire to extract
seigniorage through monopoly note issuance. While governments may desire to have control over note issuance to
derive rents, it is not clear that supervision of banks is necessary to achieve this objective.

                                                          5
(i.e., moral hazard). Asymmetric information may be lessened through government activities
aimed at transparency, but supervision can achieve the same purpose by providing independent
collaboration of accounting information and by checking for management fraud. It is certainly
possible that banks could monitor their own risk. For example, managers (directors) could also
be owners, aligning incentives and limiting risk taking. Alternatively, managers’ contracts could
be structured such that they are incentive compatible, in turn limiting risk taking and rendering
government policies aimed at reducing risk potentially redundant.6
         Demandable deposits could also potentially operate like incentive compatible contracts.
A bank offers to pay a fixed return on deposits, which can be withdrawn at any time, in exchange
for use of deposits. If depositors doubt the safety of their bank, they have the ability to run the
bank.7 The possibility of bank runs may act to discipline bank managers such that they hold less
risky portfolios (Calomiris and Kahn 1991). When monitoring and information releases are
imperfect, however, managers may still invest in risky assets and depositors may still rationally
start bank runs. If runs become “contagious,” they can potentially result in costly spillovers to
the real economy. The possibility of “contagious” and costly bank runs provides a theoretical
justification for supervision and/or regulation of banks: governments can commit resources to
develop technologies that monitor risk taking.8
         Formal rules or regulations on bank behavior are another mechanism that can be used to
incentivize managers to operate in ways that are incentive compatible with depositors. For
example, contingent liability laws make bank stockholders liable for losses up to the amount of
their stock. Grossman (2001) shows that double liability pushed banks to reduce their risk, but
that it did not guarantee systemic stability. Reserve requirements on deposits and minimum
capital requirements have also been enacted to rein in bank risk taking.



6
  If such contracts can be created, then regulation of risk taking may be unnecessary since losses would accrue to
equity and debtholders just like for firms in other sectors.
7
  Theorists have shown that it is rational for depositors to run on fractional reserve banks (Diamond and Dybvig
1983).
8
  It is possible that banks could act jointly and come up with collective mechanisms that would prevent spillovers to
each other or to the economy, but in practice such practices have been few and far between as a result of
coordination problems. Calomiris and Schweikart (1991) note that several states responded to the Panic of 1857 by
developing coordination technologies.

                                                          6
        Public choice theories of regulation provide a third explanation for supervision,
suggesting that it might evolve in response to the needs of the banks they oversee. Stigler (1971)
theorized that regulation principally serves to redistribute economic resources from those with
less political power to those with more.9 For example, banks may lobby for restrictions on
branching or chartering and then use government agencies, such as bank supervisory
departments, to limit entry. Public interest objectives thus can be compromised by the agendas of
well-organized bankers, customers, or political constituencies. Consequently, even without
spillovers or efficiency considerations, regulation may still be compatible with the self-interest
and profit maximizing motives of banks.


III. Institutional Development of Bank Supervision in the U.S.
        Although theory can provide some guidance as to why states may have created bank
supervisory institutions, state legislatures’ perceptions about the public need for supervision
appear to have been shaped by the changing economic environment, including the growth of the
nation, innovations in the banking industry, and the incidence of costly and unevenly distributed
financial panics. Indeed, as we document here and in the empirical exercises that follow, it would
be difficult for a single theory to account for the decision to adopt formal supervisory
institutions: rather, the objective of policymakers seem to have shifted over time. Hence, in this
section, we describe the evolution of state banking departments over three eras, highlighting key
factors that may have influenced policymakers’ decision-making to create permanent state
banking departments. The first period covers the nation’s early history, when banks received
special charters from state legislatures to operate. The second period corresponds to the Free
Banking Era – from the 1830s through the Panic of 1857 and the large number of bank closures
during the early years of the Civil War. The last period covers the National Banking Era, 1863-
1913, which includes the rise of dual banking, the shift to deposit-taking commercial banks, and
the Panic of 1907.10



9
  See also Posner (1971, 1974) and Peltzman (1976).
10
   Grossman (2010) uses a similar periodization to study the evolution of banking and various prudential regulations
(e.g., double liability and minimum capital requirements).

                                                         7
A. Special Bank Charters and the Young Republic
         Commercial banking emerged slowly during the first decades of the 19th century, a
period when private banks and moneylenders featured prominently. In part, the growth in
banking was hindered by the chartering process. Individuals wanting to create a bank had to seek
legislative approval at the state level. The use of special acts of incorporation to charter banks
was a practice inherited from Europe. American legislators, however, viewed their authority to
bring banks into existence with some trepidation, fearing that charters effectively granted
monopolies that were concentrated in a “moneyed elite.” Because states were banned from
issuing their own currency, some politicians also worried about concentrating banks' unique
power to create money through note issuance in the hands of a few.11 Special charters balanced
two objectives: permitting banks to exist but providing more control over banking than a fixed
set of standards.
         The chartering process was tedious and requests were often denied by state legislatures.
In order to obtain a charter, banks often had to agree to purchase government debt or make loans
to the state (Bodenhorn 2003).12 Special bank charters were also susceptible to influence
peddling, and many histories of this period describe a process whereby charters were handed out
only to those that were politically connected. For example, as one banking historian describes,
“It had long been difficult to get new bank charters in New York…And whenever a new one was
decided on...opportunities were afforded the public to purchase stock—provided of course that
most of the stock went into the possession of Democrats” (Hammond 1957, 574). Centralized
banking was ironically enhanced by the special chartering process. Since banks needed special
government privilege to operate, the number of banks grew slowly, mostly in urban areas, and
banks had considerable monopoly power.
         Bank supervision sprouted its first roots in response to these special charters, and with the
general concern of giving banks the right to exist and issue notes. 13 A few legislatures attempted

11
   Although they feature less prominently in the early discussions of bank chartering, some legislatures expressed
concern that the issuance of “bad notes” would lead to a faulty money supply or that excessive note issuance could
lead to inflation.
12
   This was another common European practice. Bodenhorn (2003) and Hammond (1957) provide detailed
descriptions of the evolution of bank charters and the politics surrounding chartering during the antebellum period.
13
   Some states placed limitations on note issuance or prohibited dealings in certain types of securities. These types of
provisions were often vague and enforcement was virtually non-existent.

                                                           8
to require officials to obtain simple reports of condition on banks they had chartered or put into
individual banks’ charters the right to inspect them by forming special committees. However,
these requirements had little bite and were often avoided. When reports were requested, it was
easy to hide the true state of a bank’s condition. Virginia’s problems are indicative of this early
era of bank supervision. In 1817, residents of Lynchburg accused Farmers’ Bank of Virginia of
discriminating in its lending practices, including lending excessively to insiders (directors) and
real estate agents. In response, the legislature appointed a committee to examine the bank's
practices, but the bank's directors had no incentive to cooperate with the committee: there was no
legal means to force compliance with requests for information or changes in conduct (Gruchy
1937).
         In spite of these shortcomings, incremental improvements took place in the first three
decades of the 19th century. Massachusetts passed a law in 1803 requiring periodic statements by
banks; the law specified which items were to be included and authorized the assessment of fines
when reports were not submitted. In 1813, the governor set up a system of three bank
commissioners to enforce charter regulations, including minimum paid-in capital, but their
examinations could not be described as comprehensive by any means (Gruchy 1937).
         New York also moved relatively early to improve bank supervision. The New York
Safety Fund, set up in 1829, established a mutual insurance system that guaranteed the liabilities
of failed banks.14 The fund authorized three bank commissioners to examine member banks on a
quarterly basis and determine if they were solvent. This public-private partnership also
authorized any three banks to call for the examination of any other bank within the system.15
Despite giving the bank commissioners the power to supervise member banks, they had no legal
basis to shut down banks unless they were in violation of a particular section of state banking
law. The fund eventually had to be bailed out through state borrowing after the Panic of 1839,
making it any early example of socialized risk in the American banking system.16

14
   It is helpful to note that the insurance was only intended to cover bank notes, and it was only through loose
wording that some depositors were paid out. During the collapse of the system, New York properly defined the
language to make sure that no additional depositors were repaid.
15
   The fund, however, did not properly incentivize its member to monitor each other as failures were borne by the
fund and not individual banks (Weber 2011).
16
   Safety Funds were also started in Vermont in 1831 and Michigan in 1836, but they suffered from similar
problems.

                                                         9
         A group of banks in Indiana also set up a self-insurance system to limit risk taking in
1834. Under this system, state banks in Indiana were independent but were mutually responsible
for each other’s liabilities. A board of directors, composed primarily of the individual bank
presidents, was created to oversee the integrity of all the banks in the system. This structure
encouraged banks to monitor each other’s portfolios in order to prevent default while allowing
each bank a large degree of autonomy (Weber 2011). As a result, no member bank in Indiana
failed during the Panics of 1837 and 1839. Eventually groups of banks in Ohio (1845) and Iowa
(1858) set up similar mutual guarantee systems.
         Archival evidence from the era of the early republic shows that formal bank supervisory
institutions were only present in Massachusetts and New York before 1830, despite nearly 313
banks operating across the other 23 states. Legislative records at both the state and national level
also suggest little impetus for more formalized bank supervision. If anything, the 1830s ushered
in the Jacksonian Era of Free Banking and a move toward less government involvement in
banking at both the national and state level.


B. The Free Banking Era: Unleashing the Genie from the Bottle
         Bank creation through special legislative chartering does not appear to have quenched the
nation’s thirst for capital. Beginning in the 1830s, 18 states passed general bank incorporation
acts permitting groups of individuals to form banks without legislative approval.17 Free banking
laws were particularly prevalent in the Midwest, but many states in the Northeast also passed
versions. These laws specified a well-defined set of capital, reserve, and note-issuance
requirements. While these particular requirements differed by jurisdiction, all free banks,
regardless of the state in which they were chartered, were required to fully back their note issues
with government bonds or other specified assets.18


17
   Rolnick and Weber (1983, p.1082) dates the passage of free banking laws as follows: Michigan 1837 (repealed
1839) and 1857; Georgia 1838; New York 1838; Alabama 1849; New Jersey 1850; Illinois 1851; Massachusetts
1851; Ohio 1851; Vermont 1851; Connecticut 1852; Indiana 1852; Tennessee 1852; Wisconsin 1852; Florida 1853;
Louisiana 1853; Iowa 1858; Minnesota 1858; Pennsylvania 1860. Kentucky, Missouri, and Virginia are generally
not considered free banking states as their general incorporation law differed from the rest.
18
   The intent was that notes should be “riskless” since the bank's collateral in the form of bonds should have been
sufficient to cover the note issuance. There was also no risk of the bank absconding with the collateral as it was held
by state officials.

                                                          10
           Free banking reduced entry costs and hence led to a tremendous growth in the number of
state commercial banks.19 Despite the financial panics of 1837, 1839, and 1857, the commercial
banks in the U.S. increased from just over 765 banks in 1836 to more than 1,600 in 1860.
Consistent with the laissez faire nature of the laws, free banking states generally did not create
costly stand-alone agencies to monitor the behavior of all the newly created banks. Instead, the
laws contained simple rules requiring notes to be fully backed with collateral that was then
surrendered to a state official in the hope that these requirements would prevent losses. While
noteholders could run on banks, repayment concerns only arose when there were dramatic
movements in the bond market or economic shocks that would have affected all banks in a given
state. Idiosyncratic bank risk was not the primary concern of policymakers during this period.
During the discussion of free banking in Indiana’s Constitutional Convention of 1850, it was
argued that “the state should have no more interest in banks than to protect the billholder. All
else must be left to the exigencies of commerce.” (Esarey, 1912, pp. 272-273) Legislatures were
more likely to increase backing requirements than watch over bank activities, and at most, free
banks were required to publish unaudited balance sheets a few times a year. Hence with little
government attention directed toward supervision, depositors, noteholders, and creditors had to
rely on private monitoring and the limited published data of banks to obtain information about
bank behavior.
           Free banking nevertheless raised several concerns for state policymakers, foremost of
which was the issuance of notes by free banks. The legislation placed few, if any, restrictions on
the size of note issuance, continuing a trend that had been started in the era of special bank
chartering.20 By 1860, thousands of types of bank notes circulated, constituting two-thirds of the
money supply (Temin 1969, Table 5.2). The vast array of notes represented a potential risk to
state banking systems since note issuance was not fundamentally limited and since mechanisms
to induce banks to issue them prudently were largely lacking in state laws.
           During the Free Banking Era, state banking proved to be susceptible to bond market
fluctuations. By 1863, nearly two-thirds of all free banks and about a third of all legislatively
charter banks had closed their doors. Due to the requirement that notes be fully backed, losses to

19
     For instance, 46 free banks were chartered in four years after free banking was established in Wisconsin.
20
     Banks received interest on their bond collateral and thus had little incentive to rein in their issuance.

                                                            11
depositors and noteholders were generally minor outside of panics and a few states (King
1983).21 Scholars point to insufficient portfolio diversification and lack of proper supervision as
reasons for these failures (Jaremski 2010). Rockoff (1974) and Rolnick and Weber (1984), for
instance, highlight how Indiana state officials did not accurately price collateral bonds, and how
Minnesota’s law allowed risky revenue bonds to be used as collateral. In response, 15 states
established separate banking authorities (generally called state bank commissioners) between
1830 and 1863. Similar to the New York Safety Fund, however, most authorities had little power
to take action against banks that were in danger of becoming insolvent; they primarily focused
on determining if de novo banks were in compliance with capital and note requirements.
Moreover, at this point in time, very few states had developed banking departments that devoted
resources to regular and periodic examinations of balance sheets and the monitoring of risk
taking.
          Banking panics, in particular, seem to have played a central role in the creation of these
banking departments. Of the 15 states that installed supervision between 1830 and 1863, six
states created formal supervisory institutions in the three years following the Banking Panic of
1837, and two of the hardest hit states of the Panic of 1857, Iowa and Missouri, set them up
within two years of experiencing bank failures. The number of large and publicized bank
closures stirred up fears of instability. Politicians seized upon these failures, using banking
reform as a platform for gaining electoral support.22
          Even New York and Massachusetts upgraded their institutions in response to the
instability of the era. After the suspension or failure of 32 banks, Massachusetts strengthened its
board of bank commissioners in 1838, requiring it to conduct annual examinations of all banks in
addition to any special examinations requested by the legislature. The state supreme court also
empowered the commissioners to force any bank to cease unsound practices. This provision
provided the first basis for a state’s supervisory authority to take action before a bank became

21
   About a third of all free banks and a fifth of all charter banks left behind some noteholder losses. Antebellum
banks also issued more short-term debt and made far fewer long-term commercial loans and investments than
today’s banks; hence liquidity mismatch was less of a problem. They also tended to make many loans to insiders and
members of the board of directors (at least in the Northeast), thus lessening the information asymmetry problem and
reducing losses (Lamoreaux 1986, 1994).
22
   For instance, the architect of the National Banking Act, Salmon Chase, railed against the improper behavior of
state banks while he was governor of Ohio (Davis, 1910).

                                                        12
insolvent, and eventually became a universal feature of state bank regulation. In 1851, the state
passed a free banking law and, in contrast to some other states, simultaneously enabled
stockholders or creditors to request an examination of any bank in the state.
        In response to the 1837 and 1839 Panics, in 1841 New York passed a law in 1841
requiring all bank notes to be backed by its state bonds or Federal bonds; in 1843, it also
abolished its banking commissioners after the failure of the Safety Fund. In 1851, New York
then transferred authority from the State Comptroller to a newly, independent banking
department. The superintendent of this department was authorized to hire as many examiners as
“necessary,” had the authority to require quarterly reporting of balance sheets from all banks, and
(in 1853) gained the power to solicit weekly statements of condition for all banks.23


C. The Era of the Dual Banking: Bottling the Genie
        The Panic of 1857, the Civil War, and a series of banking failures in the early 1860s
ushered in dramatic changes to the American banking system. The National Banking Acts of
1863 and 1864 established national banks – a new type of commercial bank that was federally
chartered by the Office Comptroller of the Currency and competed with state chartered banks.
The Act adopted free banking’s process of incorporation, but made that conditional on higher
capital, note, and reserve requirements than many state laws.24 Borrowing extensively from the
supervisory systems of New York, Massachusetts, and Louisiana, the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (OCC) also extended government’s role in supervising banks. It required the
commercial banks it chartered (national banks) to file reports of condition five times a year, and
implemented a system of regular bank examinations. OCC examiners were charged with looking
at the balance sheets as well as the quality of management and loans of national banks. While the
OCC had the ability to prohibit payments of dividends and compel write-downs of capital, it still
did not have the authority to force banks that were nearing insolvency to alter their behavior


23
   These features were later embraced by the Comptroller of Currency’s office, the regulatory agency authorized to
oversee national banks beginning in the 1860s (Gruchy 1937).
24
   First, the Acts avoided the attachment of note issuance to risky state debt by requiring the use of U.S. Treasury
bonds to back 90% of their value. Second, they prevented the creation of rural banks by increasing minimum capital
requirements. Third, the Acts avoided land speculation by prohibiting loans secured by real estate. Finally, they
increased reserves on notes and required them on deposits as well.

                                                         13
(Bolles 1888; Robertson 1968). It only had the authority to force a suspension if the bank had
defaulted and failed to redeem its bank notes.25
        Competition from national banks as well as a tax placed on state bank notes
fundamentally altered the balance sheets of state banks. Liabilities shifted from notes to deposits.
Figure 1 shows that deposits in the antebellum period were a smaller and relatively constant
portion of liabilities than bank notes through the late 1850s, but deposits quickly increased
relative to circulation after the state of the Civil War. The rise in deposits is often attributed to
state banks gradually introducing demand deposits and checking accounts as a way of competing
with national banks, but national banks also seized upon the benefits of deposits. By the end of
1900, bank notes made up less than 10% of all liabilities. The shift in the U.S. banking system to
the widespread use of demand deposits exposed banks to greater liquidity risk and depositor
runs, as witnessed by the banking Panics of 1873, 1893, and 1907, where liquidity seems to have
played a role (Sprague 1910).
        In response to the rise of demandable deposits, state policymakers seem to have begun to
shift their focus toward ensuring bank safety and making improvements in supervisory standards
in order to protect depositors and improve solvency. However, this shift began slowly, with
significantly cheaper alternatives like double liability laws being installed first.
        Double liability maintained that directors, chief executive officers, chief financial
officers, and stockholders of banks would have to pay up to twice the par value of their shares in
the event of bank failure. With more at stake, bank owner-managers may have taken less risk.
States appear to have adopted this earlier than formal supervision (with 32 states installing
double liability prior to creating a separate banking department) as an early attempt to mitigate
bank risk taking.26 Figure 2 shows that most states in the Midwest and Northeast had passed a
double liability law before 1870, and potentially in response to the National Banking Acts’
requirements, many more passed one during the 1870s and 1880s. By 1890, 27 states had
enacted double liability.


25
   White (2009) provides much more detail on supervision under the OCC and offers some comparison with state
supervision.
26
   Only 7 states installed double liability after a separate banking authority was created (GA, MI, MS, NH, NV, NY,
OR). The average state installed double liability almost 15 years before the authority.

                                                        14
       In contrast to double liability, the creation of independent state banking departments saw
little development between 1863 and 1890. Only California installed bank commissioners during
this 27-year period, bringing the number of states that had a separate department to 18 in 1890
(Figure 3). The next two decades, however, saw a flurry of activity, such that by 1914, only
Arizona, Delaware, and Indiana were without an independent banking authority. Once again,
banking crises seem to have been an agent for change, bringing the shortcomings of the states’
supervisory systems to the forefront. Six states installed formal supervisory institutions within
four years of the Baring Crisis of 1890 and the (banking) Panic of 1893; 17 more states
established formal supervisory institutions between 1907 and 1914.
       Existing state banking departments also responded to the Panic of 1907. For instance, in
1908 New York granted its state banking department the right to restrict chartering by requiring
that banks receive charters only if “public convenience and advantage” necessitated a new
financial institution. Several other states passed similar legislation or began to more strongly
enforce restrictions on the chartering of new banks.
       Some legislatures also augmented their existing supervisory institutions with reserve
requirements and deposit insurance after panics. 35 states installed reserve requirements on
deposits between 1889 and 1914, and deposits insurance was not tried again until after 1907.
That said, only nine states installed reserve requirements on deposits before establishing
permanent state banking departments, and only Indiana established deposit insurance prior to
installing permanent bank supervisory institutions. Thus, unlike double liability, deposit
insurance and reserve requirements lagged bank supervision.
       By the beginning of the twentieth century, the actions of state banking authorities had
been affirmed by the Supreme Court of the United States. In a 1911 decision, the Supreme Court
ruled: “It has been held, we do not doubt rightly, that inspections may be required and the cost
thrown on the bank.” (Noble State Bank v. Haskell, 219 U.S. 104. January 3, 1911). Therefore,
groundwork had been laid for supervision in the public interest prior to the creation of the
Federal Reserve System.


IV. The Determinants of State Bank Supervision


                                                15
        We now turn to assessing the factors that drove the adoption of formal bank supervision,
using the historical evidence presented in Section II as well as economic theory to guide the
selection of determinants. Drawing on a wide variety of historical records, including state
constitutions, state banking reports, and survey data from state banking departments described in
the data appendix, we obtained the year in which each state first established an independent
banking authority (e.g. Office of the Bank Examiner, Bank Commissioner, or state banking
department), our measure of formal supervision. To explain the timing of adoption, we estimate
Cox proportional hazard models where observations are by state and by decade. 27 The panel is
updated each decade, such that states without banks or areas that were still territories are
excluded from the sample until those conditions are met. The dependent variable is coded as
either a zero in a decade where the state had not established an independent banking department
for any of the years of that decade or a one if the department came into existence during the
decade.28 The coefficients in the hazard model provide the relative effect on the probability of
adopting supervision, but unlike probit or logit models, the estimation procedure allows us to
account for differential state entry dates and the unbalanced nature of our panel by controlling
for the date at which statehood was obtained. In our tables of results, a positive coefficient
implies a particular covariate increases the probability of adoption whereas a negative coefficient
implies it decreases the probability of creating a state banking department.
        We include a large set of conditioning variables that may have influenced the legislative
decision on when to create formal state bank supervision.29 Our first independent variable is the
rate of bank entry in a given decade relative to the number of banks at the beginning of the
decade. Public choice theory suggests that existing banks would lobby state legislators to impede



27
   Because demographic and economic data on states are only available every 10 years, we conduct the model at the
decade level rather than exclude potentially important determinants. While hazard models are often used for
continuous data and the proportionality assumption might miss some of the effect of the explanatory variables, the
results reported in the paper are robust to using discrete choice models as well as other types of survival models.
28
   In order to form a complete panel of states, we disaggregate states such as West Virginia and Virginia and South
and North Dakota for the whole period.
29
   Many of these same factors have been used by Grossman (2001, 2007) and others to study the political economy
of prudential regulation such as double liability.

                                                        16
the development of banking systems to protect their rents.30 A negatively-signed coefficient
would be consistent with existing banks lobbying policymakers to promote their own interests,
perhaps to protect themselves from competition or to forestall the creation of institutions
requiring greater disclosure of profits, management activity, or supervisory activities perceived
as costly. On the other hand, a positively-signed coefficient would suggest that legislators acted
in the interest of the public by setting up supervisory institutions to promote product and price
competition and to enforce legal restrictions on bank activity.
         We include two additional independent variables that follow theories suggesting that
regulation is done in the public interest. The first public interest measure is the rate of state bank
closures (defined here as either voluntary liquidations or failures) that occurred during the
previous decade.31 Banks may take on more risk than what is optimal from a depositors’
perspective (i.e., moral hazard) as they may not be able to perfectly observe the quality and
distribution of loan portfolios. Unable to discern if bank managers were taking on too much risk
or committing fraud and worried that they might only receive a fraction of their funds if a bank
failed, depositors would be reluctant to put money in the bank, thus making banking institutions
less viable. In aggregate, this inefficiency could result in lower investment and output. Hence,
asymmetric information could be lessened through supervision by providing independent
assessment of accounting information and by checking for management fraud.
         The second public interest measure is the logarithm of the ratio total deposits to total
circulation for both national and state banks in each state.32 In the context of the U.S. banking,
the issue of depositor welfare became more pronounced in the latter half of the nineteenth
century – when state banks changed their liability structure. Due to the taxation of state bank
notes by the federal government, state-chartered commercial banks shifted away from note
issuance and toward deposit taking. Depositors typically held funds in just a few banks at most,

30
   In the historical context of the United States, Davis (1965), Sylla (1969), James (1976), and Sullivan (2009) argue
that the high capital requirements of national banks and taxes on state bank notes after 1865 enabled geographically-
segmented unit banks to obtain considerable monopoly power.
31
   In this case, we normalize bank closures using the sum of the beginning number of banks and the number of bank
entries during the period. This approach avoids overstating the rate of closure due to banks that entered and quickly
closed.
32
   We use both national and state bank data in order to best capture the overall shift to deposits in state. The
approach also avoids the issue of state circulation declining to zero in the decades after the taxation of state bank
notes. We add one to the ratio before taking the logarithm to avoid undetermined values.

                                                         17
whereas noteholders often held a variety of notes from banks across the nation. A positive
coefficient on the deposit-circulation ratio would indicate that state legislatures responded to the
growth in fractional-reserve, deposit banking and the risk of runs on individual banks by creating
formal supervisory institutions.
         The description of the evolution of banking in the nineteenth and early-twentieth
centuries in Section II provides additional factors that may have influenced the decision to adopt
formal bank supervisory institutions. We assess whether there were any positive or negative
externalities associated with the introduction of national banks in the 1860s by including the rate
of national bank entry and closure. On the one hand, even though the OCC had no regulatory or
supervisory authority over state banks, the mere presence of national banks could have created a
positive demonstration effect. The Comptroller’s Office developed a set of best practices with
respect to bank examination, including understanding how accounting procedures and asset
portfolios affected risk and failure likelihood. National banking may also have influenced state
banking through a legislative requirement passed in 1873, which mandated that the OCC file an
annual report describing the banking condition of the entire country. To fulfill this duty, the OCC
had to gather information on state banks even though they were outside its formal jurisdiction
and implored some states to change their practices.33 On the other hand, the presence of national
banks could have delayed the establishment of state banking departments, either by creating an
incentive to free ride on the OCC or by introducing competition in laxity, i.e., an incentive not to
impose costs on state-chartered banks that national banks faced.
         State legislatures may have delayed the creation of formal supervisory institutions since
they had lower cost substitutes such as double liability laws. Alternatively, the passage of free
banking laws, which accelerated the growth in state-chartered banks, could have increased the
public demand for supervision. We therefore include dummy variables indicating whether a state
had passed a double liability law or had passed and used a free banking law.34 While it is
possible that the adoption of double liability was endogenous to supervision, very few states

33
   It sent regular notices to all state banking departments, requesting information on the state of banking. The OCC
even provided copies of bank supervision guidelines for states to use.
34
   There were many states that installed free banking laws but never used them. We therefore only include states that
created more than 2 free banks as free banking states. A regression with double liability as the outcome variable and
supervision as an explanatory variable shows no statistical relationship between the two.

                                                         18
installed it after supervision. In this way, double liability seems to have been an early attempt to
prevent bank risk taking without devoting any resources to do so.
        We do not, however, include dummy variables for reserve requirements or deposit
insurance systems because, as discussed above, they were largely installed after formal
supervisory institutions.35 Although some states appear to have considered state banking
departments a necessary condition for enacting regulation, the timing of the adoption of state
deposit insurance systems does not work in favor of a hypothesis that these somehow served as
an impetus for the creation of independent bank supervisory departments.
        In lieu of regulation in the public interest, it is possible that banks could act jointly and
come up with collective mechanisms that would prevent spillovers to each other or to the
economy.36 The establishment of clearinghouses could have been one such private-sector
response. Clearinghouses were established to facilitate the clearing of checks and notes, but they
also collected financial statements and had the power to examine member banks. We therefore
include a dummy variable denoting whether a clearinghouse was operating in the state at the end
of the decade. To the extent that a clearinghouse mediated the need for the adoption of
government solutions, the predicted sign of clearinghouses on the creation of state banking
departments would be negative. We can only include clearinghouses when looking across the
entire period because (1) only Maryland installed a clearinghouse before supervision in the
antebellum and (2) the clearinghouse dummy becomes nearly collinear with the region dummies
once banks that installed supervision are dropped out of the postbellum sample.
        We include a variety of controls to capture other state and region specific factors that
may have also influenced the decision to create state banking departments. We examine the
extent to which a state’s level of development might have influenced the establishment of
permanent supervisory institutions by including the number of state banks per capita at the end
of a decade (as well as its square), the log of a state’s population, the urbanization rate (defined
as those places with more than 2,500 people), and the percent of the population that is non-


35
   When these additional variables are included in the estimation, the results are quite similar to those shown in
Table 1.
36
   In practice such practices have been few and far between as a result of coordination problems. Calomiris and
Schweikart (1991) note that several states responded to the Panic of 1857 by developing coordination technologies.

                                                        19
white.37 Since the timing of adoption may have been influenced by geographical differences such
as banking market structure, regional indicator variables are also included as controls.38 For
example, the general lack of state supervision in the South prior to the Civil War was likely a
result of the use of state-sponsored banks in that region. These banks served the state, holding
their deposits, were permitted to branch throughout a state, and were protected by large capital
stocks. The resulting small number of other commercial banks may thus have limited the
incentives for legislatures to develop costly supervision.39


V. Explaining the Adoption of State Bank Supervision
         Estimating a hazard model over the entire sample period of 1820-1910 has the virtue of
statistical power; however, it is less useful for taking into account evolving legislative priorities
given structural changes in the American banking system. For example, in the antebellum period,
state legislatures liberalized entry requirements with free banking laws. Because deposit accounts
were fairly limited and note issuance was fully collateralized, banking largely grew unabated and
there were few advances in supervision. However, by the postbellum period, the National
Banking Acts gave rise to competition between state banks and national banks and to the rapid
growth of banks funding their investments via deposits rather than notes. Because legislative
priorities may have shifted in response to these structural changes, the estimation and
interpretation of some of our coefficients using the entire sample period is sometimes
problematic. For example, before 1870, the hazard model will assign values of zero to national
bank entries and closures instead of a null value even though no national banks existed. We
therefore also present estimates for the sub-sample periods of 1820-1860 and 1870-1910. We
discuss the sub-sample estimates when we want to highlight how the perceptions of state
legislatures may have been altered by structural breaks in American banking.


37
   To provide coefficients of reasonable size, per capita is defined per 100,000 people. We cannot include measure
of economic activity such as manufacturing and agricultural output because these types of measure were only widely
collected after 1840.
38
   Dummies for the South, Midwest, and West are included, with the Northeast being the omitted category.
39
   Louisiana stands out as the clear exception. It established a board of commissioners in 1842, and improved the
quality of supervision with its free banking law in 1853 by requiring weekly statements of condition, uniform
quarterly reporting (including details on loans by maturity), and annual bank examinations. In this way, the state was
on par with New York and Massachusetts and surpassed the level of supervision in most other states.

                                                         20
          Table 1 shows that periods of state banking distress help to predict when formal
supervision were put in place. The rate of state bank closures accelerated the establishment of
formal supervision across both the antebellum and the postbellum periods. Based on the
underlying hazard ratios, a 10 percent higher closure rate in state banks would nearly double the
probability of installing formal supervision. On the other hand, national bank closure rates are
not significantly correlated with the adoption of state banking departments in the postbellum
period.
          Consistent with public interest theory, state policymakers thus may have been more
compelled to change supervisory practices in response to distress for banks they had chartered
(i.e., state banks) in comparison to those that may have created negative spillovers but for which
they had no chartering authority (i.e., national banks). As with other bureaucracies, state-banking
departments persisted once they were established. Therefore, a state had to be willing to commit
to operational costs indefinitely. In normal periods, when losses were relatively low, states might
not have seen the benefit in obligating themselves to future taxpayer liabilities. It appears that it
was not until financial panics and widespread state bank depositor losses united constituencies
that politicians were forced to act in the public interest. For instance, in its first report in 1893,
Pennsylvania’s superintendent of banking states that before the creation of the department:


          It does not appear that any one of our Auditors General has ever been afforded proper
          assistance for the discharge of his duties relating to banks and saving funds. In fact,
          beyond receiving and publishing the quarterly reports of those institutions which were
          made to the Auditor General, and occasional appointments of special examiners, further
          supervision does not seem to have been expected of them … Time and again [State
          Auditors] have called particular attention to the necessity of a closer state supervision of
          banks. Had some of their recommendations been adopted … the unfortunate and
          disreputable failures that have recently occurred, would have been halted at a time to
          prevent so serious a damage as has happened, and so disgraceful a stain placed upon our
          banking- annals both state and national (Krumbhaar 1893, 1-2).

          State legislatures also might have responded to the high bank resolution costs that
emerged from banking panics. Kentucky’s banking commissioner’s first report confirms that this
as an additional reason for installing formal institutions:



                                                   21
         Prior to 1912, there were few safeguards thrown around banking institutions in this State.
         The frequency with which bank failures occurred led the Legislature, in 1912, to pass a
         comprehensive act looking toward the regulation, examination and proper conduct of all
         State banks, and providing for the closing and winding up of the affairs of all such as
         were found to be in an insolvent condition. This legislation has, as its ultimate aim the
         protection of the depositing public (Smith 1913, VI).

Without a staff of examiners, court officials of the state would have been saddled with the time
consuming process of obtaining records of bank assets, negotiating with loan customers, and
tracking down stockholders; court-ordered liquidations can be slow, and can delay the
redeployment of productive assets back into the economy (Anari, Kolari, and Mason 2000).40
Hence, in the wake of failures and economic disruptions associated with them, legislatures may
have been compelled to set up permanent supervisory institutions to reduce resolution costs and
time.
         Table 1 also indicates that faster bank growth rates accelerated the creation of formal
supervision across the whole period. For state bank entry, the effect is relatively small. A 10-
percentage-point increase in the rate of entry of state banks raised the probability of installing
formal state bank supervision by about 0.2 percent per year over the period 1820-1920. The
positive sign indicates that policymakers were not delaying supervision to protect local
monopolies. Policymakers, however, appear more concerned about the growth of national
banking systems. A 10-percentage-point increase in the rate of national bank entry raised the
probability by 1.7 percent per year over the whole sample period. 41 The positive coefficient is
consistent with regulation in the public interest since legislatures wanted their state banking
systems to flourish in the face of competition from national banks. White (1983, 2010) has
shown that this competition often resulted in lower capital and reserve requirements, but states
may have also attempted to draw banks away from the federal system by offering an alternative
to the OCC. Our result suggests a potential positive spillover from the competition between state
and national banks.



40
   For example, OCC examiners checked to make sure all stockholder information for national banks was up to date
and a few states even published detailed information on stockholders in their annual reports.
41
   It is also possible that state legislatures installed formal supervision after observing the stability of national banks
or in order to avoid spillover effects.

                                                            22
         Consistent with regulation in the public interest, the switch from circulation to deposits
also raised the likelihood of state legislatures establishing state banking departments. As
expected, the coefficient is statistically insignificant in the antebellum period when deposits were
consistently low and held mostly by firms. However, it is statistically significant and positively
signed in the postbellum period. A state that had double the number of deposits relative to
circulation was about eleven times more likely to install supervision during the postbellum than a
state that had a ratio of one. Since depositors were generally more susceptible than noteholders to
losses associated with idiosyncratic bank risk, we interpret this as an indication that elected
legislators (who were accountable to depositors) began to pay more attention to the operations of
individual banks. Because the rise of deposits pushed banks to expand their loan portfolios
relative to bond purchases, the shift would have more closely connected to economic and
financial health as well (Calomiris and Mason 2008). Therefore, as deposits became more widely
held, policymakers sunk the cost of creating state banking departments in the public interest.
         Double liability also sped up the introduction of bank supervision. Over the period 1820-
1910, a state with a double liability law in place was sixteen times more likely to install a
separate banking department than a state without a law. Two-thirds of states passed double
liability laws prior to establishing formal bank supervision, and most installed it a couple
decades prior (Figure 4). Therefore, double liability was the first widely pursued bank regulation
at the state level, and states only appear to have established costly supervision after double
liability had been found lacking. As states experienced significant numbers of bank failures,
legislators and depositors likely learned, through first-hand experience, how hard it was to track
down and obtain payments from stockholders without the help of formal institutions charged
with this responsibility. In the wake of banking distress, state banking departments and improved
supervision thus may have evolved to improve the effectiveness of double liability laws (Carlson
2014).
         Free banking laws were installed during the antebellum period, but they did not have a
statistically significant effect during that period. Instead, they slowed down the adoption of
supervision across the entire period. A state that passed a free banking law was about half as
likely to install a separate bank authority as other states.


                                                   23
       While a few states installed independent supervisory departments during the antebellum
period, their adoption was slow and primarily driven by financial panics. The latter half of the
nineteenth century marks an important shift toward a system of state bank supervision that began
to deal with the negative externalities associated with fractional reserve banking and deposit-
taking financial institutions. However, states initially pursued cheaper options for reigning in
bank behavior, such as double liability for bank stockholders, and again, only devoted significant
resources to formal supervision after periods of banking distress. The competition between state
and national banks also played a role in speeding up the adoption of formal supervision.


VI. Quality of State Bank Supervision
       As shown in Figures 3 and 4, adoption of formal supervision by states was nearly
completed by the first decades of the twentieth century. That said, the quality of state banking
departments varied considerably across states. The size of examination staffs, expenditure to
support examination activities, and the quality of data collected by examiners differed
considerably. To learn more about the determinants of differences in the quality of supervision,
we first examine when states began to publish separate banking reports using the same hazard
model framework as in the previous section. We then analyze how reported measures of
expenditures and staffing of examination departments differed in 1911 – after most states had
created formal bank supervisory institutions.
       Some state banking departments began to publish detailed and standardized bank balance
sheet data beginning in the antebellum era, but most states failed to collect detailed balance sheet
information even on an annual basis. As this type of information was important for the public to
reliably monitor banks, it is a key measure of the quality of bank supervision. As shown in Panel
B of Figure 3, the practice of collecting standardized information on banks began in the
Northeast and slowly diffused westward. Many states in the Northeast published banking reports
prior to the 1870s, with other regions lagging. The Great Plains began in the 1890s, the Pacific
Northwest in the 1900s, and the Southwest in the 1910s.




                                                 24
        Table 2 estimates a hazard model predicting when states began publishing regular and
periodic balance sheets over the period 1820-1910.42 As might be expected, states that created
permanent bank supervisory institutions were significantly more likely to publish annual reports
on the balance sheets of banks in the postbellum era. A state that established a separate bank
authority was about 10 times more likely to publish a detailed bank report than a state without
one. We also find that the rates of national bank entry and closure encouraged the publication of
separate bank reports. The former finding is likely driven by the state’s concern over spillovers,
whereas the latter finding likely driven by the mandate of the OCC to collect state bank data.43
Consistent with our earlier discussion, the move to deposit-taking banks as well as laws
mandating the payment of double the owner’s equity in the event of a bank’s failure encouraged
publication of annual balance sheets.
        In 1911, the Comptroller of Currency published results from a survey that provided
information for each state’s expenditure on bank supervision, the number of examiners on staff,
and the number of examinations conducted during the previous year.44 Figure 5 shows state-level
differences in expenditures by banking departments and the number of examiners hired. Because
the Comptroller only surveyed state banking departments for a single year, we explore the cross-
state differences in supervisory quality using an OLS model and a rich set of predictive variables.
        As might be expected, having a state banking department is associated with increased
expenditure on bank supervision and more bank examinations in Table 3. States with bank
supervisory departments spent nearly five times more in total and 1.7 times more per state bank
in comparison to the nine states that had not created them by 1911. States that had created their
supervisory departments earlier also spent more on supervision and examined banks more
frequently than other states, perhaps indicating that these states used the additional funds to
increase the quality of their supervision. The presence of double liability laws increased the
number of examinations in a year, whereas free banking appears to have had no residual impact


42
   We cannot estimate the model using only antebellum data because few states published a report before 1870.
43
   The general lack of state reporting and national banking before 1870 upwardly biases the coefficient on national
bank closures in column two of table 2; hence we view the postbellum result shown in column 1 as the more reliable
estimate.
44
   Because the Comptroller did not receive information on Alabama, Illinois, or Louisiana, they are dropped from
the sample.

                                                        25
on the quality of bank supervision (at least after controlling for the number of banks in a state).
Based on the regressions, a state that installed double liability made about 126 percent more
examinations in total and about 25 percent more examinations per bank than states that had
maintained single liability.
       The number of national banks is associated with increased spending on supervision as
well as the number of bank examiners, perhaps an unintended benefit of competition between
federal and state regulators. Based on the model, a one-standard-deviation increase in the number
of national banks per capita (i.e., 5.3 banks) increased the total amount spent on supervision by at
least 130 percent and the number of examiners 3.0. Consistent with the fact that some states
published data on national banks, the regressions indicate that states devoted resources to watch
over national banks. Alternatively, the number of state banks is only statistically significant in
Column 3. The relative insignificance of state banks is likely due to the fact that banking
departments would have to spend more as the number of banks increased, but would be able to
spend less per bank.


VII. Conclusion


       From the outset, government officials in the U.S. were skeptical of giving banks too
much power and autonomy. The first attempts at state bank supervision focused on assessing
whether banks had sufficient paid-in capital to open for business and whether they had sufficient
assets to back up the notes they issued. Policymakers in the early nineteenth century appear to
have paid little attention to systemic risk. A century later, state bank supervision, though far from
perfect, had made considerable strides toward modern standards and objectives. The vast
majority of U.S. states had established separate state banking departments by the time the
Federal Reserve System was founded.
       Using a new data set on the establishment of formal supervision, we show that state
banking departments, which employed dedicated, supervisory staff to conduct regular and
periodic examinations, were slow to emerge. The large initial fixed costs of establishing such
institutions appear to have been one factor that influenced state legislatures’ choice to use far


                                                 26
cheaper regulatory systems based around double liability requirements for stockholders.
Repeated and costly banking crises, however, moved states to look beyond the cheaper options,
and forge permanent agencies devoted to bank examination. Twenty-seven states installed
supervision immediately after one of the period's three major panic periods: 1837/1839,
1890/1893, and 1907.
       As we show, there are several reasons why states likely chose to install supervision after
panics. First, public outcry after large or widespread banking failures increased the demand for
financial stability. As banks changed from issuing collateralized notes to uncollateralized
deposits, more and more individuals became exposed to the negative effects of fraudulent
behavior and financial crises. Elected officials in the postbellum were increasingly accountable
to taxpayers holding bank deposits and supervising in the public interest. Second, state officials
likely learned that banking distress could involve sizable resolution costs. Liquidating banks
meant taking accurate account of all failed banks’ assets, wrapping up loans, and tracking down
any stockholders who were liable for losses. Politicians might have been able to more easily
justify the expenses associated with permanent state banking departments if they could reduce
resolution costs by using qualified supervisory staff to liquidate banks. Finally, if legislators
could make the claim that state-banking departments prevented future failures, then supervision
in the public interest may have become more palatable to taxpayers. Ex post, there appears to be
some evidence to support this conjecture. During the next severe banking crisis to hit the U.S.
economy, states with higher quality bank supervisory departments experienced fewer failures
during the Great Depression (Mitchener 2005, 2007).
       Our findings from an analysis of the timing of the publication of state banking reports
and the 1911 Comptroller’s survey of state banking departments speak somewhat further to this
point, suggesting that institutional learning may help account for differences in supervisory
quality that were apparent in the 1930s. Looking at when states began publishing regular and
periodic reports, we find that very few states published detailed data before an independent
authority had been established. The states that created permanent state banking departments the
earliest also tended to have the most detailed summary of bank portfolios. Looking at the 1911
Comptroller’s survey of state banking departments, those states that established independent


                                                27
supervisory agencies earlier had banking departments that, on average, spent more on
supervision and carried out more examinations. To the extent that better information and more
examinations improve systemic stability, the timing of supervision installation is important.
           Finally, while previous research has drawn attention to how the dual banking system may
have promoted laxity in regulation, our analysis suggests somewhat different results for
supervision.45 For example, we find that states accelerated the adoption of permanent bank
supervisory institutions in the face of greater competition from national banks. Of course, this
may have been an unintended consequence of a chartering race whereby states offered an
alternative regulatory and supervisory environment to draw banks away from the national
banking system. That said, the national banking system also appears to have enhanced the quality
of state supervisory institutions. During the 1870s, the Comptroller of the Currency pushed states
to collect and release bank data with regular frequency. We also find that national bank activity
is positively associated with state banking systems carrying out more examinations and having
more examiners to do so.




45
     See for instance White (1983, 2011) and Agarwal, et al. (2011).

                                                           28
References

Agarwal, Sumit, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. (2011). “Inconsistent
        Regulators: Evidence from Banking.” NBER Working Paper 17736.
Anari, Ali, Joseph Mason, and James Kolari. (2000). “The Speed of Bank Liquidation and the
        Propagation of the U.S. Great Depression.” In Bank Structure and Competition
        Conference Proceedings. Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Barnett, George. (1911). State Banks and Trust Companies since the Passage of the National-
        Bank Act. 61st Congress, 3rd Session, Senate Document 659. National Monetary
        Commission. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Bodenhorn, Howard. (2003). State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History. New
        York: Oxford University Press.
Bodenhorn, Howard and David Cuberes. (2010). “Financial Development and City Growth:
        Evidence From Northeastern American Cities, 1790-1870.” NBER Working Paper
        15997.
Bernanke, Ben. (1983). “Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
        Great Depression.” American Economic Review 73: 257-276.
Bolles, Albert. (1888). The National Bank Act and Its Judicial Meaning. New York: Homans
        Publishing Company.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles Kahn. (1991). “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
        Optimal Banking Arrangements.” American Economic Review 81: 497-513
Calomiris Charles W. and Larry Schweikart. (1991). “The Panic of 1857: Origins, Transmission,
        and Containment.” Journal of Economic History 51(4): 807-34.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Mason, Joseph R. (2008). "Resolving the puzzle of the underissuance
        of national bank notes," Explorations in Economic History 45: 327-355.
Carlson, Mark. (2014). “Lessons from the Historical Use of Reserve Requirements in the United
        States to Promote Bank Liquidity”. Unpublished Working Paper.
Catterall, Ralph. (1903). The Second Bank of the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press.
Chen, Nan-Kuang. (2001).“Bank net worth, asset prices and economic activity.”
        Journal of Monetary Economics 48: 415 – 436.
Comptroller of the Currency. Various Years. Report. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Davis, Andrew. (1910). The Origin of the National Banking System. Washington: US
        Government Printing Office.
Davis, Lance. (1965). “The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National
        Market.” Journal of Economic History 25: 355-399.
Dehejia, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. (2007). "Financial Development and Pathways of Growth:
        State Branching and Deposit Insurance Laws in the United States, 1900–1940." Journal
        of Law and Economics 50: 239-272.
Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole. (1993). "Efficient Governance Structure: Implications for
        Banking Regulation." In Capital Markets and Financial Intermediation, pp. 12-35.
        Edited by Colin Maye and Xavier Vives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


                                              29
Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig. (1983). “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.”
       Review of Economic Studies 51: 392-414
Esarey, Logan. (1912). “State Banking in Indiana, 1814-1873.” Indiana University Studies 15.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. (1963). A Monetary History of the United States
       1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gorton, Gary. (1996). “Reputation Formation in Early Bank Note Markets.” Journal of Political
       Economy 104: 346-97.
Grossman, Richard. (2001). “Double Liability and Risk-Taking.” Journal of Money, Credit, and
       Banking 33: 143-159.
Grossman, Richard. (2007). " Fear and greed: The evolution of double liability in American
       banking, 1865–1930". Explorations in Economic History 44: 59-80.
Grossman, Richard. (2010). Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized
       World Since 1800. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gruchy, Allan Garfield. (1937). Supervision and Control of Virginia State Banks. D. Appleton-
       Century Co., New York.
Haines, Michael R. (2004). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
       States, 1790-2000. ICPSR Study 2896. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
       Political and Social Research.
Hammond, Bray. (1957). Banks and Politics in American from the Revolution to the Civil War.
       Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Holdsworth, John T. and Davis R. Dewey. (1910). The First and Second Banks of the United
       States. Washington: Government Printing Office.
James, John. (1976). “The Development of the National Money Market: 1893-1911”. The
       Journal of Economic History 36: 878-897.
Jaremski, Matthew. (2010). “Free Bank Failures: Risky Bonds vs. Undiversified Portfolios.”
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42: 1565-1587.
Jaremski, Matthew (2014). “Clearinghouses as Credit Regulators Before the Fed?” Forthcoming
       Journal of Financial Stability.
King, Robert. (1983). “On the Economics of Private Money.” Journal of Monetary Economics
       12: 127-158.
Krumbhaar, C.H. (1893). Reports of the Several Banks, Savings Institutions, and Trust
       Companies of Pennsylvania. Harrisburg: Edwin K Meyers, State Printer.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R. (1986). "Banks, Kinship, and Economic Development: The New England
       Case." Journal of Economic History 46: 647-667.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R. (1994). Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic
       Development in Industrial New England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lebergott, S. (1970). “Migration within the U.S., 1800–1960: Some New Estimates”. Journal of
       Economic History 30: 839–847.
Marquis, Ralph W., and Frank P. Smith. (1937). “Double Liability for Bank Stock”. American
       Economic Review 27: 490-502.
Meh, Cesaire A. and Kevin Moran. (2010). “The Role of Bank Capital in the Propagation of
       Shocks.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34: 555-576.
Mihm, Stephen. (2007). A Nation of Counterfeiters: Capitalists, Con Men and the Making of The
       United States. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

                                             30
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2001). “Prudential Supervision: Why Is It Important and What Are the
        Issues?” In Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn't Frederic S. Mishkin
        (ed.) Unversity of Chicago Press: 1-30.
Mitchener, Kris James. (2005). “Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Financial Instability during
        the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History 65: 152-85
Mitchener, Kris James. (2007). “Are Supervision and Regulation Pillars of Financial Stability?
        Evidence from the Great Depression.” Journal of Law and Economics 50: 273-302.
Mitchener, Kris James and Gary Richardson. (2013). “Skin in the Game? Risk,
        Leverage, and the Consequences of New Deal Financial Legislation.”
        Explorations in Economic History 50: 508-25.
Peltzman, Sam. (1976). “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law and
        Economics 27: 211-240.
Peltzman, Sam. (1984). “Constituent Interest and Congressional Voting.” Journal of Law and
        Economics 84: 181-210.
Posner, Richard A. (1971). “Taxation by Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and
        Management Science 2: 22-50.
Posner, Richard A. (1974). “Theories of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
        Management Science 5: 335-88.
Robertson, Ross. (1968). The Comptroller and bank supervision: a historical appraisal.
        Washington D.C.: Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Rajan, Raghuram. (2009). "The Credit Crisis and Cycle-Proof Regulation." Federal Reserve
        Bank of St. Louis Review 91: 397-402.
Rockoff, Hugh. (1974). “The Free Banking Era: A Reexamination.” Journal of Money, Credit,
        and Banking 6: 141-167.
Rodkey, R. G. (1934). "Legal Reserves in American Banking". Michigan Business Studies VI.
Rolnick, Arthur J. and Warren E. Weber. (1983). “New Evidence on the Free Banking Era.”
        American Economic Review 73: 1080-1091.
Smith, Thomas. (1913). First Annual Report of the Bank Commissioner of the Commonwealth of
        Kentucky. Frankfort, KY: The State Journal Company.
Sprague, Oliver. (1910). History of Crises Under the National Banking System. Washington
        D.C.: National Monetary Commission.
Stigler, George J. (1971). “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and
        Management Science 2: 3-21.
Sullivan, Richard J. (2009). “Regulatory Changes and the Development of the US Banking
        Market, 1870-1914: A Study of the Profit Rates and Risk in National Banks.” In The
        Origins and Development of Financial Markets and Institutions. Cambridge: Cambridge
        University Press.
Sylla, Richard. (1969). “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization in
        the United States, 1863-1913.” Journal of Economic History 29: 657-686.
Temin, Peter. (1969). The Jacksonian Economy. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Townswend, Robert M. (1979). “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
        Verification.” Journal of Economic Theory 21: 265-93.
Trescott, Paul B. (1963). Financing American enterprise. New York: Harper and Row.


                                             31
Weldon, Samuel. (1910). Digest of State Banking Statutes. U.S. National Monetary Commission.
       Washington: GPO. 61st Congress, 2nd session, Senate, Document no.353.
Weber, Warren. (2005). “Listing of all State Banks with Beginning and Ending Dates.” Research
       Department,          Federal          Reserve        Bank         of      Minneapolis.
       http://research.mpls.frb.fed.us/research/economists/wewproj.html.
Weber, Warren. (2008). “Balance sheets for U.S. Antebellum State Banks.” Research
       Department,           Federal         Reserve        Bank         of       Minneapolis
       http://research.mpls.frb.fed.us/research/economists/wewproj.html
Weber, Warren. (2011). “Bank Liability Insurance Schemes Before 1865.” Research
       Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 679.
White, Eugene. (1983). The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-
       1929. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
White, Eugene. (2009). “Lessons from the History of Bank Examination and Supervision in the
       Unites States, 1863-2008,” In Financial Market Regulation in the Wake of Financial
       Crises: The Historical Experience. Banca d’Italia Eurosistema, Rome, pp. 15-44.
White, Eugene. (2011). “To Establish a More Effective Supervision of Banking”: How the Birth
       of the Fed Altered Bank Supervision.” NBER Working Paper 16825.




                                             32
Data Appendix

Banking Data
        We obtain the number of banks, bank entry, and bank closure data from two types of
sources. We start with Weber's antebellum bank census (2005), which contains the location and
dates of operation for every bank before 1861. We then extend his banking census through 1910
using the Merchants and Bankers’ Directory (1860-1889), Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory
(1890-1900), and Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia (1901-1910). These bank directories are reported
to provide, “a complete list of banks, bankers, savings banks, and principle trust companies.”46
The directories include the name, location, and capital of each bank, as well as whether they
were chartered by a state legislature or the Comptroller of the Currency. Therefore, by
comparing the directories in successive years, we can determine when a bank was chartered and
when it exited. A drawback of using these directories is that they do not permit us to determine if
banks exited due to merger, voluntary liquidation, or failure (involuntary liquidation). Even so,
the data provide the most comprehensive census of banking activity for the nineteenth century.
As a check on the completeness of the directory data, we confirmed that the totals matched those
reported in published state banking reports (when the latter became available).
        The circulation and deposit data come from Weber (2005) for the antebellum era, and the
various issues of the Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency for the postbellum era.


Date of Establishment of Independent Bank Authority
        We define this as the year when a state installed its first independent banking state
banking authority. These agencies went by various names, the most common of which were the
Office of the Bank Examiner, Bank Commissioner, or State Banking Department. While
individual states’ departments differed, they all shared the common feature of focusing on
banking, rather than insurance businesses or general business incorporation. In our analysis, we
make no distinction between states that referred to the head of the agency as a bank
commissioner, a bank comptroller, or a banking superintendent. We obtained dates using a

46
  We combine trust companies, savings banks, and savings and loan banks under the “state bank” category as all of
them usually reported to the same authority.

                                                       33
variety of sources. Two published sources listed the dates of bank commissioners (Gruchy 1937)
and banking departments (Weldon 1910), but these are incomplete and contain some errors based
on our other data collection. We therefore conducted two surveys of 48 state banking
departments (in 2002-3 and a follow up in 2012), soliciting official documentation on the origin
of their departments (denoted “state historical documents” in appendix Table A1). Through these
surveys, we obtained histories of state banking departments in the form of printed information or
web-based official histories; however, a significant number of states did not respond. Hence, we
utilized published state banking department reports from the first years of their existence, which
we were able to locate for almost all states in our sample; these contained useful information on
the enactment of state banking laws and the founding of the state banking departments.
Whenever there were conflicts in the information we obtained, we used those dates from latter
two sources rather than from the secondary sources. The sources used to obtain these for each
state are provided in Table A1.


Double Liability on Bank Stockholders
       This dummy value takes on positive values once a state passed a law legislating double,
triple, or unlimited liability for bank stockholders. Those states that did not have a liability law or
had an ambiguous law are not considered to have double liability. We obtained these dates as
well as the date of removal from a variety of sources. First, we sorted through the NBER State
Constitutions Database (http://www.stateconstitutions.umd.edu/index.aspx) for keywords such as
bank, shareholders, stockholders, liable, liability, and double. We augmented these data using
Barnett (1911, 76-77) and the compiled statutes of each state. Second, we used Marquis and
Smith (1937) to obtain the dates of some states that adopted double liability in the antebellum
period and Grossman (2001, 2007) and Mitchener and Richardson (2013) for dates of some
states in the postbellum. We obtained the remaining dates from the following sources: Paton’s
Digest of Legal Opinions, Broom’s First Hundred Years of North Carolina Banking, The Pacific
Reporter, and The Atlantic Reporter.




                                                  34
Reserve Requirements on Deposits
       We obtained these the dates when a state first required all banks to holder reserves on
depostis from Rodkey (1934).


Deposit Insurance
       We obtain the dates of deposit insurance for the antebellum period from Weber (2011)
and for the postbellum period from Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2007, Table 1).


Publication Date of Separate Banking Reports
       This is defined as the first year that a state published a separate report on banking. The
distinction is necessary because some states reported a small amount of banking information in
an omnibus report that also contained information on population, education, farming, and
finances, which we do not code as constituting a banking report. We gathered the dates directly
from the reports themselves (i.e., dates of first published volumes), denoted in appendix Table
A2 as “published first report.” Many state reports are digitized and available on the internet;
others were tracked down through the Library of Congress and state libraries. For the few states
that we were not able to obtain the first report, we obtained the year of the first volume through
its library entry or through its numbering scheme (e.g. if the 8th annual report was published in
1908, the first was likely 1900), denoted as “Worldcat” in appendix Table A2. The list of sources
are provided in Table A2.

Population Data
       Figures on each state’s total population as well as the fractions living in an urban area and
that were non-white are from census data assembled by Haines (2004).


Clearinghouse Data
       The dates of clearinghouse establishment were obtained from Jaremski (2014). Because
they are listed by city, we selected the earliest year that a clearinghouse operated in a particular
state to generate the dummy variable used in the paper.



                                                35
           Figure 1: Number of Banks and Ratio of Deposits to Circulation, 1820-1910
                     14000                                                                      300%

                     12000                                                                      250%




                                                                                                       Log Ratio of Deposits to Notes
                     10000
   Number of Banks




                                                                                                200%
                      8000
                                                                                                150%
                      6000
                                                                                                100%
                      4000

                      2000                                                                      50%


                         0                                                                      0%




                             1884
                             1820
                             1824
                             1828
                             1832
                             1836
                             1840
                             1844
                             1848
                             1852
                             1856
                             1860
                             1864
                             1868
                             1872
                             1876
                             1880

                             1888
                             1892
                             1896
                             1900
                             1904
                             1908
                             State Banks    National Banks             Ln(Deposits/Circulation)

Notes: The number of state banks and the ratio of individual deposits to notes in circulation before 1861 are
from Weber (2005, 2008). The number of state and national banks and ratio of deposits to notes after 1860
come from the Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency. We add one to the deposit to circulation
ratio in order to avoid undefined numbers.




                                                        36
                        Figure 2: Year When Double Liability First Installed




Notes: See data appendix for sources.




                                                 37
                       Figure 3: The Evolution of State Bank Supervision
                  Panel A: Year When Separate Banking Authority Authorized




            Panel B: Year When State Began Publishing Detailed Report on Banks




Notes: See data appendix for sources.




                                             38
       Figure 4: Adoption Rates for State Bank Supervision and Regulation, 1820-1914
                                  (Rate of Existing States)
        1

      0.9

      0.8

      0.7

      0.6

      0.5

      0.4

      0.3

      0.2

      0.1

        0
            1820
                   1824
                          1828
                                 1832
                                        1836
                                               1840
                                                      1844
                                                             1848
                                                                    1852
                                                                           1856
                                                                                  1860
                                                                                         1864
                                                                                                1868
                                                                                                       1872
                                                                                                              1876
                                                                                                                     1880
                                                                                                                            1884
                                                                                                                                   1888
                                                                                                                                          1892
                                                                                                                                                 1896
                                                                                                                                                        1900
                                                                                                                                                               1904
                                                                                                                                                                      1908
                                                                                                                                                                             1912
                            Separate Banking Authority                                          Publish Bank Report                                 Double Liability

Notes: See the data appendix for sources. Shaded areas mark the three major banking panics (1837/1839,
1890/1893, and 1907) as well as three lesser ones (1857, 1860/1861, and 1884). Since territories did not install
regulation and supervision prior to statehood, the creation of new states thus results in reductions in adoption rates.




                                                                                          39
                    Figure 5: Quality of State Bank Supervision in 1911
                Panel A: Total Expenses Spent on Bank Supervision (dollars)




                               Panel B: Number of Bank Examiners




 Notes: See the data appendix for sources. The Comptroller’s report, on which the figure is based, does not
include data for Alabama, Illinois, and Louisiana.

                                                      40
 Table 1: Explaining the Adoption of an Independent State Banking Authority, 1820-1910
                                         1820-1860        1870-1910         1820-1910
                                             (1)              (2)                (3)
Rate of State Bank Closures                2.944*           8.932*            2.275**
                                          [1.531]          [5.282]            [1.119]
Rate of National Bank Closures                                              0.026                  -0.806
                                                                           [3.440]                [2.607]
Rate of State Bank Entries                           0.008                  -0.001                0.018**
                                                    [0.015]                [0.017]                [0.008]
Rate of National Bank Entries                                               0.089                 0.160**
                                                                           [0.107]                [0.076]
Ln(Deposits/Circulation)                             -2.164               3.337**                  0.963
                                                    [2.885]               [1.451]                 [0.672]
Double Liability                                    2.672**              3.929***                2.798***
                                                    [1.069]               [1.263]                 [0.661]
Free Banking State                                   -3.386                 -1.240               -3.024**
                                                    [2.532]                [0.882]                [1.203]
# of State Banks Per Capita                          0.209                  -0.023                 -0.027
                                                    [0.174]                [0.079]                [0.049]
# of State Banks Per Capita^2                        -0.004                 0.001                  -0.001
                                                    [0.002]                [0.001]                [0.001]
Log of State Population (lagged)                     -0.251                 -0.204                 -0.211
                                                    [0.606]                [0.344]                [0.368]
Percent Urban (lagged)                               2.564                  -2.250                 0.130
                                                    [9.150]                [2.363]                [1.416]
Percent Black (lagged)                              10.469*              -3.738***                -3.640*
                                                    [5.668]                [1.377]                [2.000]
Clearinghouse in State                                                                             0.389
                                                                                                  [1.316]
Year Fixed Effects?                                   Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Region Fixed Effects?                                 Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Observations                                           85                   109                     194
R-squared                                            0.363                 0.364                   0.315



Notes: Estimates are based on cox proportional hazard model, where the dependent variable is a dummy
denoting whether the state had created a state banking department in that decade. Observations are defined at
the state-decade level. We drop observations for states that did not yet have commercial banks. Region fixed
effects are included in all specifications. Robust standard errors appear in brackets beneath the coefficients.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at ten-percent, five-percent, and one-percent levels,
respectively.




                                                      41
Table 2: Explaining the Publishing of Banking Reports, 1820-1910
                                                          1820-1910
Rate of State Bank Closures                                 3.405
                                                           [2.358]
Rate of National Bank Closures                                             5.614*
                                                                           [3.279]
Rate of State Bank Entries                                                  0.023
                                                                           [0.020]
Rate of National Bank Entries                                             0.166**
                                                                          [0.073]
Ln(Deposits/Circulation)                                                   1.813*
                                                                           [1.034]
Separate Bank Authority                                                   2.193***
                                                                           [0.841]
Double Liability                                                           0.991*
                                                                           [0.598]
Free Banking State                                                          -1.759
                                                                           [1.268]
# of State Banks Per Capita                                                 0.041
                                                                           [0.082]
# of State Banks Per Capita^2                                               -0.001
                                                                           [0.001]
Log of State Population (lagged)                                            0.026
                                                                           [0.443]
Percent Urban (lagged)                                                      -1.673
                                                                           [1.769]
Percent Black (lagged)                                                    -5.185**
                                                                           [2.313]
Clearinghouse in State                                                      -0.325
                                                                           [1.006]
Year Fixed Effects?                                                          Yes
Region Fixed Effects?                                                        Yes
Observations                                                                 250
R-squared                                                                   0.464




Notes: Estimates are based on Cox Proportional Hazard Model, where the dependent
variable is a dummy denoting whether the state began publishing a independent banking
report in that decade. Observations are defined at the state-decade level. We drop
observations for states that did not yet have commercial banks. Robust standard errors
appear in brackets beneath the coefficients. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at
ten percent, five percent, and one percent levels, respectively


                                              42
Table 3: Explaining the Level of Bank Supervision in 1911
                                           Ln(Supervision Expenses)                                               Ln(Examinations in Year)
                                                                                                                                                                        # of Bank Examiners
                                        Total               Per State Bank                                       Total              Per State Bank
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)                                  (5)       (6)           (7)       (8)                          (9)           (10)
Separate Banking Authority               4.659***                       1.707***                          2.617***                           0.243                         0.624
   in 1910                                [1.143]                        [0.448]                           [0.878]                          [0.184]                       [1.224]
Double Liability in 1910                   1.070                          0.300                            1.264**                         0.265**                         1.759
                                          [0.646]                        [0.300]                           [0.506]                         [0.121]                        [1.699]
Years with Separate Banking                            0.034**                          0.013**                            0.017                          0.001                           0.010
  Authority                                            [0.014]                          [0.006]                           [0.010]                        [0.002]                         [0.018]
Years with Double Liability                             0.017*                            0.006                           0.016**                         0.003                           0.028
                                                        [0.010]                          [0.004]                          [0.007]                        [0.002]                         [0.021]
# of State Banks Per Capita                -0.045        -0.027          -0.031**         -0.025            0.007          0.021             -0.001       0.002            -0.084         -0.066
   in 1910                                [0.033]       [0.043]           [0.014]        [0.018]           [0.027]        [0.037]           [0.008]      [0.009]          [0.060]        [0.061]
# of National Banks Per                  0.260**       0.387**          0.153***       0.198***             0.082          0.168             0.023        0.033          0.578***       0.636***
   Capita in 1910                        [0.102]       [0.156]           [0.046]        [0.063]            [0.085]        [0.125]           [0.027]      [0.031]          [0.196]        [0.205]
Ln(Deposits/Circulation)                   0.609         0.652            0.383           0.398             0.246          0.264             0.094        0.092          5.797**         5.756*
  in 1910                                 [1.019]       [1.232]          [0.456]         [0.519]           [0.880]        [1.057]           [0.235]      [0.252]         [2.806]         [2.836]
Free Banking State                         0.254         -0.052           0.411           0.294             0.488          0.336             0.131        0.122            -0.181         -0.193
                                          [0.815]       [0.727]          [0.401]         [0.374]           [0.725]        [0.768]           [0.240]      [0.243]          [2.334]        [2.310]
Log of Total Population                    0.184        0.665*           -0.311*          -0.154          0.822***       1.222***            0.062        0.128          4.004***       4.367***
  in 1910                                 [0.330]       [0.348]          [0.169]         [0.195]           [0.292]        [0.407]           [0.117]      [0.132]          [1.205]        [1.347]
Percent Urban in 1910                    6.371***      5.511**          3.811***       3.522***             2.019          1.339             0.558        0.459            3.602          3.023
                                          [2.025]      [2.275]           [1.082]        [1.123]            [1.895]        [2.416]           [0.647]      [0.717]          [6.312]        [5.913]
Percent Black in 1910                      5.574         5.562            2.849           2.870             3.773          3.483             0.781        0.699            5.807          4.860
                                          [4.057]       [8.043]          [1.697]         [3.055]           [3.168]        [5.527]           [0.603]      [0.850]          [4.327]        [4.637]
Clearinghouse in State                   -2.568*         0.287            -0.878          0.163             -0.358         1.257             0.176        0.328            -2.262         -1.938
  in 1910                                [1.405]        [0.995]          [0.653]         [0.552]           [1.560]        [1.101]           [0.384]      [0.319]          [3.251]        [3.308]
Region Fixed Effects?                      Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes            Yes
Observations                                45            45                45             45                 45            45                45           45                45             45
R-squared                                 0.784          0.543             0.820          0.707              0.730         0.572             0.464        0.389             0.669          0.671


Notes: Estimates are based on OLS regressions, where the dependent variables are listed in the column heading. Observations are defined at the state level. Region fixed effects are included in
all specifications. Robust standard errors appear in brackets beneath the coefficients. Alabama, Illinois, and Louisiana are not included in the sample because the Comptroller did not report data
on their supervisory practices. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at ten percent, five percent, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                   43
 Table A1: Source of First Separate Banking Entity
        State                                             Source of Separate Banking Entity
 Alabama                 Cited in AL 1911 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 Arizona                 Cited in AZ 1917 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 Arkansas                Cited in AR 1914 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 California              Cited in CA 1879 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 Colorado                Cited in CO 1907 Report
 Connecticut             Gruchy (1937) and Dewey
 Delaware                State historical documents
 Florida                 State historical documents
 Georgia                 Gruchy (1937)
 Idaho                   Cited ID 1905 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 Illinois                Gruchy (1937)
 Indiana                 State historical documents
 Iowa                    Gruchy (1937)
 Kansas                  Cited KS 1892 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 Kentucky                Cited KY 1913 Report, confirmed in state historical documents
 Louisiana               Gruchy (1937)
 Maine                   Gruchy (1937)
 Maryland                State historical documents
 Massachusetts           Gruchy (1937)
 Michigan                Gruchy (1937)
 Minnesota               Weldon (1910)
 Mississippi             State historical documents
 Missouri                Modern Department’s Website
 Montana                 Year of Earliest Report of State Auditor
 Nebraska                Year of Earliest Report of State Banking Board
 Nevada                  Cited in NV 1909 Report
 New Hampshire           Gruchy (1937)
 New Jersey              Surveys of Banking depart. And related docs.
 New Mexico              Cited in NM 1915 Report
 New York                Gruchy (1937)
 North Carolina          State historical documents
 North Dakota            Public Examiner made superintendent of banking system. Cited in ND 1890 Report.
 Ohio                    Gruchy (1937)
 Oklahoma                Oklahoma Historical Society Encyclopedia
 Oregon                  State historical documents
 Pennsylvania            Cited in PA 1892 Report, Surveys of Banking depart. And related docs.
 Rhode Island            Gruchy (1937)
 South Carolina          Weldon (1910)
 South Dakota            Weldon (1910)
 Tennessee               Campbel (1932, p. 46)
 Texas                   Cited in TX 1911, confirmed in state historical documents
 Utah                    Cited in UT 2013 Report
 Vermont                 Gruchy (1937)
 Virginia                Cited in VA 1910 Report
 Washington              Cited in WA 1907 report
 West Virginia           State historical documents
 Wisconsin               State historical documents
 Wyoming                 No separate banking department found through 1920
Notes: See the appendix for further details.




                                                            1
        Table A2: Source of Separate Banking Report
               State                                        Source of Separate Banking Report
        Alabama                  Published first report
        Arizona                  Published first report
        Arkansas                 Published first report
        California               Published first report
        Colorado                 Published first report
        Connecticut              Worldcat
        Delaware                 Published first report
        Florida                  No separate publication through 1914
        Georgia                  Published first report
        Idaho                    Information obtained from 2nd Annual Report of 1906
        Illinois                 Published first report
        Indiana                  No separate publication through 1914
        Iowa                     Not separate publication through 1914
        Kansas                   Information obtained from 2nd Annual Report of 1894
        Kentucky                 Published first report
        Louisiana                Published first report
        Maine                    Information obtained from 19th Annual Report of 1875
        Maryland                 Published first report
        Massachusetts            Published first report
        Michigan                 Published first report. State Treasurer before 1889.
        Minnesota                Published first report. Public Examiner before 1910.
        Mississippi              Published first report
        Missouri                 Information obtained from 1899 Annual Report
        Montana                  Information obtained from 12th Annual Report in 1906.
        Nebraska                 Worldcat
        Nevada                   Published first report
        New Hampshire            Worldcat
        New Jersey               Worldcat
        New Mexico               Published first report
        New York                 Bodenhorn (2003, 216)
        North Carolina           Published first report
        North Dakota             Information obtained from 3rd Annual Report of 1892.
        Ohio                     Published first report. Auditor of State Before 1908.
        Oklahoma                 Information obtained from 5th Biennial Annual Report of 1906
        Oregon                   Published first report
        Pennsylvania             First surviving record in 1827. First report could be earlier.
        Rhode Island             Information obtained from 1863Annual Report
        South Carolina           Published first report
        South Dakota             Information obtained from 3rd Biennial Report of 1898
        Tennessee                No banking data published periodically or separately through 1914
        Texas                    Published first report
        Utah                     Worldcat
        Vermont                  Information obtained from 1877-78 Annual Report
        Virginia                 Published first report
        Washington               Published first report
        West Virginia            Information obtained from 2nd Annual Report of 1902. State Auditor before 1901.
        Wisconsin                Published first report
        Wyoming                  No banking data published periodically or separately through 1914
Notes: See the appendix for further details.




                                                              2
