                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CAPITAL DEPRECIATION AND LABOR SHARES AROUND THE WORLD:
                     MEASUREMENT AND IMPLICATIONS

                                       Loukas Karabarbounis
                                          Brent Neiman

                                        Working Paper 20606
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20606


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation, the Business and Public
Policy Faculty Research Fund at Chicago Booth, and the Robert King Steel Faculty Fellowship at
Chicago Booth. The Online Appendix that accompanies this paper can be found on the authors' web
pages. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Capital Depreciation and Labor Shares Around the World: Measurement and Implications
Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman
NBER Working Paper No. 20606
October 2014, Revised November 2014
JEL No. E21,E22,E23,E25

                                              ABSTRACT

The labor share is typically measured as compensation to labor relative to gross value added ("gross
labor share"), in part because gross value added is more directly measured than net value added. Labor
compensation relative to net value added ("net labor share") may be more important in some settings,
however, because depreciation is not consumed. In this paper we make three contributions. First, we
document that gross and net labor shares generally declined together in most countries around the
world over the past four decades. Second, we use a simple economic environment to show that declines
in the price of capital necessarily cause gross and net labor shares to move in the same direction, whereas
other shocks such as a decline in the real interest rate may cause the net labor share to rise when the
gross labor share falls. Third, we illustrate that whether the gross or the net labor share is a more useful
proxy for inequality during an economy's transition depends sensitively on the nature of the underlying
shocks that hit the economy.


Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
loukas.karabarbounis@chicagobooth.edu

Brent Neiman
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction

A recent wave of empirical work has invigorated interest in theories of factor shares, capital

accumulation, growth, and inequality. In Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), we documented

a pervasive decline in the labor share of income since 1975 and highlighted its comovement

with the decreasing relative price of investment goods. Piketty (2014) and Piketty and Zuc-

man (2014) similarly characterized this factor share movement and related it to increases in

the capital-output ratio. The decline in the labor share and hypotheses about its causes have

spurred a debate among economists and policymakers as they carry implications for the deter-

minants and future evolution of inequality and growth.

    Capital depreciation, often treated as an accounting construct of limited importance in

macroeconomics, plays a critical role in this discussion.1 Depreciation cannot be consumed,

and therefore labor’s share of income net of depreciation (“net labor share”) may be more

closely related to inequality than labor’s share of income inclusive of depreciation (“gross labor

share”). Most economic theory and empirical work, however, are based on gross concepts, in

part because depreciation is not directly measured in national accounts.

    In this paper, we make three contributions. First, we document that gross and net labor

shares generally declined together in most countries around the world over the past four decades.

Second, we use a simple economic environment to show how their joint movement is informative

about the causes of their trends. Declines in the price of capital cause gross and net labor

shares to move in the same direction, whereas declines in the real interest rate may cause the

net labor share to rise when the gross labor share falls. Third, we illustrate that it is not

obvious whether the gross or the net labor share is a more useful proxy for inequality during

an economy’s transition. Instead, the relationship between factors shares and inequality during

the transition depends crucially on the nature and timing of the underlying shocks that hit the
   1
     Summers (2014) points out that the distinction between the marginal product of capital net of depreciation
and its gross counterpart is important for the behavior of factor shares. Krusell and Smith (2014) argue that
the exclusion of depreciation significantly changes Piketty’s quantitative predictions of how a growth slowdown
would impact the capital-output ratio, a point also recognized by Jones (2014). Additionally, Bridgman (2014)
and Rognlie (2014) question the extent to which the observed declines in gross labor shares were accompanied by
declines in net labor shares.


                                                      1
economy.

   We begin our analysis by documenting the time series and cross country patterns of labor

share trends. We use the dataset introduced in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) to examine

trends in four labor share measures that differ in their sector coverage (total economy vs.

corporate sector) and treatment of depreciation (gross vs. net). We focus particularly on

estimates from the corporate sector as they offer several key advantages. Corporate labor share

measures are less affected by the existence of unincorporated enterprises and proprietors whose

reported income combines payments to both labor and capital, a well-known difficulty in the

measurement of the labor share (Gollin, 2002). Further, gross and net corporate labor shares

are largely insensitive to the measurement and economic interpretation of residential housing,

a controversial topic in studies of the economy-wide labor share (Bonnet, Bono, Chapelle, and

Wasmer, 2014; Jones, 2014; Rognlie, 2014; Acemoglu and Robinson, 2014).

   All four measures of the labor share have decreased meaningfully since 1975. For the average

country, gross and net labor share declines were similar in the corporate sector, and the net

decline was even larger in the total economy. In addition, the cross-country variation in net

labor share declines closely mirrors that in gross labor share declines. The pattern of declining

labor shares in the corporate sector is somewhat different when we weight countries by their

size, predominantly due to the influence of the United States. In the U.S. corporate sector, the

value of depreciation has increased as a share of value added since 1975. As a result, its net

labor share declined by 2.6 percentage points, compared to the 4.7 percentage point decline in

its gross labor share. Finally, we confirm that both the time series and cross sectional patterns

that we document are quantitatively similar in the newly released data from the Penn World

Tables (PWT 8.0) that allows for measurement of depreciation for a larger sample of countries.

   Next, we analyze the joint dynamics of depreciation and factor shares within a simple variant

of the neoclassical growth model. Production combines labor with two types of capital, one that

depreciates slowly and another that depreciates rapidly. Consistent with measurement practices

in national accounts, depreciation as a share of gross value added in our model fluctuates in



                                               2
response to shifts in the composition of capital and to changes in the aggregate capital-output

ratio. An increase in depreciation as a share of gross value added causes the net labor share to

increase relative to the gross labor share.

      We use the model to derive simple analytical relationships that link steady state changes in

gross and net labor shares to each other and to the underlying shocks. We start by considering

a decline in the real interest rate, a case emphasized in important recent work by Rognlie

(2014). Rognlie highlights a mismatch between Piketty’s explanation for the behavior of net

labor shares and estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor that

typically come from studies, including our own, of gross labor shares. He demonstrates that,

in response to declines in the real interest rate, the elasticity of substitution in net production

is significantly smaller than that in gross production. Summers (2014), in his book review of

Piketty, makes this point most forcefully:

        Piketty argues that the economic literature supports his assumption that returns
        diminish slowly (in technical parlance, that the elasticity of substitution is greater
        than 1), and so capital’s share rises with capital accumulation. But I think he
        misreads the literature by conflating gross and net returns to capital. It is plausible
        that as the capital stock grows, the increment of output produced declines slowly,
        but there can be no question that depreciation increases proportionally. And it is
        the return net of depreciation that is relevant for capital accumulation. I know of no
        study suggesting that measuring output in net terms, the elasticity of substitution
        is greater than 1, and I know of quite a few suggesting the contrary.


      We confirm in our environment the hypothesis of Summers (2014) and reproduce the finding

of Rognlie (2014). A decline in the real interest rate causes the capital-output ratio to rise,

which increases depreciation as a share of gross value added. For reasonable parameterizations,

reductions in the real interest rate cause the net labor share to increase despite a decrease in

the gross labor share. This happens when the elasticity of substitution in net production is less

than one while the elasticity of substitution in gross production exceeds one.

      By contrast, we show that gross and net labor shares always move in the same direction in

response to technology-driven changes in the relative price of investment goods.2 Declines in the
  2
      The decline in the relative price of investment can also explain other macroeconomic developments over the

                                                        3
price of capital mute the increase in depreciation’s share of gross value added that arises from

the higher real capital-output ratio. Whereas Summers (2014) and Rognlie (2014) emphasize

that the real interest rate affects the net rental rate proportionately more than the gross rental

rate, we emphasize that declines in the relative price of investment affect both gross and net

returns to capital proportionally in steady state. As a result, if labor share movements are

driven by declines in the relative price of investment, the elasticities of substitution in gross

and net production are both on the same side of (or equal to) one.

   Our empirical findings demonstrated that very few countries experienced opposite move-

ments in gross and net labor shares over the past four decades. Our theoretical analysis points

out that gross and net labor shares always move in the same direction in response to changes

in the relative price of investment, but not necessarily in response to changes in the real in-

terest rate. Collectively, our results can reconcile declines in the price of investment when

the elasticity of substitution in gross production exceeds one, as highlighted by Karabarbounis

and Neiman (2014), with the narrative of Piketty (2014) that rests on a high elasticity in net

production.

   Finally, we address the question of which labor share concept – gross or net – one should use.

We clarify that, depending on data availability and the economic application, both concepts can

be useful and complementary. Since depreciation is imputed by national statistical agencies, a

preference by researchers for direct measurement argues for the use of gross concepts. On the

other hand, unlike the rest of gross income, depreciation cannot be consumed by households. A

body of work since at least Weitzman (1976), therefore, has argued that net concepts may be

more closely associated with welfare and inequality than their gross counterparts. We point out

that this logic most naturally applies in an economy’s steady state. It is not obvious whether

gross or net concepts are most useful for thinking about welfare and inequality during the

economy’s transition.
past decades. As Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997) argue, technology-driven changes in the relative price
of investment goods constitute a major driver of economic growth. Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante
(2000) show that the increase in capital equipment is a key force for understanding the increase in the skill
premium.



                                                       4
    To illustrate this point, we introduce into our model two types of agents, workers and

capitalists. Workers cannot save. The dynamics of consumption inequality between these two

groups are governed by the assumption that capitalists, in contrast to workers, are forward

looking and have a positive saving rate. The net labor share perfectly summarizes inequality

between workers and capitalists in the steady state of our model as, in each period, workers

consume their labor earnings and capitalists consume their capital income net of depreciation

expenses. This simple relationship, however, ceases to hold along the transition. Intuitively,

the net labor share only captures the net income position of workers relative to capitalists in a

specific time period, whereas welfare-based measures of inequality take into account the entire

future paths of consumption for workers and capitalists. We use several examples to compare

gross and net labor share measures to welfare-based measures of inequality. A preference for

the gross or net labor share as a simple proxy for inequality during an economy’s transition

depends sensitively on the nature and timing of the underlying shocks that hit the economy.


2     Depreciation and the Labor Share

The gross labor share is more commonly used than the net labor share, in part because it is

better and more directly measured. The net labor share may be more appropriate in some

settings, however, because depreciation is not consumed. In this section, we first discuss how

depreciation is measured in the national accounts. We then demonstrate that most countries

have exhibited meaningful and broadly similar declines since 1975 in both their gross and net

labor shares.

2.1    Measurement of Depreciation

Depreciation, typically referred to as consumption of fixed capital in the national accounts, is

the decline in the value of fixed capital due to tear, damage, obsolescence, and aging. It is

the implicit income that is consumed by the use of fixed capital and therefore it is included in

gross domestic product (GDP), the measure of gross value added for the aggregate economy.

This inclusion of the value of depreciation in GDP does not, in general, require any explicit

                                               5
measurement of depreciation.3 The cost of consuming fixed capital during production is re-

flected in final goods prices, in the value of produced goods, and in factor prices. Depreciation

will therefore be automatically incorporated when GDP is measured using the expenditure,

production, or income approaches.

       To measure net domestic product (NDP), which equals GDP less depreciation, national

accountants combine estimates of depreciation rates with estimates of the value of the capital

stock. In the United States, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) estimates depreciation

rates since 1996 for more than 100 different types of capital, typically using the geometric

method that imposes a constant rate of depreciation every period. Estimates of the geometric

rate of decline in the economic value of assets come from studies of the prices of used assets

in resale markets, as described in Fraumeni (1997). These asset-specific depreciation rates are

then used to derive the capital stock for each type of asset and for the aggregate economy,

along with the associated values of depreciation (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2003).4 Note

that the depreciation rate for each type of capital is assumed to be constant. Changes in the

depreciation rate of the aggregate capital stock purely reflect compositional changes in the

types of capital used by the economy.

       The 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA) recommends measurement of depreciation

in a way that is intended to be theoretically appropriate and comparable across countries.

The international comparability of measured depreciation depends on the coverage of fixed

assets and the depreciation rates used. As OECD (2014) recognizes, depreciation practices

differ across countries with some countries using geometric profiles and others using straight-

line profiles (corresponding to a value of depreciation for each asset and each period that is

constant in levels terms rather than in percentage terms). For example, the national accounts in
   3
       There are some exceptions to this. For example, estimates of depreciation are used to calculate the value
added from non-market producers such as the government, which also contribute to GDP.
     4                                          j
       For a given type of capital j, let Kt,i      be the real stock at the end of period t contributed from investment
undertaken during period i. Assuming that real investment Xij is purchased in the middle of year i, we have
   j
Kt,i   = (1 − δ j /2)(1 − δ j )t−i Xij , where δ j is the depreciation rate. The total real stock net of depreciation from
                                           Pt
all vintages of investment is Ktj = i=1 Kt,i        j
                                                      . Finally, the nominal value of depreciation for each asset j is then
                 j    j         j       j           j
measured as ξt (Kt−1 + Xt − Kt ), where ξt is the price index used to deflate nominal investment in asset j and
   j
Kt−1    + Xtj − Ktj represents the real value of depreciation of asset j.


                                                            6
the United Kingdom apply the straight-line method to derive estimates of depreciation and the

net capital stock (Dey-Chowdhury, 2008). Some international databases such as the PWT and

KLEMS attempt to make depreciation patterns more comparable across countries by applying

the depreciation rates used by the BEA to each country.

       Some analyses may call for a theoretical focus on the net labor share in addition to, or

instead of, the gross labor share. As an empirical matter, however, the difficulty in imputing

depreciation likely makes net labor share measures less precise than gross labor share measures.

This same observation underlies the pervasive use of GDP rather than NDP in discussions of

aggregate economic performance. As described in the 1993 SNA, “In general, the gross figure

is obviously the easier to estimate and may, therefore, be more reliable...”.

2.2       Results from National Accounts Data

Our primary analyses use the national accounts dataset introduced in Karabarbounis and

Neiman (2014), which combines a number of sources including country-specific web pages and

digital files and physical books published by the United Nations (UN) and Organization for

Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).5 Our data are annual, start in 1975, and

generally conform with SNA standards, though there are certainly some differences in con-

ventions across countries and over time. Importantly for our purposes, we make use of the

“Detailed National Accounts,” which allow us to distinguish between government, household,

and corporate flows.

       We now introduce four different concepts of the labor share of income sL . All four labor

shares express a measure of compensation of employees as a fraction of a measure of income.6
   5
     We refer the reader to Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) for details on the construction of these data. The
analyses presented in this paper use the “KN Merged” version of our dataset. Our qualitative conclusions do not
change if we instead use the “OECD and UN” version, which is based only on data digitally available and readily
downloaded from OECD and UN web pages with minimal additional manipulations.
   6
     Typical labor share measures include taxes on production in income but not in the compensation of employees.
Therefore, this practice effectively treats all taxes as capital income. A reasonable alternative treatment of these
taxes is to augment compensation of employees with a proportion of taxes that equals the share of non-tax value
added belonging to compensation. We document in the Online Appendix that the tax share of value added has
not changed significantly either in the United States or globally since 1975. An adjustment for taxes, therefore,
does not matter quantitatively for the decline in the labor share. This evidence argues against the claim made in
Bridgman (2014) that taxes on production meaningfully alter the declining trend in the labor share.



                                                         7
They differ in their treatment of depreciation as well as their sectoral coverage. The four labor

share measures are:

   1. “Total Gross Labor Share”:

                                           Total Compensation of Employees
                                 sTL G =                                   .
                                               Gross Domestic Product

   2. “Total Net Labor Share”:

                                         Total Compensation of Employees
                          sTL N =                                               .
                                    Gross Domestic Product − Total Depreciation

   3. “Corporate Gross Labor Share”:

                                       Corporate Compensation of Employees
                              sCG
                               L =                                         .
                                           Corporate Gross Value Added

   4. “Corporate Net Labor Share”:

                                     Corporate Compensation of Employees
                     sCN
                      L  =                                                        .
                             Corporate Gross Value Added − Corporate Depreciation

We index these four labor share measures with superscript j ∈ {TG, TN, CG, CN} and denote

the labor share of type j in country i at year t by sjL,i,t .

       Across all notions of the labor share, compensation of employees includes wages and salaries

in cash or in kind. Compensation also includes various supplements to wages such as employer

contributions for sickness, pensions, health insurance, and social insurance. It also tries to

capture the estimated value of stock option grants (Lequiller, 2002).

       The first two labor share measures, j ∈ {T G, T N }, are taken from the overall economy.

The “Total Gross Labor Share” is the most commonly used measure and simply divides com-

pensation of employees by GDP. The “Total Net Labor Share” has the same numerator, but

it instead subtracts depreciation in the economy from GDP and uses that net income concept,

equal to NDP, in the denominator.7
   7
    In U.S. data, “Total Compensation of Employees” equals Line 2 from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) Table 1.12. “Gross Domestic Product,” can be found in Line
1 of NIPA Table 1.1.5. “Total Depreciation” is typically referred to in the national accounts as consumption of
fixed capital and can be found for the U.S. economy as Line 5 in NIPA Table 1.7.5. Equivalently, “Net Domestic
Product” can be used directly as the denominator instead of GDP minus depreciation and is found in Line 1 of
NIPA Table 1.9.5.

                                                      8
       The second two labor share measures, j ∈ {CG, CN }, use the same corresponding concepts

in the numerators and denominators, but with the measures taken only from the corporate

sector, which includes both financial and non-financial corporations. “Corporate Gross Value

Added”, for example, is the contribution of the corporate sector to total GDP (and in fact

is often referred to as Corporate GDP).8 The precise definition of the corporate sector varies

somewhat across countries. The sector generally includes most market producers located in

a given country that are not controlled by the government and excludes most unincorporated

enterprises and sole proprietors.9 In both the United States and the world more generally,

the corporate sector accounts for roughly 60 percent of GDP. This share has remained largely

stable over our sample period.

2.2.1      Time Series Patterns Using Raw Data

We start our analysis of the time series patterns of these labor share measures at the global

level by running regressions of the form:


                                           sjL,i,t = γtj + γij + ji,t .                                    (1)


Each regression only includes countries with at least 15 observations of the corresponding labor

share measure and excludes the few outliers with labor shares above 0.99 or below 0.01. We

include country fixed effects γij because we do not have a balanced panel. Country fixed effects

eliminate the influence of entry and exit of countries with different labor share levels on our

inference about the time series behavior of the global labor share.

       To show the time series behavior of the global labor share in the total economy, Figure 1

plots the year dummies γtj from four regressions, all normalized to equal the average level of

the corresponding labor share measure in 1975. The solid line, corresponding to the “Gross
   8
     In U.S. data, the required information on the corporate sector is found in NIPA Table 1.14. “Corporate Com-
pensation of Employees” equals Line 4, “Corporate Gross Value Added” equals Line 1, “Corporate Depreciation”
equals Line 2, and “Corporate Net Value Added” equals Line 3.
   9
     Most unincorporated enterprises are included in the household sector and “can range from single persons
working as street traders or shoe cleaners with virtually no capital or premises of their own through to large
manufacturing, construction or service enterprises with many employees.” (United Nations Statistical Commission,
2008). A small share of unincorporated enterprises may be included in the corporate sector as something called
quasi-corporations if their business accounts are sufficiently detailed.


                                                        9
                          .7        .65
             Global Total Labor Share
           .5      .55    .45.6




                                          1975   1980   1985    1990        1995   2000    2005      2010

                                                        Gross Unweighted            Gross Weighted
                                                        Net Unweighted              Net Weighted



      Figure 1: The Evolution of Total Global Labor Share Measures in KN (2014) Data

Unweighted” measure, plots the gross labor share of the total economy for the average country

in our sample. The long-dashed line, corresponding to the “Gross Weighted” measure, plots

the year dummies when observations in regression (1) are weighted by GDP, after translating

GDPs into current U.S. dollars using market exchange rates. Because regressions are weighted,

movements in this measure of the labor share disproportionately reflect movements in the labor

shares of the largest economies. Fitting these two lines with a linear trend implies that the

global gross labor share for the total economy has declined globally by 4.6 percentage points

(unweighted) and 4.0 percentage points (weighted) between 1975 and 2012.

   The two other lines plot the unweighted and weighted labor shares net of depreciation.

The net labor share measures differ from their corresponding gross measures for three reasons.

First, the net labor share is by definition greater than the gross labor share because it excludes

depreciation from the denominator. Second, for the weighted regressions, differences in depre-

ciation across countries render weights based on GDP different from weights based on NDP.

Third, the set of countries included is different. We only include countries with at least 15

observations in each regression. For some countries and years we do not observe depreciation


                                                                       10
                                   Table 1: Global Labor Share Trends

                                           Percentage Points                     Percent
   Dataset        Labor Share           Unweighed       Weighted     Unweighed        Weighted     Countries


   KN (2014)      Total Gross               -4.6            -4.0          -9.1             -7.5        70
   KN (2014)      Total Net                 -7.0            -3.6         -11.9             -5.6        59
   KN (2014)      Corporate Gross           -9.2            -5.4         -14.5             -8.8        40
   KN (2014)      Corporate Net             -9.8            -3.7         -13.4             -5.1        29
   PWT 8.0        Adjusted Gross            -8.7            -6.4         -13.7             -10.6       72
   PWT 8.0        Adjusted Net              -9.3            -5.8         -13.0             -8.7        68



and therefore cannot calculate net labor shares. Of the 70 countries with data sufficient to

calculate 15 years of total gross labor shares, only 59 have data sufficient to do the same for

net labor shares.10 Fitting the net labor share series with a linear trend implies a decline of

7.0 percentage points for the unweighted regressions and a decline of 3.6 percentage points for

the weighted regressions.

       Table 1 summarizes the results from our global time series analyses. As seen in the top

two rows, the decline in the net labor share is larger than the decline in the gross labor share

in percentage points for the average country in our sample (corresponding to the unweighted

regressions). The net labor share declines by slightly less in percentage points relative to the

gross when we weight countries by their GDP. Since net labor shares are higher in levels, the

table also reports these declines in percent terms.

       We next characterize movements in the labor shares of the corporate sector. As in our

previous work, we emphasize corporate labor share measures because they are less affected by

the existence of unincorporated enterprises and proprietors whose income combines payments

to both labor and capital. This issue, most notably highlighted by Gollin (2002), is quite
  10
    The largest countries without sufficient data on depreciation include Argentina, Brazil, China, Colombia, and
Saudi Arabia. Throughout our analyses we have verified that our results do not change meaningfully when we
require that a country have both measures in order to be included in the regression.



                                                       11
                          .8
           Global Corporate Labor Share
            .6     .65    .55.7     .75




                                          1975   1980   1985    1990        1995   2000    2005      2010

                                                        Gross Unweighted            Gross Weighted
                                                        Net Unweighted              Net Weighted



        Figure 2: The Evolution of Corporate Labor Share Measures in KN (2014) Data

problematic for the consistent measurement of the labor share across countries and over time

because the share of these enterprises likely varies across countries and over time.

   In the context of this paper, a focus on measures of the labor share taken from the corporate

sector offers two additional benefits. First, it removes any influence of residential housing on the

dynamics of depreciation and, therefore, on the gap between gross and net labor shares. This

is in line with key dynamics in recent papers such as Bridgman (2014) and Rognlie (2014),

which instead emphasize the changing composition of the corporate capital stock. Second,

papers such as Bonnet, Bono, Chapelle, and Wasmer (2014), Jones (2014), Rognlie (2014),

and Acemoglu and Robinson (2014) have noted that elasticity estimates derived from the

relationship between labor shares and the capital-output ratio are sensitive to the inclusion of,

and method of deflating, housing capital. Reasonable arguments can be made as to whether

housing capital should or should not be excluded from analyses aiming to estimate the shape

of the production function. This issue applies less to the corporate sector, where nearly all

structures are offices, factories, and commercial stores used for productive purposes.

   Figure 2 plots four times series corresponding to unweighted and weighted gross and net


                                                                       12
labor shares in the corporate sector. The corporate labor share is in general larger than the

labor share in the total economy shown in Figure 1 for two reasons. First, GDP includes certain

taxes on products that are excluded from the equivalent denominator in the corporate sector.11

Second, the income of owners of unincorporated enterprises that are part of the household sector

is included in value added but is not included in compensation of employees. Implicitly, the

economic activity of those proprietors is treated as having a zero labor share. This downward

force impacts labor share measures for the total economy but it impacts less measures for the

corporate sector.

       We summarize our results in Table 1. When we do not weight our regressions, the corporate

gross and net labor shares decline by 9.2 and 9.7 percentage points, or by 13.4 and 14.5 percent

respectively. These declines are so similar because, for the average country in our sample,

corporate depreciation as a share of corporate gross value added has not changed meaningfully

over time. When we weight observations in our regressions with value added, we observe a 5.4

percentage point decline in the corporate gross labor share and a 3.7 percentage point decline in

the corporate net labor share. The smaller decline in the weighted net measure largely reflects

the increase in depreciation relative to value added in the U.S. corporate sector.

2.2.2      Time Series Patterns Imputing Net Labor Shares

The above analyses only included labor share measures for countries with raw data sufficient

to directly construct these measures. To examine the sensitivity of our results when a more

representative global aggregate is examined, we now make imputations that rely on propor-

tionality assumptions when a country has sufficient data to get close to, but not all the way

to, a given labor share measure. More formally, let Ωj for j = {T G, T N, CG, CN } denote the
                                                                                   0
set of countries i that contain at least 15 years of data on sjL,i,t . Let ηtj,j denote the year fixed

effects from regressions of the form:

                                        sjL,i,t
                                                  = ηtj,j0 + ηij,j0 + j,j0
                                                                       i,t .                              (2)
                                        sj0
                                         L,i,t

  11
    This statement holds for most countries’ national accounts but there are several exceptions, including the
United States.


                                                         13
                              .8
              Global Corporate Net Labor Share
                 .6      .65  .55  .7     .75




                                                 1975    1980    1985     1990        1995      2000   2005    2010

                                                          Only Raw Data               Imputation 1        Imputation 2



                                                 Figure 3: Comparison of Corporate Net Labor Shares by Method

As before, we absorb country fixed effects to account for entry and exit into the sample and we

normalize the level of the time dummies to equal the average of the left-hand side variable in
                                                                                           0
1975. Note that only countries in both sets Ωj and Ωj will be included in this regression.

       Our imputation applies to a country that has a measure of sj0               j
                                                                  L,i,t but lacks sL,i,t . In that case

we impute the latter as sj0       j,j0
                         L,i,t × ηt . For example, New Zealand has data on its total net labor

share sTL,i,t
         N
              but not on its corporate net labor share sCN
                                                        L,i,t . But many other countries have both

of these measures. We use those other countries to calculate the appropriate ratio of the two

measures in each year, ηtCN,T N , and then impute sCN                        CN       TN      CN,T N
                                                   L,i,t for New Zealand as sL,i,t = sL,i,t ×ηt      .

Note that this implies that while the inclusion of the imputed New Zealand corporate net labor

share can impact the global trends of gross and net labor shares, it cannot by construction

influence their relative movement. Similarly, Tunisia has data on its corporate gross labor

share sCG                                                     CN
       L,i,t but lacks data on its corporate net labor share sL,i,t . We might therefore wish to

use ηtCN,CG to impute its corporate net labor share.12

       Figure 3 plots the unweighted corporate net labor share under three alternative methods.
  12
    For some of our analyses we also use this procedure to impute the corporate gross labor share using ηtCG,T G .
This imputation also includes some large developed countries such as Australia and Japan.


                                                                                 14
The solid line shows the path of corporate net labor shares without any imputation (i.e. using

“Only Raw Data”) and therefore is identical to the path of the unweighted corporate net labor

share shown in Figure 2. The short-dashed line, labeled “Imputation 1,” imputes the corporate

net labor share when it is missing from the raw data using a particular sequence of steps. First,

if a country’s corporate gross labor share is available, it imputes the corporate net labor share

using ηtCN,CG . Next, if the corporate gross labor share is unavailable but the total net labor

share is available, this method imputes corporate net labor share using ηtCN,T N . Finally, if only

the total gross labor share is available, this method imputes the corporate net labor share using

the product of these factors, ηtCN,CG × ηtCG,T G . The long-dashed line, labeled “Imputation 2,”

instead imputes the corporate net labor share directly from the total gross labor share using

ηtCN,T G .13 As can be seen in Figure 3, all methods for calculating the global corporate net labor

share reveal similar patterns of decline.14

2.2.3      Cross Country Patterns

Above we documented that both gross and net labor shares exhibit declines. This is true

both for the average country and for the world as a whole. We now document that the cross

country pattern of corporate gross labor share declines largely mirrors that of the net labor

share declines. Figure 4 compares plots of these two trends for each country, measured in

percentage points per 10 years. The plot includes all countries with 15 years of raw data on

both measures. Most countries, such as Mexico, lay below the plotted 45-degree line, indicating

that the corporate net labor share declined by more than the gross. Others, such as the United

States (difficult to visualize as it is close to the origin), are above the 45-degree line, and

therefore had a smaller decline in the net labor share.

       Overall, the cross sectional variation in the two trends is quite similar. Of the 24 countries

with declines in their gross labor shares, 22 experienced declines in their net labor shares. Of

the 20 countries with statistically significant at the 5 percent level declines in their gross labor
  13
      We have confirmed the robustness of our results to reversing the order of the first two steps in “Imputation 1.”
                                                                   CN,T N
It makes little difference if we first try to impute sCN
                                                      L,i,t using ηt      × sTL,i,t
                                                                               N
                                                                                    before trying to use ηtCN,CG × sCG
                                                                                                                    L,i,t .
   14
      Countries lacking the corporate net labor share have systematically lower corporate gross labor share and total
net labor share values, causing the two imputed lines to start at a level significantly lower than the raw series.


                                                            15
                               .1             .05
             Trend in Corporate Net Labor Share                                                         ESP           UKR
                                                                                                     BEL PRT
                                                                                                      CZE ARM
                                        0
                                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                                   USA
                                                                                                     ITA GBR
                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                 GER
                                -.05


                                                                                                 SVK
                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                             ZAF
                                                                                              LUX

                                                                                       MEX  SVN
                                                                                              LVA
                         -.1




                                                                                        AZE  LTU
                                                                                         HUN
                 -.15




                                                                            POL
           -.2




                                                                      KAZ
                               -.25




                                                    -.25   -.2    -.15       -.1       -.05       0             .05     .1
                                                                 Trend in Corporate Gross Labor Share



           Figure 4: Comparison of Trends in Corporate Gross and Net Labor Shares

shares, 17 also had statistically significant declines in their net labor shares.

2.3    Results from the Penn World Tables

The methodology and quality of depreciation measurements in the national accounts is het-

erogeneous across countries. The recently released PWT 8.0 (Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer,

2013) contains new measures of the capital stocks, labor shares, and depreciation. The key

advantage of using the PWT is that it harmonizes measurement of depreciation across coun-

tries. It does not allow us to focus on the corporate sector as we can in the Karabarbounis and

Neiman (2014) dataset, but depreciation is measured for a broader set of countries than in our

baseline analysis.

   The PWT 8.0 starts with depreciation rates for six types of capital (structures, transport

equipment, computers, communication equipment, software, and other machinery). These

asset-specific depreciation rates are assumed to be constant across countries and years and equal

the official BEA depreciation rates (given in Fraumeni, 1997). The aggregate depreciation rate

for each country equals the weighted average of asset-specific depreciation rates, with weights


                                                                                  16
                           .75
               Global Total Labor Share
              .6       .65 .55    .7




                                          1975   1980    1985    1990      1995   2000       2005   2010

                                                        Gross Unweighted          Gross Weighted
                                                        Net Unweighted            Net Weighted



                                                  Figure 5: Global Labor Shares in the PWT

given by the value of each asset in the total capital stock. As a result, cross-country differences

in the overall depreciation rate exist purely due to cross-country differences in the composition

of their capital stocks. We refer the reader to Inklaar and Timmer (2013) for more details on

the measurement of the labor share, capital, and depreciation in PWT 8.0.

       PWT 8.0 offers four underlying series of the labor share for the total economy. Three of

the four series build upon the adjustments proposed by Gollin (2002) to incorporate data on

the self-employed in calculating the labor share for the total economy. The fourth series adds

the value added in agriculture to labor compensation of employees, with the rationale being

that agriculture is labor intensive and it employs a large fraction of the self-employed in poor

countries. The PWT constructs a “best estimate” labor share from these four series for each

country and we use this measure in our analysis.15
  15
     The first method attributes all the self-employed’s “mixed income” – a term referring to the fact that their
income likely pools compensation for labor and capital – to labor. The second method assumes that the self-
employed’s income is split between labor and capital in the same proportion as in the rest of the economy. The
third method assumes that self-employed earn the same wage as other workers and uses data on the number of
self-employed to impute their labor earnings. For most countries, and especially the developed ones, the best
estimate labor share uses the second adjustment. We drop those observations where the labor share is assumed
to be constant within a country or is interpolated by the PWT.



                                                                    17
                               .1
                                                                                                                      BMU


                                           .05
               Trend in Net Total Labor Share                                                                   MAC
                                                                                                            MNG
                                                                                                            ISL
                                                                                                      HKG
                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                                  MLT
                                                                                                JAM RWA
                                   0


                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                CZE
                                                                                                USASGP
                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                               KEN
                                                                                       JPN   TUR
                                                                                              BRA  SEN
                                                                                        KOR
                                                                                      THA   BOL
                                                                                           NER
                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                       BFAMEX
                                                                                         ISR  GBR
                                                                                            SVK
                                                                                          CAN
                                                                                TWN FRAPRT
                                                                                  SVN NLDCOL NGA
                                                                                               LTU
                                                                                       ZAF
                       -.05




                                                                                 ITAFIN NZL
                                                                                 BHR
                                                                            TTO PAN  PHL
                                                                                   NOR  TUN
                                                                              DEU
                                                                                LKA
                                                                           SLE
                                                                          ARG
                                                                            FJI    KGZ
                                                                          AUS
                                                                      IND
                                                                        MUS             LVA
                                                                       NAM
              -.1




                                                                   DOM
                                                                    ROU
                                                               CHN PER
                                                              ZWE

                                                        MKD
                               -.15




                                                                    TZA

                                                 -.15         -.1            -.05            0              .05             .1
                                                                      Trend in Gross Total Labor Share



                                                        Figure 6: Gross vs. Net Labor Shares in the PWT

       As in our previous analyses, we run unweighted and weighted regressions of the form shown

in equation (1). Figure 5 plots the year fixed effects for the gross and the net labor shares.

The bottom rows of Table 1 summarize the percentage point and percent declines in the labor

shares. Similarly to the facts documented in the Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) dataset, the

PWT data shows comparable declines in both gross and net labor shares. This reflects the fact

that the value of depreciation as a fraction of gross value added did not increase significantly

over time.16

       Figure 6 plots the country trends in gross labor shares against the country trends in net

labor shares, after removing an outlier (Azerbaijan) to improve the figure’s presentation. Most

of the points lay below, but close to, the plotted 45 degree line, which indicates that the cross-

country variation in gross labor share trends closely tracks the variation in net labor share

trends. Of the 60 countries with declines in their gross labor shares, 56 also experience declines

in their net labor shares. Of the 41 countries with statistically significant declines in their gross

labor shares, 40 also experienced statistically significant declines in their net labor shares.
  16
    The depreciation rate as estimated by the PWT shows a mild increase from roughly 4 percent to roughly 4.2
percent over the sample period for the average country.


                                                                                  18
3     A Model of Gross and Net Labor Shares

Having demonstrated a robust pattern of declining gross and net labor shares globally, we now

use a variant of the neoclassical growth model to understand the joint dynamics of depreciation,

factor shares, and inequality. We recognize that the model abstracts from various subtleties

that affect both factor shares and inequality. Despite its simplicity, the model serves two

purposes. First, we use the model to characterize analytically how the relative movement of

gross and net labor shares across steady states depend on the nature of the underlying shocks

and the structure of production. We demonstrate conditions under which gross and net labor

shares necessarily move in the same direction. Second, we work through some examples to

illustrate that, even in this simple model, the relationship between factor shares and inequality

is complicated when an economy is not in steady state.

    We consider an infinite horizon deterministic economy with periods t = 0, 1, 2, ..., populated

by two types of agents indexed by i ∈ {N, K}. Workers (i = N ) simply consume labor

earnings and do not save. Capitalists (i = K) decide how to allocate capital income between

consumption and investment. All inequality in this economy therefore reflects the “between”

component in comparing these two groups.

    There are two types of capital indexed by j ∈ {L, H} that are produced with different

technologies and that depreciate at different rates. Changes in the composition of the aggregate

capital stock generate changes in the aggregate depreciation rate. We think of capital KtH

as a high depreciation asset (for instance, capital related to information and communication

technologies) and KtL as a lower depreciation asset (for instance, structures and transportation

equipment).


Final Goods.     Competitive firms produce gross final output Yt with a constant elasticity of

substitution (CES) technology:
                                         σ−1                      σ−1
                                                                        σ
                                                                        σ−1
                        Yt = α (AK,t Kt )  σ  + (1 − α) (AN,t Nt )  σ       ,                 (3)




                                                 19
where Kt denotes the aggregate capital stock, Nt denotes aggregate labor supply, σ > 0 denotes

the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital, α ∈ (0, 1) is a distribution parameter,

AK,t denotes capital-augmenting technology, and AN,t denotes labor-augmenting technology.

Final goods producers rent labor and capital at prices Wt and Rt and sell final output at a

price of one.

       Denoting by CtN workers’ consumption and by CtK capitalists’ consumption, final output

Yt in the economy is allocated between consumptions and intermediate inputs used in the

production of investment goods:

                                       Yt = CtN + CtK + ItL + ItH .                                        (4)


Investment Goods.          Firms in investment sector j = {L, H} purchase inputs Itj from final

goods producers and produce output Xtj =              1 j
                                                         I
                                                      ξtj t
                                                              that is used to augment the capital stock.

Investment firms are perfectly competitive and sell their output at price pjt = ξtj .17


Workers.        There is a measure χ of identical workers. Each worker exogenously supplies nt

units of labor, so aggregate labor supply is Nt = χnt . Workers cannot save and simply con-

sume their labor earnings in each period, cN            N
                                           t = Wt nt = Ct /χ. Instantaneous utility from
                              
consumption is given by U cNt .



Capitalists.      There is a measure 1 − χ of identical capitalists. We denote the consumption of

each capitalist by cK    K                                                             L
                    t = Ct /(1 − χ) and their investment in the two capital stocks by xt and

xH                                      L        H
 t . Capitalists choose capital stocks kt+1 and kt+1 and bonds dt+1 to maximize the discounted

present value of utility flows:
                                                              ∞
                                                              X
                                                                    β t U cK
                                                                             
                                  V0 =         max                         t   ,                           (5)
                                           L ,k H ,d
                                         {kt+1          ∞
                                               t+1 t+1 }t=0   t=0

subject to the budget constraint:

                      cK    L L     H H                   L L     H H
                       t + ξt xt + ξt xt + (1 + rt )dt = Rt kt + Rt kt + dt+1 ,                            (6)
  17
    We note that, without adjustment costs, the price of each unit of type-j investment equals the price of
each unit of the type-j capital stock. Therefore, we use the terms “price of investment” and “price of capital”
interchangeably and apply the price ξtj to translate capital into units of the numeraire good.

                                                      20
and the capital accumulation equations for j = L, H:

                                             j
                                            kt+1 = (1 − δ j )ktj + xjt .                                        (7)

   The first-order conditions for utility maximization are:

                                       U 0 cK   = β(1 + rt+1 )U 0 cK
                                                                     
                                            t                      t+1 ,                                        (8)

                                       Rtj = ξt−1
                                              j
                                                  (1 + rt ) − ξtj (1 − δ j ).                                   (9)

Equation (8) is the standard Euler equation for consumption. Equation (9) characterizes the

optimal investment decision of capitalists. The rental rate Rtj for one unit of capital j that was

purchased in period t − 1 equals the gross return investors would have earned had they invested
                     j
this unit in bonds, ξt−1 (1 + rt ), less today’s resale value of undepreciated capital, ξtj (1 − δ j ).

Finally, bonds are in zero net supply, (1 − χ)dt = 0.


Capital Intermediaries.           Capital intermediaries produce competitively the capital bundle

Kt using the two types of capital Ktj = (1 − χ)ktj , rented from capitalists at prices Rtj . The

aggregate capital Kt is then rented at price Rt to final goods producers. The production

technology is:
                                                                                   θ
                                                       θ−1              θ−1       θ−1
                                   Kt =         KtL      θ
                                                              +   KtH      θ
                                                                                          ,                    (10)

where θ > 0 denotes the elasticity of substitution between the two types of capital. Cost

minimization implies:
                                 !−θ
                           Rtj                                               1−θ                    1
                                                                                              1−θ  1−θ
                 Ktj =                 Kt       with      Rt =          RtL          + RtH                 ,   (11)
                           Rt

where Rt denotes the rental rate of the aggregate capital stock Kt .


Equilibrium.     An equilibrium for this economy consists of quantities and prices such that

capitalists maximize their utility, firms maximize their profits, and all capital and labor markets

clear. Goods market clearing and zero profits in the production of final goods imply:

                         Yt = CtN + CtK + ξtL XtL + ξtH XtH = Wt Nt + Rt Kt .                                  (12)

                                                          21
The first part of equation (12) says that final gross output is allocated between consumption

of workers, consumption of capitalists, and investment in the two types of capital. The second

part of this equation shows how total gross income is distributed between labor and capital.

From zero profits in the production of the aggregate capital bundle, gross capital income equals

Rt Kt = RtL KtL + RtH KtH .


Capital Prices, Depreciation, and Factor Shares.                        The price of the aggregate capital stock

ξt is a weighted average of the price of each type of capital:

                                                    KtL L KtH H
                                             ξt =      ξ +   ξ ,                                           (13)
                                                    Kt t   Kt t

and the economy-wide depreciation rate δt is a weighted average of each type of capital’s

depreciation rate:
                                                ξtL KtL L ξtH KtH H
                                         δt =          δ +        δ .                                      (14)
                                                 ξt Kt      ξt Kt
Consistent with national accounting practices, depreciation rates for each type of capital are

treated as constants δ j . The aggregate depreciation rate δt varies over time only because of

changes in the composition of the capital stock. The share of depreciation in gross income can

be written as:
                                                           δt ξt Kt
                                                    ψt =            ,                                      (15)
                                                              Yt
which highlights that it varies over time with the aggregate depreciation rate δt and the aggre-

gate capital-output ratio ξt Kt /Yt .

   We define the gross and net labor shares as:

                              Wt Nt                                Wt Nt               1
                     sG
                      L,t =                  and     sN
                                                      L,t =                   = sG
                                                                                 L,t        ,              (16)
                               Yt                               Yt − δt ξt Kt        1 − ψt

where Yt is gross value added, Yt − δt ξt Kt is net value added, and ψt is the share of depreciation

in gross value added. We can relate the aggregate rental rate of capital to the gross labor share

using the first-order condition of the production function (3) with respect to capital:
                                       1
                         σ−1       Yt    σ
                                                                            σ 1−σ σ−1
                      αAK,t
                          σ
                                             = Rt     =⇒        sG
                                                                 L,t = 1 − α Rt  AK,t .                    (17)
                                   Kt

                                                           22
When the elasticity of substitution in the aggregate production function exceeds one, σ > 1,

the gross labor share sG
                       L,t decreases when the aggregate rental rate of capital Rt decreases or

when capital-augmenting technology AK,t increases. When σ = 1, the case of Cobb-Douglas

production, the gross labor share is always constant, sG
                                                       L,t = 1 − α.



4     Labor Shares in Steady State: Two-Sector Model

To derive simple analytical expressions that summarize the relationship between gross and net

labor shares, we now focus our analysis on changes across steady states of the model. We drop

time subscripts of variables to denote steady state values. A key input in our derivations is

the rental rate of aggregate capital. Using the first-order conditions for investment, equation

(9), together with the definitions of the price of aggregate capital in equation (13) and the

aggregate depreciation rate in equation (14), we write the rental rate in steady state as:

                                         R = ξ(r + δ).                                       (18)

We will use equation (18) to express sG      N
                                      L and sL as a function of capital-augmenting technology

AK , the real interest rate r (that in steady state simply equals 1/β − 1), the depreciation rate

of aggregate capital δ, and the price of aggregate capital ξ.

    We emphasize that δ and ξ are endogenous variables in our three-sector model and will in

general vary as a function of the exogenous shocks β, AN , AK , ξ H , and ξ L . We summarize the

implications for labor shares of these shocks in terms of the aggregates δ and ξ as this allows

us to compare our model with two-sector models that feature exogenous (or no) movements in

δ and ξ. In Section 5 we examine how endogenous changes in δ and ξ impact our conclusions.

4.1    Relative Changes in Gross and Net Labor Shares

Gross and net labor shares are linked through the share of depreciation in gross value added

ψ. Substituting equation (18) and the definition of the gross labor share sG
                                                                           L = 1 − RK/Y into

the definition of ψ in equation (15), we write ψ in steady state as:
                                                        
                                δξK     δξ RK          δ
                           ψ=         =         =           (1 − sG
                                                                  L ).                       (19)
                                  Y      R Y        r+δ

                                               23
Depreciation as a share of gross value added is decreasing in sG
                                                               L , increasing in δ, and decreasing

in r.

   Substituting equation (19) into the equation sG    N
                                                 L = sL (1 − ψ) and totally differentiating the

resulting expression, we can relate the log change of the net labor share to the log changes of

the gross labor share, of the aggregate depreciation rate, and of the real interest rate:

                                 1 − sN                                sN    G      N
                                                                                     h
                                                                        L − sL 1 − sL
                                                                                                                  i
                sN                    L
                                                      sG
                                                          
        d log    L       =                    d log    L       +                             d log (δ) − d log (r) .   (20)
                                 1 − sG
                                      L                                   sN
                                                                           L   1 − sG
                                                                                    L

   Consider the case when shocks either do not change the real interest rate and the aggregate

depreciation rate or change these variables by the same rate, d log (δ) = d log (r). Examples of

such shocks include capital-augmenting technological progress AK and exogenous movements

in the relative price of capital ξ in a two-sector model. In such a case, the last term of equation

(20) equals zero and gross and net labor shares necessarily move in the same direction. If we

set the labor shares to their average values observed in our sample, sG             N
                                                                      L = 0.64 and sL = 0.73,

we obtain that the log change in the net labor share equals 75 percent of the log change in the

gross labor share.

   More broadly, if some combination of shocks causes the aggregate depreciation rate to grow

proportionately more than the real interest rate, d log (δ) > d log (r), this will create a force

that increases the growth rate of the net labor share relative to that of the gross labor share.

Changes in δ or r, unlike changes in ξ or AK , can potentially cause gross and net labor shares

to move in different directions across steady states.

4.2      Gross and Net Elasticities

In Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), we related declines across countries and industries in

the relative price of investment ξ to declines in the gross labor share sG
                                                                         L since 1975. This

comovement underlies our estimate that the gross elasticity of substitution σ, which relates

movements in the real capital to output ratio and the gross rental rate of capital, exceeds

one. Rognlie (2014) correctly notes that one should be careful in importing estimates of σ to

analyses of movements in the net labor share such as those in Piketty (2014) and Piketty and


                                                                        24
Zucman (2014). Instead, Rognlie highlights that the “net elasticity of substitution” , which

relates movements in the real capital to net output ratio and the net rental rate of capital, is

the key elasticity governing the response of the net labor share. He demonstrates that  < σ

and, therefore, evidence that σ > 1 does not imply that  > 1 and is insufficient to understand

the directional response of the net labor share. In fact, he argues that most estimates of the

gross elasticity, including those that modestly exceed one, imply that the net elasticity is below

one.

    This argument seems at odds, however, with equation (20) which shows that gross and net

labor shares always move together if the percent change in the depreciation rate equals that of

the real interest rate. The results appear at first to be inconsistent because the expression in

Rognlie (2014) for the net elasticity  assumes that all movements in the rental rate of capital

are due to changes in the real interest rate. As Rognlie notes, his results need not hold if

changes in the relative price of capital also affect movements in the rental rate of capital.

  To illustrate this key difference, we define the gross and net elasticities of substitution as:
                                                                                           
                                                                                       K
                                K                                           d log
                                  
              1           d log Y                             1                     Y (1−ψ)
 σ=                    =−              and     =                       =−                    . (21)
          d log(1−sL )
                   G
                          d log(R)                        d log(1−sL )
                                                                   N
                                                                             d log(R − ξδ)
    1 − d log(K/Y )                                1 − d log(K/Y (1−ψ))

Dividing the two elasticities, we get:
                                                 
                                              K
                                  d log   Y (1−ψ)
                                                      
                                                           d log(R)
                                                                      
                               =                                     .                                    (22)
                            σ         d log K Y
                                                        d log(R − ξδ)

We can solve for the each term in brackets in equation (22) under alternative assumptions on

which shock generates movement in the system from one steady state to another. To make our

point analytically and in the simplest way, we compare cases in which only one shock operates

at a time.18

    We start by considering movements in labor shares caused by changes in β as this case most

closely corresponds to the analysis of Rognlie (2014). Changes in β cause movements in the real
   18
      The first bracket can be written as 1 − d log(1 − ψ)/d log(K/Y ). Using the definition of ψ in equation (19)
we take d log(1 − ψ)/d log(K/Y ) = [K/Y (1 − ψ)] [−δξ − δ(K/Y )dξ/d(K/Y )]. For the second bracket, we use
d log(R) = ((r + δ)dξ + ξdr) /R and d log(R − ξδ) = (rdξ + ξdr) /(R − ξδ).


                                                       25
interest rate, dr 6= 0, while all other shocks are assumed to equal zero, dξ = dδ = dAK = 0.19

Evaluating equation (21) under these assumptions yields:

                                                      1 − sN
                                               
                                          1    r          L
                                      =             =        < 1.                                                (23)
                                    σ     1−ψ r+δ     1 − sG
                                                           L

Since sN    G
       L > sL , the net elasticity is always smaller the gross elasticity of substitution. As

explained by Rognlie, a given change in r affects the net rental rate proportionately more than

the gross rental rate (i.e. the second bracket in equation (22) is smaller than one), which mutes

the response of the net labor share. For example, using the estimated elasticity σ = 1.25

from Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) together with the average labor share values in our

sample, sG             N
         L = 0.64 and sL = 0.73, equation (23) implies that the net elasticity  = 0.94. This

calculation accords with the claim of Summers (2014) that “I know of no study suggesting that

measuring output in net terms, the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1...”.

       Next, we consider movements in labor shares caused by changes in ξ as this case most

closely corresponds to the evidence in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). All other shocks are

assumed to equal zero, dr = dδ = dAK = 0. Evaluating equation (21) under these assumptions

yields:
                                                                                 sN
                                       h i
                             1       ψ                                           L
                         =         1−       1                  =⇒    ( − 1) =      (σ − 1).                     (24)
                       σ     1−ψ      σ                                          sG
                                                                                  L

Equations (23) and (24) differ because shocks to the relative price of investment, unlike those

to the real interest rate, cause proportional changes in the net and the gross rental rate (i.e. the

second bracket of equation (22) now equals one). Equation (24) shows that if the only shocks

are to ξ and σ = 1, then  = 1.20 Since sN    G
                                         L > sL , the net elasticity exceeds the gross elasticity

whenever the gross elasticity exceeds one, i.e.  > σ > 1, and the net elasticity is smaller than

the gross elasticity whenever the gross elasticity is smaller than one, i.e.  < σ < 1. Under the

assumption that declines in the rental rate of capital are caused only by declines in the relative
  19
     The real interest rate r in our model is the net return to an investment other than physical capital accumulation.
As such, r should be interpreted broadly as an after-tax return on some alternative asset. Our analysis of the
impact of r on labor shares would similarly hold for changes in any components of the gross return on physical
capital R (such as those due to capital taxes) other than changes to ξ and δ.
  20
     That is, both labor shares are constant. Recall that sG                                N      G
                                                              L is constant when σ = 1 and sL = sL /(1−ψ). Equation
(19) shows that ψ is also constant in this case because dδ = dr = 0.



                                                          26
price of investment, σ > 1 is a sufficient condition to generate declines in both the gross labor

share and the net labor share. Using the values sG          N
                                                 L = 0.64, sL = 0.73, and σ = 1.25 we obtain

 = 1.29.

       To summarize, our theoretical analysis shows that declines in the gross labor share caused

by declines in the real interest rate are likely to be associated with increases in the net labor

share. By contrast, declines in the gross labor share caused by declines in the relative price

of investment necessarily also imply declines in the net labor share. Our empirical analysis

documented that both gross and net labor shares declined globally since 1975. Therefore,

under σ > 1, the decline in the relative price of investment is a more plausible explanation of

the decline in the labor share than a decline in the real interest rate.21


5        Labor Shares in Steady State: Three-Sector Model

Equations (17) and (20) express steady state labor shares as functions of the depreciation rate

of aggregate capital δ and the price of aggregate capital ξ. In Section 4, we took changes in

δ and ξ as given, but in our three-sector model these two variables endogenously respond to

the underlying shocks. We now turn to numerical solutions across steady states which allow

us to understand how various shocks and parameters affect the response of both labor shares,

allowing δ and ξ to change endogenously. The key parameters we focus on are the elasticity

of substitution between capital and labor σ and the elasticity of substitution between the two

types of capital θ.22

       In Figure 7, we show responses across steady states to a 2/3 decline in the price of the

high-depreciation capital ξ H . All four panels plot the elasticity of substitution between capital

types θ on the x-axis and contain three lines. The solid horizontal line shows the pre-shock

value in the initial steady state, the dashed line shows the post-shock steady state value for the
  21
                                                                   
     We can plug values from the PWT for d log sN                 G             N         G
                                                     L , d log sL , d log (δ), sL , and sL into equation (20) to
back out the implied d log (r). With weighting, the results imply that the real interest rate barely changed. The
unweighted results actually imply an increase in the real interest rate.
  22
     For our numerical solutions, we set AN = N = 1 and α = 0.40. We choose the low depreciation rate δ L = 0.02
and the high depreciation rate δ H = 0.20. As we vary θ and σ, we pick β, ξ H , ξ L , and AK to always target the
same initial steady state values of sG          N
                                     L = 0.64, sL = 0.73, R = 0.10, and δ = 0.04.




                                                       27
                              σ = 1.00                                                 0.25   σ = 1.00




                                                                  Depreciation Share
   Depreciation Rate

                       0.08   σ = 1.25                                                        σ = 1.25
                                                                                        0.2
                       0.06
                                                                                       0.15
                       0.04
                                                                                        0.1
                       0.02                                                            0.05
                         0                                                               0
                          0    0.5       1       1.5   2   2.5                            0    0.5       1       1.5   2   2.5
                                             θ                                                               θ

                              σ = 1.00                                                  0.8   σ = 1.00
                        0.7
   Gross Labor Share




                              σ = 1.25                                                        σ = 1.25




                                                                  Net Labor Share
                                                                                       0.75
                       0.65

                                                                                        0.7
                        0.6


                          0    0.5       1       1.5   2   2.5                            0    0.5       1       1.5   2   2.5
                                             θ                                                               θ


                                     Figure 7: Decline in Price of High Depreciation Capital

Cobb-Douglas case with σ = 1, and the dotted line shows the post-shock steady state value

when σ = 1.25.

           The top left panel shows the behavior of the aggregate depreciation rate δ, which equals

0.04 in the initial steady state. We note that the response of δ does not depend on the value

σ, which is why the two lines are indistinguishable in that plot. Changes in δ purely reflect

changes in the composition of the capital stock, which is governed by the elasticity θ. When

θ = 1, the share of each type of capital in total capital is constant, and therefore δ does not

change in response to the ξ H shock. When θ < 1, the two types of capital are complements. In

response to a lowering in ξ H , the share of the low depreciation capital in total capital increases

and δ decreases. The opposite happens when θ > 1.23

           The bottom left panel shows the response of the gross labor share sG
                                                                              L following the decline
  23
           These intuitions can be formalized by deriving the response of δ as a function of changes in ξ H , ξ L , and r:

                                                                                             (ζ L )2   (ζ H )2
                                                                                                              
               dδ = (1 − θ) (r + δ) χL + ζ L d log ξ L + χH + ζ H d log ξ H + θ 1 +
                                                                             
                                                                                                     +           dr,
                                                                                              χL        χH

where χj = Rj K j /(RK) and ζ j = χj (r + δ)/(r + δ j ). A decline in ξ H implies that δ decreases when θ < 1, stays
constant when θ = 1, and increases when θ > 1. We also note that δ is increasing in r for any value of θ.



                                                                 28
                                                 σ = 1.00                           0.25                       σ = 1.00




                                                               Depreciation Share
                                                 σ = 1.25                                                      σ = 1.25
  Depreciation Rate

                      0.08
                                                                                     0.2
                      0.06
                                                                                    0.15
                      0.04
                                                                                     0.1
                      0.02                                                          0.05
                        0                                                             0
                         0   0.5   1       1.5    2     2.5                            0   0.5   1       1.5   2      2.5
                                       θ                                                             θ

                                                 σ = 1.00                            0.8                       σ = 1.00
                       0.7
  Gross Labor Share




                                                 σ = 1.25                                                      σ = 1.25




                                                               Net Labor Share
                                                                                    0.75
                      0.65

                                                                                     0.7
                       0.6


                         0   0.5   1       1.5    2     2.5                            0   0.5   1       1.5   2      2.5
                                       θ                                                             θ


                                           Figure 8: Increase in Discount Factor

in ξ H . When σ = 1, sG
                      L is constant. For σ > 1, the gross labor share declines because the

aggregate rental rate of capital R = ξ(r+δ) declines. As θ increases, the decline in the aggregate

price of capital ξ becomes stronger and dominates the increase in δ, causing the gross labor

share to decline by even more.

          The top right panel shows the response of the depreciation share in gross value added ψ. It

is useful to recall equation (19) that shows that ψ = (1 − sG
                                                            L )δ/(r + δ) in steady state. When

σ = 1, the gross labor share is constant. Additionally, with θ = 1, δ does not change, and

therefore ψ does not change. With σ = 1, but θ > 1, δ increases and so ψ increases relative to

the pre-shock steady state value. With σ = 1.25, the gross labor share declines which causes

an upward shift of the ψ response relative to σ = 1 for any given θ. Comparing the top panels

for the σ = 1.25 case illustrates that δ and ψ need not move in the same direction.

          Finally, the bottom right panel shows the change in the net labor share following the decline

in ξ H . In proximity to θ = 1, where δ does not change, the net and the gross labor shares

move in the same direction as dictated by equation (20). Since the gross labor share is constant

for the σ = 1 case, the net labor share is also constant at θ = 1. Since the gross labor share


                                                              29
declines for the σ > 1 case, the net labor share also declines at θ = 1. As we increase the value

of θ above one, the wedge between the growth of gross and net labor shares increases because

of the rise in δ (and ψ).

    Figure 8 shows steady state changes in response to a lowering of r (due to a 3 percentage

point increase in β). Unlike the case of the ξ H shock, in response to a decline in the real interest

rate, δ always declines. For sufficiently low values of θ, ψ increases. Therefore, while the gross

labor share declines when σ > 1, the directional response of the net labor share depends on

the elasticities σ and θ. For relatively lower values of θ and σ, the increase in depreciation as

a share of gross value added ψ is sufficiently strong to actually cause an increase in sN
                                                                                        L.



6     Transitional Dynamics of Labor Shares and Inequality

Our analysis thus far has shown that both gross and net labor shares are informative for welfare

and macroeconomic dynamics. For example, their relative movement can teach us about the

source of shocks hitting the economy as well as about the structure of production. An additional

source of interest in labor share movements stems from their relevance for inequality, which we

now turn to in this section.

    It is helpful to start with the relationship between the ratio of consumption and the net

labor share in steady state:
                                  CK    (R − δξ) K   1 − sN
                                                          L
                                    N
                                      =            =    N
                                                            .                                   (25)
                                  C        WN          sL
Shocks that decrease the net labor share in steady state are directly mapped into increases in

the consumption of capitalists relative to the consumption of workers. Since the consumption

streams for each type of agent are constant in steady state, this consumption ratio is a welfare-

relevant measure of inequality. In this sense, changes in the net capital share from one steady

state to another are perfectly informative about inequality. Motivated in part by this argument,

we demonstrated empirically that both gross and net labor shares have in fact declined globally

since 1975 and we demonstrated theoretically that a shock to the relative price of capital will

cause both labor share measures to move together across steady states.


                                                 30
                                                                                       Change in Labor Share
                                           1.3                                                                                                                   sG
                        Labor Technology
                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                 sN
                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                          0.01
                                           1.2

                                           1.1                                                                                      0


                                            1                                                                  −0.01
                                                 0   20   40    60       80      100                                                     0   20   40   60   80    100


                                                                                                                                   0.3
 Change in Inequality




                                  0.01




                                                                                                               Change in Welfare
                                            0
                                                                                                                                   0.2
                        −0.01
                        −0.02                                        C K /C N                                                      0.1
                                                                     (1 − sG     G
                                                                           L )/s L                                                                               λN
                        −0.03                                        (1 − sL )/sN
                                                                           N
                                                                                 L                                                                               λK
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                 0   20   40    60       80      100                                                     0   20   40   60   80    100



                                                          Figure 9: Increase in Labor Augmenting Technology

                        We stress, however, that this direct mapping of the net labor share to inequality is a limiting

result that applies only in steady state. We now analyze some experiments that relate labor

shares to inequality over the transition in response to various shocks. In these experiments, we

treat a model period as a year and assume the period utility is given by U = (1 − 1/ρ)−1 c1−1/ρ

with ρ = 0.5. We set σ = 1.25, θ = 1.10, and use the other parameter values given in Section

5.24

                        We start by considering a labor-augmenting productivity shock AN . This is a interesting

case because AN does not affect the gross or net labor shares in steady state.25 The relationship

between labor shares and inequality is therefore non-trivial only during the transition.

                        The top left panel in Figure 9 shows the path of the shock. Desired investment increases

in response to the increase in AN,t , pushing up the real interest rate rt and the rental rate for

aggregate capital Rt . Since σ > 1, the increase in Rt causes an increase in the gross labor share
     24
     The value σ = 1.25 comes from Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). We choose θ = 1.10 because with this
value the depreciation rate δ changes from 4.0 to 4.2 percent in response to the ξ H shock shown in Figure 7. This
change is consistent with the change in δ observed for the average country in our sample.
  25
     Changes in AN across steady states do not impact ξ, r, δ, and the rental rate R = ξ(r + δ). As a result, we
see in equations (17) and (20) that neither labor share measure changes in response to changes in AN .



                                                                                       31
sG
 L,t , shown in the top right panel of Figure 9.

       Though the increase in rt differentially impacts the returns on high and low depreciation

capital, their absolute and relative movements are small. As a result, there is only a minor

reallocation of capital between the two types, and the depreciation rate δt and aggregate capital

price ξt remain relatively constant. Because the capital-output ratio decreases, the share of

depreciation in gross income ψt = δt ξt Kt /Yt declines and is always below its pre-shock steady

state value. As a result, the net labor share always lies below the gross labor share during the

transition. In fact, in this particular example, the net labor share initially falls below its pre-

shock steady state value and then quickly reverts to a value that roughly equals its pre-shock

steady state value.

       A simplistic analysis might observe the relative stability of the net labor share and conclude

that the AN shock did not affect inequality. Such a conclusion would not hold, however, for

various notions of inequality during the transition. In the bottom left panel of Figure 9 we

plot the change in the ratio of consumption CtK /CtN relative to its initial steady state value

together with changes in two transformations of gross and net labor shares, (1 − sG      G
                                                                                  L,t )/sL,t

and (1 − sN      N                                         N      N           K   N
          L,t )/sL,t . Recall that in equation (25), (1 − sL,t )/sL,t equals Ct /Ct in steady

state. However, for the largest part of the transition the ratio of consumption CtK /CtN and the

transformation of the gross labor share (1 − sG      G
                                              L,t )/sL,t lie below their pre-shock value, whereas

(1 − sN      N
      L,t )/sL,t is roughly stable at its pre-shock value. If one wanted to argue that workers are

receiving a “larger share of the pie,” the behavior of the gross labor share would have been

more informative than the behavior of the net labor share in making this argument.26

       A similar result is obtained if we look at welfare-based measures of consumption inequality

that take into account the full consumption path. For each type of agent i = {N, K}, we define

the time-varying consumption-equivalent change in welfare as the solution λit of the equation:
                                        
                                    1
                                             U C i (1 + λit ) = U Cti + βVt+1 .
                                                                    
                                                                                                              (26)
                                   1−β
  26
    The ratio of consumption goes up in the first few periods after the shock reflecting the fact that capitalists’
consumption responds to changes in permanent income whereas the workers’ consumption is simply pinned down
by contemporaneous labor earnings.


                                                        32
                          P∞  j−t     i
                                        
In this equation, Vt =  j=t β     U C j denotes the discounted present value of utility flows for
                                                                        
the agent from period t onwards when the shock takes place and U C i /(1 − β) denotes the

discounted present value of utility flows had the shock not taken place (and hence the economy

had remained in the initial steady state). The variable λit is the percent increase in consumption

(relative to the initial steady state) required to make the agents indifferent between receiving

and not receiving the path with the shock.

       The bottom right panel of Figure 9 shows that both workers’ and capitalists’ welfare in-

creases immediately with the positive AN,t shock. However, and in parallel to the dynamics

of relative consumption, workers gain relatively more than capitalists throughout the transi-

tion. The dynamics of the gross labor share more closely capture this decrease in welfare-based

inequality than the dynamics of the net labor share.

       While this example is admittedly simple, it does allow us to draw some general lessons for the

informativeness of labor shares for inequality outside of steady state. In response to shocks that

increase desired investment, capitalists may optimally decide to postpone consumption early

on in return for higher consumption later on. The net labor share only captures the net income

position of workers relative to capitalists in a specific time period. Net income inequality does

not necessarily translate into consumption inequality when some agents are forward looking

and can use savings and borrowing to achieve an optimal allocation of resources across time.

       Table 2 summarizes quantitatively the dynamics of factor shares and inequality for various

shocks.27 For each shock, the rows of the table show the percent change from the pre-shock

steady state in four measures of inequality, (1 + λK         N     K   N         N    N
                                                   t )/(1 + λt ), Ct /Ct , (1 − st )/st , and

(1 − sG    G
      t )/st . The first three columns show these changes 10, 20, and 50 periods after the shock,

and the fourth column (t → ∞) shows the changes when the system reaches the new steady

state. For example, consider the response 20 periods after an increase in AN,t . The table shows

that (1 + λK         N                                                           K   N
           t )/(1 + λt ) is 5.2 percent below its pre-shock steady state value, Ct /Ct is 7.4
  27
    Across all four experiments we standardize the path of the shocks in the following way. Let x0 denote the
pre-shock steady state value and xT denote the value of the shock in the final steady state. T is the first period
in which the shock converges to its final value. We then generate the path of the shock as xt = (t + 1)ν with
ν = log(xT /x0 )/ log(T + 1). In all experiments we set T = 20. We set AN,T /AN,0 = 1.30, AK,T /AK,0 = 1.30,
βT /β0 = 1.0323, ξTH /ξ0H = 1/3.


                                                       33
                               Table 2: Inequality and Factor Shares



                                           Change From Initial Steady State        t ∈ [1, 50]
    Shock         Inequality Measure     t = 10        t = 20   t = 50   t→∞      % Same Sign


    ↑ AN          (1 + λK         N
                        t )/(1 + λt )    -0.062        -0.052   -0.018   0.000         –
                  CtK /CtN               -0.067        -0.074   -0.026   0.000         98
                  (1 − sN    N
                        t )/st           -0.002        -0.001   0.000    0.000         98
                  (1 −   sG    G
                          t )/st         -0.033        -0.032   -0.011   0.000        100


    ↑ AN = AK     (1 + λK         N
                        t )/(1 + λt )    -0.026        0.002    0.072    0.110         –
                  CtK /CtN               -0.049        -0.043   0.056    0.110         76
                  (1 − sN    N
                        t )/st            0.078        0.102    0.109    0.110         62
                  (1 − sG    G
                        t )/st            0.016        0.041    0.087    0.110         64


    ↑β            (1 + λK         N
                        t )/(1 + λt )    -0.176        -0.145   -0.087   -0.033        –
                  CtK /CtN               -0.237        -0.202   -0.115   -0.033       100
                  (1 − sN    N
                        t )/st           -0.001        -0.005   -0.016   -0.033       100
                  (1 −   sG    G
                          t )/st          0.030        0.058    0.107    0.151         2


    ↓ ξH          (1 + λK         N
                        t )/(1 + λt )     0.013        0.033    0.082    0.109         –
                  CtK /CtN               -0.007        0.005    0.070    0.109         76
                  (1 − sN    N
                        t )/st            0.105        0.119    0.108    0.109        100
                  (1 − sG    G
                        t )/st            0.045        0.076    0.111    0.128         98




percent below its pre-shock value, (1 − sN    N
                                         t )/st is essentially unchanged relative to its pre-shock

value, and (1 − sG    G
                 t )/st is 3.2 percent below its pre-shock value. At that particular point in

time and for that particular shock, consistent with Figure 9, the gross labor share appears a

better proxy for inequality than the net labor share.

   Figure 10 shows the response of the economy to a factor-neutral shock (i.e. when AN,t = AK,t

for all t), plotted in the top left panel. A key difference relative to a labor-augmenting tech-



                                                  34
                                                                                                                            0.01




                                                                                         Change in Labor Share
                                             1.3                                                                                                                   sG
                        Neutral Technology
                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                      0                            sN
                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                             1.2
                                                                                                                 −0.01
                                             1.1                                                                 −0.02

                                              1                                                                  −0.03
                                                   0   20   40    60       80      100                                                     0   20   40   60   80    100


                                   0.06
 Change in Inequality




                                                                                                                                     0.6




                                                                                                                 Change in Welfare
                                   0.04
                                   0.02                                                                                              0.4

                                              0                        C K /C N
                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                       (1 − sG     G
                                                                             L )/s L
                        −0.02                                                                                                                                      λN
                                                                       (1 − sN
                                                                             L )/s N
                                                                                   L                                                                               λK
                        −0.04                                                                                                         0
                                                   0   20   40    60       80      100                                                     0   20   40   60   80    100



                                                             Figure 10: Increase in Factor-Neutral Technology

nology shock is that this shock changes the steady state distribution of consumption between

the capitalists and workers. As shown in Table 2, both labor shares are unable to capture the

dynamics of inequality in the first few periods. In the initial 10 periods after the shock, both

labor share transformations increase whereas both the relative consumption and the welfare-

based measures of inequality decrease. Capitalists ultimately benefit more than workers in

this case, with the bulk of the relative gains realized only 30 or more periods after the shock

(corresponding to t > 40 in the figure). The dynamics of the gross labor share appear more

closely linked to the behavior of inequality during most of the transition.

                        The inequality measure (1 + λK         N
                                                     t )/(1 + λt ) captures relative changes in the workers’ and

capitalists’ welfare. Across steady states, its percent change exactly equals the percent change

in relative consumption. We report in the final column of Table 2 the share of the first 50

transition periods in which the remaining three inequality measures have the same sign (i.e.

have increased or decreased) as (1+λK       N
                                    t )/(1+λt ). We think of this as one summary statistic for

the degree to which the labor share measures teach us about inequality during the transition.

In the cases of shocks to AN and ξ H , we find that both labor shares move together with


                                                                                         35
(1 + λK         N
      t )/(1 + λt ) during nearly all of the first 50 periods and therefore are useful proxies

for the directional change in inequality. This is not the case for the neutral technology shock

AN = AK , for which both labor share measures do not capture the directional change in

inequality in more than one-third of the first 50 periods. In the case of a β shock, the net labor

share unambiguously outperforms the gross labor share as a proxy for inequality during the

transition.


7     Conclusion

Gross and net labor shares have declined around the world over the past several decades.

These factor shares are subject to different measurement concerns, but both have the potential

to offer insights into the structure of production, the shocks that hit the economy, and the

implications of these shocks for macroeconomic dynamics. We demonstrate that, in fact, the

joint behavior of gross and net labor shares is informative for these issues, particularly in a

multi-sector environment with rich dynamics in the price of capital and the economy-wide

depreciation rate. Declines in the relative price of investment goods, unlike declines in the real

interest rate, are consistent with the observed declines in both labor shares.

    The finding of declining global labor shares has generated significant attention in part due

to their association with increasing inequality. We think this is a useful starting point and a

reasonable basis for interest in factor share dynamics. But significant further work is needed.

In a simple model we demonstrated the inadequacy of either labor share measure to capture

inequality in a simple way outside of steady state, even when the economy is exposed only

to basic shocks. The environment imposed a stark, unrealistic, and unchanging split between

hand-to-mouth workers and dynamically optimizing capitalists. It abstracted from critical

features for inequality such as capital-skill complementarity, redistributive taxation, and life-

cycle considerations. We hope that future research can enrich the empirical and theoretical

relationship between factor shares and inequality.




                                               36
References
Acemoglu, D., and J. Robinson (2014): “The Rise and Fall of General Laws of Capitalism,”
  Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Bonnet, O., P.-H. Bono, G. Chapelle, and E. Wasmer (2014): “Does Housing Capital
  Contribute to Inequality? A Comment on Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the 21st Century,”
  Economics Discussion Paper 07, Sciences Po.

Bridgman, B. (2014): “Is Labor’s Loss Capital’s Gain? Gross Versus Net Labor Shares,”
  Working Paper, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Bureau of Economic Analysis (2003): “Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods in
  the United States, 1925-99,” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Dey-Chowdhury, S. (2008): “Methods Explained: Perpetual Inventory Method,” Economic
  and Labour Market Review, 2(9), 48–52.

Feenstra, R., R. Inklaar, and M. Timmer (2013): “PWT 8.0 – A User Guide,” Working
  Paper, Groningen Growth and Development Centre.

Fraumeni, B. (1997): “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and
  Product Accounts,” Survey of Current Business, July, 7–23.

Gollin, D. (2002): “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2),
  458–74.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-Run Implications of
  Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 342–62.

Inklaar, R., and M. Timmer (2013): “Capital, Labor, and TFP in PWT8.0,” Working
  Paper, Groningen Growth and Development Centre.

Jones, C. (2014): “The Macroeconomics of Piketty,” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2014): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.

Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Rios-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000): “Capital-
  Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, 68(5),
  1029–53.

                                            37
Krusell, P., and T. Smith (2014): “Is Piketty’s “Second Law of Capitalism” Fundamen-
  tal?,” Working Paper, Yale University.

Lequiller, F. (2002): “Treatment of Stock Options in National Accounts of Non-European
  OECD Member Countries,” Working Paper, OECD.

OECD (2014): “National Accounts at a Glance 2014,” OECD Publishing.

Piketty, T. (2014): Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press.

Piketty, T., and G. Zucman (2014): “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich
  Countries 1700-2010,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–310.

Rognlie, M. (2014): “A Note on Piketty and Diminishing Returns to Capital,” Working
  Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Summers, L. (2014): “The Inequality Puzzle: Piketty Book Review,” Democracy: A Journal
  of Ideas, 33, 91–9.

United Nations Statistical Commission (2008): “Updated System of National Accounts
  (SNA): Chapter 4: Institutional Units and Sectors,” Working Paper.

Weitzman, M. (1976): “On the Welfare Significance of National Product in a Dynamic
  Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 156–62.




                                            38
