NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAVING FOR A (NOT SO) RAINY DAY:
A RANDOMIZED EVALUATION OF SAVINGS GROUPS IN MALI
Lori Beaman
Dean Karlan
Bram Thuysbaert
Working Paper 20600
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20600
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

The authors thank partners Oxfam America, Freedom from Hunger and the Strømme Foundation for
funding and their collaboration. Thanks to Yann Guy, Jaye Stapleton, Sarah Custer, Aissatou Ouedraogo
and Nouhoum Traore for excellent research assistance and to the field staff of Innovations for Poverty
Action – Mali office. We thank seminar and conference participants. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lori Beaman, Dean Karlan, and Bram Thuysbaert. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Saving for a (not so) Rainy Day: A Randomized Evaluation of Savings Groups in Mali
Lori Beaman, Dean Karlan, and Bram Thuysbaert
NBER Working Paper No. 20600
October 2014
JEL No. D12,D91,O12
ABSTRACT
High transaction and contracting costs are often thought to create credit and savings market failures
in developing countries. The microfinance movement grew largely out of business process innovations
and subsidies that reduced these costs. We examine an alternative approach, one that infuses no external
capital and introduces no change to formal contracts: an improved “technology” for managing informal,
collaborative village-based savings groups. Such groups allow, in theory, for more efficient and lowercost loans and informal savings, and in practice have been scaled up by international non-profit
organizations to millions of members. Individuals save together and then lend the accumulated funds
back out to themselves. In a randomized evaluation in Mali, we find improvements in food security,
consumption smoothing, and buffer stock savings. Although we do find suggestive evidence of higher
agricultural output, we do not find overall higher income or expenditure. We also do not find downstream
impacts on health, education, social capital, and female decision-making power. Could this have happened
before, without any external intervention? Yes. That is what makes the result striking, that indeed
there were no resources provided nor legal institutional changes, yet the NGO-guided, improved informal
processes led to important changes for households.
Lori Beaman
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-beaman@northwestern.edu
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu

Bram Thuysbaert
Ghent University
Sint-Pietersnieuwstraat 25
9000 Gent, Belgium
bram.thuysbaert@ugent.be

1

Introduction

Most of the world’s poor do not have ready and affordable access to banking services. For
centuries, informal, often collective mechanisms called rotating savings and credit associations
(ROSCAs), have evolved to simulate savings services.2 Yet even when such practices are present,
they are effusive, often not reaching the poorest. And often, perhaps relatedly, the structure is
not flexible, not satisfying the financial service needs of the poor.
This gap thrust microcredit to the forefront of development policy. Despite receiving massive
attention and funding, microcredit institutions, whether banks or nongovernmental
organization, often find between 10% and 30% of households want to participate (Angelucci,
Karlan, and Zinman 2014; Attanasio et al. 2014; Augsburg et al. 2014; Banerjee et al. 2014;
Crepon et al. 2014; Tarozzi, Desai, and Johnson 2014; and for a summary, see Banerjee, Karlan,
and Zinman 2014). Moreover, their ability to reach remote villages is often extremely limited: in
our sample in Mali at baseline, fewer than 30% of villages had a formal credit institution within
15 kilometers.
In response to low participation rates and often high interest rates of microcredit, several large
international NGOs began promoting “savings groups”, in short improved versions of often
already present informal arrangements (ROSCAs, and accumulating savings and credit
associations, or ASCAs). The response has been clear: take‐up has been in the millions, reaching
communities where microcredit institutions have no presence, and at relatively low cost. Oxfam
America (“OA”), Freedom from Hunger (“FFH”), and the Strømme Foundation (“SF”) has
introduced savings groups in Mali, Senegal, Niger, Burkina Faso, Benin, Cambodia, El Salvador,
Honduras, Mexico, Colombia, Uruguay, Brazil, Peru, and Guatemala. CARE, Save the Children,
PLAN and Catholic Relief Services all have major programs promoting similar savings groups.
The worldwide number of people participating in savings groups was estimated to be almost
7.5 million as of 2013, up from 2.3 million in July 2010 (Allen 2013), with 400,000 in Mali, the
site of this study.
Naturally this prompts the obvious question: what exactly is new? How can a finance
intervention have take‐up in the millions when it relies entirely on resources and institutions
already present? There is no infusion of outside capital, no introduction of new formal
institutions, no new physical technology, and no new regulatory body making savings safer.
2

In the typical ROSCA, participants save a fixed amount every week, and each week one member takes home the
entire pot. The cycle continues, with each member saving every week, until all members have received the pot
once.

2

Instead, the intervention merely modifies existing informal mechanisms with two key
distinctions: flexibility combined with commitment, and the involvement of NGOs.
The primary innovation, compared to ROSCAs, is flexibility. Members are allowed to take out
loans from the accumulating fund, instead of having to designate an individual to take home
the entire pot each week as in traditional ROSCAs. The groups also set their own rules about
weekly contributions, the interest rates on loans, and penalties for late contributions. SfC is,
however, less flexible than a ROSCA in one dimension: the entire group has to agree upon a
common time in which to receive the lump sum payout at the end of the yearly savings cycle.
That may be an attractive feature, however, if the needs for funds of group members tend to
fall at the same time of the year, e.g. in the lean season when food stocks are low and the need
for capital for agricultural inputs high. In doing so, SfC can help members better smooth
consumption in the face of aggregate shocks, not just idiosyncratic shocks like most informal
risk sharing arrangements, by moving consumption from one period to another. Since literacy
in Mali is very low, particularly among women3, SfC staff train women on an oral accounting
system in order to keep track of outstanding loans and total savings balances of each woman.
This oral accounting “technology” is new, and helps to make the flexibility work (the flexibility
requires some form of recordkeeping). The oral accounting system also facilitates some
commitment through peer pressure, since it engages members in details of each other’s
finances. Second, the NGOs’ role may also be important for generating participation by either
providing a quality signal on the financial product or a persuasion effect from a belief that NGO
advice should be followed (although we will argue that this could explain initial adoption, but
not sustained usage).
Using a randomized evaluation in 500 villages with a household panel survey covering over
6,000 households in central Mali, we study the impacts of the SfC program on women’s access
to finance, economic activities such as small business operations and farming, food security,
assets, and social capital and intra‐household bargaining power. Supplemental high frequency
panel survey data on approximately 650 households enable us to measure consumption
smoothing across seasons. Of the 500 study villages, 209 villages were offered SfC while the
remaining 241 villages served as control communities. About 37% of women in the baseline
sample had joined SfC by endline, three years after the baseline.
In an intent‐to‐treat (ITT) analysis, we find that access to savings groups leads to an increase in
total savings of 30% and a three percentage point increase in the likelihood of receiving a loan
in the last year. We find some suggestive evidence of increased agricultural output, but we find
3

92% of female respondents in our survey were illiterate at baseline.

3

little evidence of increased investment in small businesses. Households significantly increase
their livestock holdings – the most important form of buffer stock savings for Malian
households. Households in the intervention villages report higher food security and
consumption data collected every three to four months reveal that treatment households are
able to better smooth food consumption over the year, though the level of consumption at
endline (collected soon after harvest) is no different across treatment and control. We do not
find any evidence of increased investments in education; health or health expenditures;
women’s bargaining power, involvement in the community or social capital.
So why does this “new” arrangement change behavior, in turn affecting economic outcomes
such as livestock holdings, food security and consumption smoothing? In other words, what is
the mechanism through which the savings groups shifted actual behavior? We do not think
there is a single mechanism. The changes in behavior, and economic outcomes, are important,
and the scale of this worldwide “movement” promoting savings groups has been huge. We
think of potential mechanisms in two main categories: changes due to mitigation of market
failures, including information asymmetries and information costs for starting flexible savings
groups, and changes in preferences or the management of cognitive biases.
We have no dispositive evidence on mechanisms, but rather suggestive and exploratory
evidence on a number of potential mechanisms. For example, we find some evidence that
women become more future oriented in treatment villages compared to control. This could
either be a result of increased buffer stock4 or a direct effect from the savings group model. We
do not find that individuals identified in the baseline as more time inconsistent are more likely
to join SfC groups but this may reflect data limitations. We are not able to provide any direct
evidence on whether risk sharing improved, though the fact that buffer stock savings (livestock)
increased points towards improved intertemporal smoothing and not risk sharing – as
households who could better share risks would not need to hold large buffer stock savings.5
We also find that a sustained role of the NGO is necessary for the program’s benefits to expand.
SfC is designed to be self‐replicating, so that an NGO worker only need to train the first group of
women in a given village. A “replicating agent” (RA) was selected from the women in the first
group and then trained on how to start new groups within the village or in neighboring areas.
We observe some evidence of these intended spillovers: approximately 6% of women in control
groups at endline report being members of savings groups with similar characteristics as SfC. In
4

Dean and Sautmann (2014) show that time preference as captured by price list experiments, as we used, is
affected by the respondents’ current financial situation and credit constraints.
5

Livestock is, however, both buffer stock savings and an asset providing a risky but positive return.

4

order to assess what factors may limit the spread of SfC – and perhaps give insights into why
groups like SfC did not organically occur in the absence of an NGO – we varied within the
treatment group how replicating agents were trained. In randomly selected treatment villages,
RAs were provided with more structured and formal training while in the remaining villages RAs
received less intense, less formal training. The impact is stronger for the more formal and
intense training, suggesting that despite the simplicity of the program, a sustained involvement
of the NGO in the program’s expansion is beneficial.
Other work on similar savings groups – implemented by DanChurchAid, CARE, the International
Rescue Committee and Catholic Relief Services – in East Africa have found mixed evidence on
impacts. Ksoll et al. (2013) find some evidence of improvements in consumption in Malawi
using a cluster design with 46 villages but limited evidence of increased small business
activities. In Burundi, Bundervoet (2012) finds the largest impacts using 77 savings groups:
three months after the end of one cycle, VSLA members had higher consumption and assets.6
Ongoing work by Karlan, Savonitto, Thuysbaert and Udry (2012) evaluating the CARE model in
Uganda, Malawi and Ghana find some evidence of women investing more in small enterprises
and improvements in food security but no change in assets after two years of the program.
Greaney, Kaboski, and Van Leemput (2013) find that an alternative implementation model
where savings group trainers are paid for their services, instead of being paid NGO staff,
increased the quality of the savings groups – as captured by small business investments of
members ‐ by improving selection into the savings groups. Privatized groups attract better off
(at baseline) members than the standard model. There is no control group who did not gain
access to savings groups. Their finding raises an interesting question of the tradeoff between
cost effectiveness and the type of valuable consumption smoothing we observe in Mali. This
may be particularly important given the interest in the organizations implementing savings
groups to target the ultra‐poor and households who are not likely to benefit from more formal
microfinance institutions.
This paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the intervention and section 3 gives an
overview of the experimental design and the available data. Section 4 discusses adoption, how
women use SfC and its impacts on savings and use of credit. We then present the main impact
estimates in section 5. In section 6 we discuss why an NGO was necessary to introduce this
product, and section 7 discusses the potential underlying mechanisms. Section 8 concludes.

6

The experimental design asked interested women to form into groups, and then randomized the timing of when
those groups were trained in the savings group methodology in a public lottery.

5

2

Intervention

Saving for Change (SfC), is a community‐based savings group program developed by OA/FFH.
The SfC program builds on the ASCA model, enabling women to organize themselves into
simple savings and credit groups. The objective is to improve savings and credit opportunities,
especially for those who are not reached by institutional lenders and ROSCAs. After an
introductory village meeting in which the NGO agent explains the working of SfC, twenty or so
women voluntarily form a group that democratically elects officers, sets by‐laws, meets weekly,
and collects savings from each member. Each woman is also asked to describe a savings goal at
the beginning of a cycle. At meetings, each woman contributes a savings amount (previously
established by the members) to a communal pool, which grows in value each time the group
meets. When a woman needs a loan, she proposes the desired amount to the group. Once all
demand has been voiced, the group collectively discusses whether there are enough funds and
how to divide funds, and prioritizes requests if there is more demand than funds. Loans must
be repaid with interest, at a rate set ex ante by the members. Each group manages its own
funds which are entirely internally generated (with no matching or external loans provided),
and all transactions occur in front of the group for full transparency.
In Mali, literacy rates – particularly among women – are very low.7 ASCAs which enable women
to take out loans from an accumulating pot are quite rare, perhaps because keeping track of
each women’s credit and debits is challenging without written records. SfC in Mali uses an oral
accounting system to keep track of savings amounts and outstanding loans.8 This likely
facilitates more flexibility in terms of savings and loans than could otherwise be accomplished
in traditional ASCAs.
At a predetermined date, the cycle ends and the group divides the entire fund among
members, which is referred to as a share‐out. The timing can coincide with times of high cash
flow requirements such as festivals, the planting season, or the “hungry” season. The interest
from the loans gives each member a positive interest rate. The group then decides whether to
start a new cycle, and under what conditions. At this time, groups sometimes opt to increase
their weekly contributions, accept new members, or change leadership positions.
The SfC‐promoting NGOs offer significant technical support to SfC groups, particularly during
the first year after which the program is introduced in a village. However, the NGOs do not
7

In our baseline survey, 14% of women reported being able to read or write.

8

The system is based on each woman always sitting in the same location in a circle, and remembering her own
savings, and loan and fines balances as well as those by the woman sitting to her right. The women are all also
supposed to remember the total amount in the cash box after each meeting.

6

introduce any outside capital into the groups. The SfC groups are formed and supported by two
types of agents: “hired agents” (paid employees of a local NGO and trained formally), and
“replicating agents” (local women from a village in which a hired agent formed a group, and
trained by the hired agents). The program aims to generate many replicating agents, thus giving
the program independence from the activities (and thus subsidies) of the NGO. In practice,
however, hired agents often assist replicating agents with creating and training new groups.
3

Experimental design and data

The experiment was implemented as SfC expanded into new geographic territory. The study
sample was comprised of 500 villages in the Segou region.9 Study villages were divided into 209
treatment villages and 291 control villages.10 We stratified the randomization by commune and
used a re‐randomization procedure to ensure balance on a number of village characteristics.11
Treatment villages were divided into catchment areas of about 15 villages each by OA/FFH and
local partner NGOs. As described above, hired agents work intensively in a given village for one
year before transitioning to a role where they support the replicating agent. This enables the
hired agents to continuously expand the number of villages with SfC over time. In the study
area, each hired agent was assigned a catchment area and was instructed to target 10 villages
in the first year of implementation (May 2009‐April 2010). In the following year (May 2010‐April
2011), hired agents continued to support villages targeted the first year and also introduced SfC
in the remaining villages in their zone. During the third year (May 2011‐April 2012), the number
of hired agents decreased and the territories expanded somewhat. Hired agents continued to

9

The 500 villages were spread across four administrative “cercles”: Segou, Bla, San and Tominian. There are 7
cercles in the Segou region and 49 in all of Mali. The four in the study are east of the regional capital and form a
contiguous geographic area. The villages were selected from government lists of villages in almost all communes (a
unit larger than the village and smaller than the cercle) in those four cercles. 11 of 84 (6 of which are in San) were
removed from the sample frame because other NGOs had already been promoting savings groups there.
10

More control than treatment villages were selected in order to improve statistical power for measuring
spillovers to control villages (using variation in proximity to treatment). However, we found little correlation
between distance to treatment village and the existence of SfC‐like savings groups in control villages.
11

The village‐level variables for which balance was checked were: number of households in the village, distance to
paved road, distance to market, availability of electricity and the presence of formal credit, schools, a health center
and ROSCAs. We re‐randomized until for none of these variables a test for the equality of means between
treatment and control villages yielded a p‐value smaller than 0.35. See Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) for an analysis
of this approach, and suggested improvement, to instead draw a fixed number of random assignments and then
choose the “best” one based on a pre‐determined objective criteria (such as largest smallest p‐value across all
pairwise tests, or largest p‐value for an aggregate test).

7

support existing replicating agents, added extra groups in neighborhoods of big villages/towns,
and implemented follow‐up to strengthen older groups.
In order to investigate the way in which the training method of the replicating agent affects
program impacts, treatment villages within each catchment were randomly assigned to one of
two replication types. Replicating agents in structured replication villages participated in a
formal, three‐day training. As part of the training, replicators received a pictorial guide and a
certificate stating they are certified to form SfC groups. In organic replication villages,
replicating agents were not provided with the formal training and material resources. Hired
agents provided support (answering questions and giving advice) to replicating agents, whether
in the structured or organic villages. Hired agents were instructed to target an equal number of
villages from each replication type within the first year.
3.1

Data

We collected panel data with a comprehensive household survey at baseline and endline on
almost 6,000 households (representative at the village level). For 606 households of the 6,000
households, we also conducted surveys at higher frequency, either every two to three weeks or
every three to four months over a 20 month period, in order to examine consumption
smoothing outcomes.
3.1.1 Full‐sample surveys
We conducted a comprehensive household panel survey on almost 6,000 households (baseline
survey in February‐May 2009, and endline survey three years later, February‐May 2012). To
generate the sample frame, we first conducted a census survey of all adult women in the 500
villages in the study. In each village, 12 women from the census list were randomly selected for
inclusion in the baseline survey, totaling a sample of 5,993 women in 5,954 households.12
The endline survey targeted the same households and women. Of the 5,954 households in the
baseline sample, 5,601 (94.1%) were resurveyed in the endline survey. As a number of sections
in the survey were administered to only one woman in the household (the primary female
respondent), we tried to interview these same women in the endline. If the baseline female
primary respondent could not be re‐interviewed after repeated visits, she was replaced by
another randomly selected female from the same household. For 5,094 of the 5,602
households surveyed in the endline, we managed to re‐survey the same baseline female
primary respondent; in 386 households, the baseline primary respondent was replaced by
12

As we sampled women randomly from the census list and households often have multiple adult women, there
are about 40 households from which more than 1 woman was drawn.

8

another woman in the same household; and in the remaining 122 households no adult woman
could be interviewed. The percentage of baseline primary respondents who were re‐surveyed
in the endline survey was thus 85.9% (5,094 out of 5,954) and the total endline sample of
primary respondents 5,462 (see Table 1A for an overview).
The baseline and endline surveys included an adult, household and village questionnaire. The
adult questionnaire was administered individually to the primary female respondents and the
primary female respondent’s husband, and included sections on savings, credit, risk aversion,
time preferences and cognitive ability (digit span and raven’s test). For primary female
respondents, there were additional sections on malaria knowledge, social integration, intra‐
household decision making, social capital and food security. We define a household in this
context as the primary female respondent, the person she defers to (i.e., her authority figure,
most often her husband), and this person’s immediate dependents. This would include other
wives if the respondent’s husband (i.e. her authority figure) is polygamous, for example. In
about 75% of cases, the household is embedded in a larger household structure, but we focus
in this paper on outcomes at the household and female respondent‐level.13 The average size of
the small household in our data is 7.4. The household module included sections on migration,
education, health, livestock, agriculture, other economic activities, housing, assets, transfers,
food consumption and non‐food expenditures.
3.1.2 High‐frequency surveys
Between the baseline and endline surveys, we conducted high frequency surveys on a subset of
684 randomly selected households (from both the treatment and control groups). The sub‐
sample for the high‐frequency surveys was drawn in different steps. First, we selected four
centrally located larger villages spread out over the study region to serve as the base villages
for our enumerators and determined the study villages reachable in under two hours by
motorbike from these base villages. From this set of 333 villages, we randomly sampled 60
treatment and 60 control villages. From each group, 24 villages were randomly selected to
receive survey visits every two weeks, with the remaining villages receiving survey visits every
three months. Finally, we randomly sampled seven households from the baseline sample in

13

We collected some information on extended family, including joint agricultural production and food
consumption. The extended families are quite large: on average there are 19.2 members; the 90th percentile is 41
members.

9

each of the two‐week villages and five in each of the three‐month villages. The original sample
frame thus consisted of 120 villages.14
The high‐frequency questionnaires included fixed modules on financial transactions, transfers,
health, non‐agricultural income, expenditures and asset transactions and a variable component
that, on a rotating basis, asked about agricultural production, crop stocks, food consumption,
food security, and education. The high‐frequency surveys were conducted over a 20‐month
period (June 2010‐January 2012). In total, 5,815 interviews of 309 households and 989
interviews of 297 households were completed in the two‐week and three‐month villages,
respectively.
3.2

Balance check and attrition

We conduct different tests, for both the full sample and the high‐frequency sample, to verify
that there are no important observable differences between the treatment and control groups.
Appendix Table A2 compares the treatment and control groups along 24 covariates and
summary indices constructed using these covariates. For the full sample, (a) a simple mean
comparison along the 24 covariates and the 6 indices, reported in Appendix Table A2, fails to
reject equality in 29 out of 30 tests, (b) an aggregate test at the household level, in which we
regress assignment to treatment on the set of indices and the food consumption measure, fails
to reject orthogonality (p‐value of 0.61 reported at the bottom of Appendix Table A2). The
same tests for the high‐frequency sample indicate that imbalance is not a concern.15
Appendix Table A3 reports tests for differential attrition between the treatment and control
group. The left panel shows that mean attrition is slightly higher in the treatment group (1.3
percentage points, se = 0.7 pp). However, in a regression of attrition on the six indices and food
consumption, treatment status and the interaction of treatment status and the seven
covariates, a test of the joint significance of treatment status and the interaction terms fails to
reject that the composition of attrition is the same in treatment and control (p‐value of 0.27
reported at the bottom of Appendix Table A3). In the high frequency sample, there is no
evidence of differential attrition between treatment and control: we fail to reject the equality

14

Soon after the start of the high‐frequency surveying, 8 of the originally sampled villages turned out to be too far
away from the base villages or unreachable during several months of the year. These villages were replaced by
other randomly selected villages.
15

The sample in these tests is the sample obtained after the early replacement of the 8 villages (as described
above). Since our main outcome of interest is consumption smoothing, our final sample consists of the households
for which we have at least one consumption observation. Attrition is defined accordingly.

10

of mean attrition (a difference of 1 pp, se = 2.4 pp) and of the composition of attrition (p‐value
of 0.59).
3.3

Baseline sample characteristics

As shown in Appendix Table A2, a study village has on average about 1,000 inhabitants, is 23
kilometers from the nearest paved road, and reachable by truck during nine months per year.
About 70% of villages have a primary school in the village, and 20% have a health center. Prior
to the intervention, approximately 22% of women were members of a ROSCA. Approximately
35% of primary respondents had received a loan in the last 12 months while 29% had given a
loan. Of all female adults in the household aged 20 to 65, 22% received at least one transfer
(either cash or in‐kind) from another household in the last 12 months while 17% had given a
transfer. Approximately fifty percent of primary respondents operated a business and a small
portion (5%) engaged in paid labor. Over the past year, households invested $19.65 in
agriculture and $15.71 in education. Livestock holdings averaged $690.60. About half of the
primary school aged children were enrolled in school.
3.4

Econometric specification

Given that treatment assignment was random, the main identification strategy is
straightforward. Our principal estimating equation for impacts on outcome measures in the
full‐sample survey is the following:

is the outcome variable of interest at endline for household i, and
indicates
where
assignment to treatment status at the village level.
is a vector of variables, including
the
lagged (baseline) value of the dependent variable, and the variables used in the re‐
are commune dummies, i.e., the stratification variables.
randomization procedure.
Throughout, standard errors are clustered at the unit of randomization, the village.
4
4.1

Adoption, savings and use of credit
Adoption rates and usage of SfC

With informal groups trained by replicating agents, participation in a SfC group is not simple to
define. We define SfC groups are savings groups that women report as being “applause

11

groups”16 that hold regular meetings and have received training from someone outside the
group. Table 2 shows take‐up is 29.7% in treatment villages and 6.3% in control.
Appendix Table A1 presents several descriptive statistics on SfC usage. Average weekly savings
contributions were $0.48. Given that women joined SfC at different points in time, not all
women had completed a savings cycle by the time of the endline survey: 83% of SfC members
report having received at least one share‐out (i.e., end‐of‐cycle withdrawal of savings by all
participants). The average number of share‐outs was 1.68 and the amount of the most recent
share‐out averaged $30.64. Most share‐outs (53.5%) occurred in April‐June, i.e. the months
preceding the lean season (July‐October). The most frequently reported uses of the share‐out
proceeds were food (47%) and small businesses (27%). A little under half of the SfC members
reported having received a loan from the group in the last 12 months before the survey, for an
average loan amount of $20.39. The most frequently reported uses of the SfC loans are food
(38%) and small businesses (42%).
4.2

Characteristics of SfC adopters

Table 3 compares baseline characteristics of adopters and non‐adopters in treatment villages.
Adopters tend to come from somewhat larger and somewhat wealthier households, as
measured by food consumption per capita (a difference of 0.24, mean for non‐members of
2.68). No differences in participation rates were observed based on the gender of the
household head or household ethnicity. SfC adopters were more likely than non‐adopters to
have resorted to a costly strategy to cope with a shock within the last year (a difference of 4 pp,
mean for non‐members of 16%). This could mean that these households, on average, faced
more serious shocks (and thus the value of a shock‐coping mechanism was higher for them), or
that these households had fewer pre‐existing coping mechanisms to deal with shocks. There
were no noticeable differences in levels of food‐insecurity between adopters and non‐adopters.
SfC adopters were more somewhat older and more likely to be a leader in the village (a
difference of 7 pp, mean for non‐members of 15%). More adopters were involved in ROSCAs (a
difference of 9 pp) compared to non‐adopters (20%). Additionally, more SfC adopters had taken
a loan in the past year at the time of the baseline survey (a difference of 8 pp, compared to 31%
of non‐adopters). SfC adopters were not only financially more active but also economically:
they are more likely to operate a business and to own livestock. Women who adopted SfC
scored considerably higher on the social integration index, the community action index, and the

16

Because of a characteristic clap performed at the end of each meeting by most groups, SfC groups are known as
“tegereniton” or “applause groups” in Mali.

12

intra‐household decision making power index.17 Given the communal nature of SfC groups, it is
not surprising that women who opted to participate in the program had stronger or more
frequent social ties prior to joining the group. Measures of financial patience and time
inconsistency were similar between adopters and non‐adopters.
4.3

Did SfC increase financial savings and use of credit?

We first look at whether the introduction of SfC into a village led to increases in financial
savings and use of credit. As can be seen in table 4A, female respondents from the treatment
villages are 4.9 percentage points (se = 1.6) more likely to be members of any type of savings
group.18 Overall, savings held by the primary respondents increased in treatment villages, on
average, by $3.65 (se = 1.32, mean in the control group of $11.96) over the course of the study
period. This is driven by the increase in savings in ASCAs, including SfC groups ($3.21, se = 0.84).
There is a small, but statistically significant decrease, in the amount of savings held in formal
institutions (‐$1.10, se = 0.56), but very few women have formal savings accounts (1% of the
control group).
A woman involved in savings groups prior to SfC may opt to participate in SfC rather than
continue with her existing savings group. We find that participation in ASCAs and ROSCAs other
than SfC does significantly decrease by 19.7 percentage points (se = 1.9 pp) while SfC
participation increased by 24.6 percentage points (se = 1.7 pp). This suggests that the SfC
program does crowd out other types of savings groups, and thus some of the changes in
economic outcomes are coming not from the introduction of a completely new concept, but
rather an improvement in the organization and terms and conditions of the savings groups (i.e.,
the “technology” improvement).
Table 4b shows that significantly more women reported receiving a loan in the last 12 months
in the treatment group (3.3 pp, se = 1.6, mean in the control group of 56%). Of women who
17

The intrahousehold decision‐making index includes questions on how much influence she has on decisions in the
following domains: food for the household, children’s schooling expenses, and economic activities such as small
business activities. The community action index includes questions on: how frequently she speaks with different
village leaders, participation in village meetings and activities, and voting in last elections. The social capital index
includes questions about seven other randomly selected community members from our sample and whether the
respondent knows the person, would engage in informal risk sharing and transfers with the person, or go to the
market together. The components that make up these indices are enumerated in Table 7. The index is constructed
– as in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) – by first normalizing (subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard
deviation of the control group) each individual variable, and then adding all the normalized variables together. This
summed variable is then normalized with respect to the control group.
18

This includes all ROSCAs and ASCAs – as defined above.

13

received loans, the total amount received as loans in the last 12 months did not differ between
the treatment and control villages ($1.33, se = 1.23). However, respondents from treatment
villages did borrow significantly larger amounts from savings groups, on average, compared to
control respondents. Women in treatment villages were 12.4 percentage points (se = 1.4) more
likely to receive a loan from a savings group and 4.4 percentage (se = 1.6) less likely to receive a
loan from family and friends. In Malian culture, it is often considered shameful or embarrassing
to ask friends or family members for a loan. Therefore, the impacts point to a benefit of the SfC
program that is difficult to quantify but likely quite important: SfC groups provide a less
stigmatized source of credit while simultaneously normalizing lending within the community.
5

Impacts

Savings groups may impact a wide set of outcomes, and at the start of the experiment there
was no simple and linear mechanism of change. Our partners anticipated increases in economic
activities and income, increased investments in health and education, increased consumption
and improvements in women’s bargaining position and women’s social capital. We will present
a wide range of outcomes in the following order: economic activities (agriculture, livestock and
microenterprises); food consumption and non‐food expenditures; food security and
consumption smoothing; health and education; and, social capital and household decision‐
making power.
5.1

Economic activities

Columns (1)‐(4) of Table 5 present estimates of impacts on economic activities (agriculture,
livestock and small businesses). These show the main impacts, and appendix tables A4A, A4B
and A4C provide details on agriculture, livestock, and small businesses, respectively.
5.1.1 Agriculture
In Mali, as other places in West Africa, women farm their own agricultural plots. Columns (1)
and (3) show the impact on the value of agricultural output and the household and primary
female respondent level, respectively. We find no change in the value of output at the
household level, but women in SfC villages had $5.93 more in agricultural value (se = 2.37,
mean of control = 25.88), a 23% increase. Appendix table A4A shows that we see no significant
changes in agricultural input expenses as a result of the intervention, at either the household or
female respondent level. A similar fraction of women in both treatment and control groups
reported cultivating land (39% compared to 41%, a difference of 2.1 pp, se = 1.5). Total
expenses on inputs were also similar in treatment and control villages (a difference of ‐$0.10, se
= 0.43). Respondents in treatment villages did report a significant increase in the values of both
output ($5.93, se = 2.37, mean in the control group of $25.88) and sales ($1.97, se = 0.97, mean
14

in the control group of $6.95). Given that agricultural inputs (which are typically considered
better measured than outputs) did not change, this is a somewhat puzzling finding. In‐kind
inputs, may have increased: the amount of land women report cultivating increases (0.044
hectares, se=0.027; mean in the control group of 0.3 ha) and men may be providing more labor
on women’s plots (0.82 of a day, se=0.50; mean in the control group 4.3). Neither of these
results is significant at conventional levels, however, and therefore we cannot confidently claim
any particular input change that led to the increase in agricultural output.
Columns (7)‐(12) show that we also find no changes in the agricultural inputs at the household
level. Seventy‐one percent of households in the control group cultivated land, which is similar
to the treatment group (a difference of 0.2 pp, se = 1.4). Expenses on agricultural inputs too
were similar between the two groups (a difference of $4.49, se = 3.79). The value of output and
sales did not change at the household level, as they did at the women’s level.
5.1.2 Livestock
In West Africa, livestock is both a productive activity and an important form of buffer stock
savings (Kazianga and Udry 2006). In order to construct the value of the livestock, we use
information households report on the number of different types of animals and then use
median prices as reported by community leaders to construct the value of livestock holdings.
Table 2 Column (2) shows a large increase in the value of livestock held by households in
treatment areas ($119.94, se = 41.33, mean in control group of $895.78). This is a large, 13
percent increase. Appendix Table A4B shows that the magnitude is driven mainly by increased
holdings of male cows ($49.73, se = 20.64). The value of goats ($11.47, se = 4.57) and sheep
($12.28, se = 4.70) also increase. The increase in cows is a particularly large effect since in the
average share‐out, a member would get about $30 and share‐outs happen about once a year.
The average member in our sample had been in SfC for almost two years. A typical share‐out
would enable households to purchase a goat or a sheep. This suggests then some crowding‐in
of investments into cows: cows are large, lumpy investments. SfC may have enabled
households to push pass the threshold of being able to invest in one. However, this may also
reflect measurement difficulties in capturing the value of livestock when transactions are rare
and when quality is not easily observed. If the cows in treatment villages are on average
younger and therefore smaller or thinner than in control villages, for example, we may
overstate the increase in value of livestock.
Consistent with the increase in holdings, column (8) shows that yearly expenditures related to
livestock increased as well ($6.22, se = 3.38) in treatment villages.

15

5.1.3 Small businesses
Table 5 Column (4) demonstrates no statistically significant increase in small enterprise profits.
On average, women in control villages reported business profits of $41 per year, which was
similar to those of women in the treatment area (a difference of $5.13, se = 3.82). Appendix
Table A4C shows most outcomes related to business development or expansion also show no
differences between treatment and control. A similar fraction of women in control and
treatment groups had a business (a difference of 1.8 pp, se = 1.3, mean in the control group of
43%). In addition to asking women directly about their business profits, as reported in Table 5,
we also asked detailed questions about sales and expenses and constructed an alternative
profits measure as the difference between sales and expenses. Using this profits measure, in
column (2) of Appendix Table A4C, there are no differences between control and treatment
villages either (a difference of ‐$0.33, se = 2.35, mean in the control group of 36.71).19 While we
see no change in profits, we do find suggestive evidence of increases in both expenses and sales
for businesses in treatment villages compared to businesses in control villages: on average,
treatment businesses spent $35.66 more (se = 20.77, mean in the control group of $131 per
year) and sold $38.56 more (se = 22.75). These differences are significant at the 10% level.
Taken together, there is only weak and limited evidence of improvements in business
outcomes.
5.2

Consumption and expenditures

As can be seen in Table 5 Column (5), overall monthly household expenditures per equivalent
adult on non‐food items did not differ in treatment and control villages (a difference of ‐$0.04,
se = 0.11). We do find suggestive evidence of a small increase in total food consumption per
adult in treatment villages. Food consumption per equivalent adult in the past week increased
by about $0.13 (se = 0.07, mean in the control group of $3.89), a 3% increase. This is a modest
effect, significant only at the 10% level. The endline, when food consumption was collected,
was after the harvest when most households are not struggling with food security. SfC may,
however, have effects on consumption and food security during the lean period as it helps
households save throughout the year, resulting in a lump sum of cash prior to the lean season.

19

de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2009) examine different methods of measuring micro‐enterprise profits and
conclude that simply asking profits provides a more accurate measure of firm profits than detailed questions on
revenues and expenses. In our data, the correlation between self‐reported and calculated profits is high (.78).

16

5.3

Impacts on food security and consumption smoothing

5.3.1 Food security
As SfC increases access to loans and improves savings by helping women to save regularly, a
portion of these funds may be used to purchase food, resulting in greater food security. We find
indeed that food insecurity in treatment villages was lower compared to control villages
(Column (7) of Table 5). A food insecurity index developed by FFH that measures chronic food
insecurity showed a decline of 3.9 percentage points (se = 1.6, mean in the control group of
43%).20
5.3.2 Consumption smoothing
While very detailed and complete, the FFH food insecurity measure may reflect respondents’
perceptions of how food secure they are, which is important but may differ from actual food
shortages. To cross‐check this finding, we verified whether households in fact are better able to
cope with seasonal fluctuations and maintain their food consumption at approximately the
same level throughout the year, without having to resort to skipping meals or eating less. The
high frequency surveys allow us to observe respondents’ food consumption in multiple seasons
throughout the year. We examine whether households are better able to smooth consumption
over the year using the following estimating equation:
∗
indicates whether the outcomes was measured in the lean season (June‐
where
September), is a vector of year dummies,
indicates whether the household is in the
two‐week or three‐month sample and is a household‐level random effect. Because the full‐
sample and high‐frequency survey instruments are quite different, constructing variables in
exactly the same way is often impossible – so we do not include baseline and endline data as
rounds when analyzing the high‐frequency data. Standard errors are clustered at the village
level.

20

The full FFH food security module is comprised of 18 questions, 9 of which are core yes/no questions that ask
whether a person has experienced a certain food insecurity phenomenon (e.g., “In the last 12 months, did you
worry that your food would run out before you had money to buy more food?”). Nine additional questions ask
how often this phenomenon occurred: ‘rarely,’ ‘sometimes,’ or ‘often.’ Whereas the basic FFH food security index
is based on the number of positive answers to the yes/no questions, the chronic food insecurity takes into account
only phenomena that occurred sometimes or often. As a more simple measure, w also find that respondents in SfC
villages were 2.8 percentage points less likely to report they did not have enough to eat (se = 1.6, mean in control
group of 37%).

17

Results are reported in Table 6. We find that weekly food consumption per equivalent adult
falls in the lean season for all households (‐$0.36, se = 0.11). However, we find evidence that
households in treatment villages experience a smaller decline in food consumption in the lean
period. The coefficient on the interaction term
∗
is positive ($0.36, se = 0.16). In
fact, since the magnitudes are the same, SfC allows households to smooth consumption
throughout the year. This is consistent with the finding from the FFH food security measure.
The fact that no important differences were seen in levels of food consumption may seem
contradictory to the finding that food security increased in treatment villages. Note that the
time periods for these two outcomes are not the same: food consumption is measured for the
past seven days, whereas food security is measured for the past 12 months. Endline data
collection occurred shortly after the harvest, during a season of relative plenty, when we would
expect to find smaller effects of SfC on food consumption. As we have seen above, the high
frequency data provide evidence that SfC did have positive effects on food consumption levels
in the lean season. Thus this is consistent with SfC contributing to important reallocation of
resources, to consumption smoothing, but not to higher levels of aggregate income over the
year.
5.4

Health and education

5.4.1 Health
The most frequent type of shocks households face is illness. We present an index of health
outcomes in column (1) of Table 7 and find no difference in health outcomes between SfC and
control villages.21 The magnitude of estimate is also quite small (0.0008, se=.03). Columns (1)‐
(6) of Appendix Table A5 provide a closer look into some individual outcomes. We do not find
that the SfC intervention affected the likelihood of illness or changed the way in which
households dealt with health shocks. Treatment and control households are also equally likely
to consult a health facility, reported similar amounts of health expenditures from the last
month (a difference of $0.21, se = 0.38) and financed health expenditures in the same ways:
they were equally likely to sell households assets or take a loan from a savings group or other
source in order to pay for health expenses.

21

The index includes whether households had experienced serious illness in the last month; whether a household
member consulted a health center; total household expenditures; and means of financing health expenditures.
The notes to Table 6 provide more detail, and Appendix Table A6 shows the estimates for many of the individual
outcomes in the index.

18

5.4.2 Education
Our implementation partners anticipated that households would be better able to pay for
school supplies and fees, leading to eventual improved education. In Table 7 Column (2) we
again use an index over education variables, including enrollment for children of different
genders and age ranges and educational expenses.22 However, we do not find evidence of
changes in educational outcomes. The point estimate on the index is 0.02 of a standard
deviation (se=0.02). Columns (7)‐(11) of Appendix Table A5 show detailed educational
outcomes. The rate of both primary and secondary enrollment for boys and girls was the same,
on average, for treatment and control villages. There is a slight increase in educational
expenses per capita in the treatment group; the treatment group spends, on average, 8% more
than the control group ($0.50, se = 0.28, mean in the control group of $6.06), which is
significant at the 10% level.
5.4.3 Housing
Table 7 Column (3) examines whether housing quality was impacted by the offer of a savings
group. The housing index includes measures of the quality of the household’s roof, walls, and
floor; whether the household has access to water in the house; the availability of electricity; the
presence of a latrine; and the use of coal or gas for cooking. We find that the housing index
increased by 0.06 of a standard deviation (se=0.03) in treatment villages. There is evidence that
households were also able to improve the quality of their housing stock as a result of SfC’s
presence in the village.
5.5

Social capital and intra‐household decision‐making power

5.5.1 Social capital
We see no significant differences between treatment and control respondents along various
measures of social capital (Table 7). Our measures of social capital include a battery of
questions on engagement in the community, such as speaking to the village chief or councilor,
participating in village meetings, or voting, as well as questions on social networks, such as
asking others for help, being willing to help others, going to the market with other women, etc.
Column (4) shows an index of the community‐based questions and column (5) presents an
index of the social network‐based questions. The point estimates are small in magnitude and

22

Included in the index is: enrollment of male children between 6 and 12 years old; enrollment of female children
between 6 and 12 years old; enrollment of male children between 13 and 18 years old; enrollment of female
children between 13 and 18 years old; and educational expenses last 12 months.

19

precisely estimated, suggesting that there were no changes in social capital along the
dimensions we measured.
This is in stark contrast to results by Feigenberg, Field, and Pande (2013), which found that
increased frequency of meetings for group‐based microcredit can increase social capital,
alleviating constraints stemming from asymmetric information. SfC groups were entirely self‐
formed, so the formation of the groups may have relied on existing social capital without
necessarily expanding it. In Feigenberg, Field and Pande, many group members had pre‐existing
weak ties but a bank officer assigned women into groups.
5.5.2 Female decision‐making power
We also find no impact on women’s decision‐making power as shown by an index in column (6)
of Table 7. Included in the index are a number of questions, including e.g., whether the woman
is free to decide on her own about food expenses, about education expenses, or about business
decisions. In no individual measure, nor in the index of all questions (a difference of 0.02, se =
0.03), do we see a statistically significant change.23
6

Why was an NGO necessary?

Given that SfC is not fundamentally different than informal savings institutions observed in
other parts of the world, why was it necessary to have an NGO intervene to provide this
product and improve food security? As mention in section 3, the experimental design included
two different treatments: “structured” and “organic” replication. In structured replication
villages, replicating agents were formally trained by the program, given a pictoral guide and
given a certificate of training. By contrast, organic replicating agents were only provided with
on‐the‐job training by the technical agent. This allows us to see how easy it is to implement SfC
once people know the general concept, thereby getting at whether there are high information
costs and/or a role for endorsement effects of organizing such an ASCA – perhaps due to low
literacy (though we do not have a treatment with and without oral accounting since it is an
integral part of the program). We do not, however, believe the NGO endorsement can explain
the sustained usage we observe among SfC members: the average SfC member had been a
member for almost 24 months and less than 10% joined and subsequently quit a group, unlike
in Karlan, Knight, and Udry (2013).

23

Note that the balance check indicated that the average household in the treatment villages scored somewhat
higher on the index of intra‐household decision making power. If this were to bias the impact assessments in any
way, we would most likely expect to find an erroneously large effect of the SfC program on decision making.

20

We examine whether impacts differ between villages with structured versus organic
replication. If SfC is difficult to implement without a lot of support, we anticipate the benefits to
be higher in structured than organic treatment villages. Table 8 shows that this is indeed the
case. First, villages where replication was structured had significantly more SfC members, on
average, than organic villages. Total savings is likely higher in structured villages than in organic
villages ($5.21 compared to $2.08), though the difference between groups is only at the margin
of significance (p value = 0.11). The main effect in Table 7 on housing quality was driven by
structured villages (column 7). Furthermore, only households in villages with structured
replication scored lower on the FFH food insecurity index (‐0.06, se=0.02). Overall, these results
suggest that even with some NGO support, these groups were not capable of improving food
security.24 It is therefore not surprising that these groups did not spontaneously develop
without outside assistance. There are multiple reasons for this: it could be that organic
replicators did not have sufficient information to train groups properly, or that organic
replicators may perform worse because they do not have the advantage of a quality signal or
persuasive power of the NGO (in the form of the certificate and prestige from travelling outside
the village at the request of an NGO) to generate higher participation.
7

Mechanisms

SfC is a simple intervention that seems to have increased savings (in cash and in livestock), the
use of credit, and improved households’ ability to smooth consumption. As SfC does not rely on
outside capital, and is merely an improved version of preexisting informal financial
arrangement (ROSCAs) with which all are familiar, the question is: how and why does SfC
change behavior? In this section we discuss a number of underlying constraints and potential
mechanisms that generated the impacts we found on household finance and consumption
smoothing. We do not put forward one particular of these mechanisms as “the” answer.
Instead, we outline a number of potential mechanisms and provide the evidence that we have
for or against each. Most likely a number of mechanisms are at work. This experiment focused
on having sufficient power to detect impacts of the implementing partners’ preferred method
of implementing SfC. Future work on mechanisms would need to test alternative interventions,
collect more nuanced and detailed process data, or expand the sample frame and identify
mechanisms through testing for heterogeneous treatment effects.

24

Unfortunately we do not have sufficient sample size in the high frequency surveys to analyze the smoothing
results by the two different treatment arms.

21

7.1

Cognitive Biases and Preferences

Here we detail several cognitive biases and potential shifts in preferences that were generated
by the introduction of SfC. We discuss time inconsistent preferences and patience below.
Weekly meetings may also affect other cognitive biases, such as attention and task
management. However, we have no proxy for attention issues in our survey instruments, to
examine whether there were heterogeneous treatment effects on those with low attention to
household finance task management. The SfC methodology also encourages members to set a
savings goal, which could induce increased savings through a labeling effect (Dupas and
Robinson 2013).
7.1.1 Time inconsistent preferences
SfC may have made an impact addressing the needs of those with time inconsistent
preferences. SfC offers a commitment device to save weekly, which may help households to use
savings to better smooth their consumption throughout the year. The saving cycles are often
structured so that the lump‐sum payouts are distributed in the period leading up to the lean
season. Gugerty (2006) highlights that informal savings groups, particularly ROSCAs, offer
participants a commitment device to save. Dupas and Robinson (2013) suggests that savings
groups which combine commitment with the flexibility of loans, as does SfC, can increase saving
and investment. Commitment savings products have been shown to increase savings and to be
in demand particularly among those with time inconsistent preferences (Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin
2006) as recent theory also predicts (Basu 2011). Furthermore, more recent evidence suggests
that commitment devices still need some flexibility to function best (Dupas and Robinson 2013;
Karlan and Linden 2014).
However, in Table 3, we find no evidence that female respondents who demonstrate time
inconsistent preferences, as measured by similar survey questions as in Ashraf et al (2006)25,
are more likely to participate in SfC. Our measure of time inconsistency is, however,
problematic: the responses between the baseline and endline are uncorrelated in the control
villages. We therefore do not see this as dispositive, and have little direct evidence on the role
of commitment as a mechanism.26
25

At two different points in the baseline survey, we asked whether the respondent would prefer 2000 FCFA in 6
months or 2500 FCFA in 7 months (or neutral), and whether the respondent preferred 2000 FCFA today or 2500
FCFA in 1 month (or neutral).
26

In the survey we collected information on regretted expenses, which may correlate with time inconsistent
preferences, but less than 5% of the female respondents reported any expenses they regretted. We also find no
evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects by the baseline time inconsistency measure.

22

7.1.2 Patience
SfC may have made an impact through the NGO quality signal or NGO persuasion effect on
patience. If, for instance, the NGO was a trusted entity, individuals may have shifted their
beliefs as to the optimal level of savings. Or, as discussed earlier, one could argue this is a shift
in preferences via a persuasion effect (these are empirically indistinguishable in our setting).
The disciplining device of a commitment savings product may also shift time preferences.27
Indeed, in table 7, we find that female respondents in treatment villages are slightly more likely
to be patient (2.2 percentage points, se=0.012, mean in the control group of 19%) than
respondents in the control village at endline.
7.2

Market failure: screening, monitoring and enforcement

Households rarely achieve complete insurance due to asymmetric information failures such as
limited screening, monitoring and enforcement (Townsend 1994; Kinnan 2012; Ligon, Thomas,
and Worrall 2002) in both formal and informal institutions. As a result, there is a mismatch
between households’ cash flow needs and those offered by either formal or informal financial
alternatives. That is, products offered do not provide the flexibility that people need. SfC, in
theory, can be construed as an organizational “technology,” one that helps mitigate asymmetric
information constraints.
When the program is introduced, two aspects are emphasized as new members are trained: the
well‐defined process for each member maintaining, orally, the information on total savings and
outstanding loans of exactly two other group members, in order to compensate for the lack of
written records; and the group‐level process of requiring public explanations of what each will
do with the loans they request. This process thus improves the flow of monitoring information
for peers, and allows members to screen each other better when approving each other’s loans.
We cannot, however, provide direct evidence of this mechanism using the field experiment as
these aspects of the program which address asymmetric information are integral to the
program and therefore were not experimentally varied.
If risk sharing was improved, however, then households would not need to rely as much on
buffer stock savings in order to smooth consumption. We in fact find a large increase in
livestock holdings. This is suggestive of households increasing their intertemporal savings
abilities rather than improving their contemporaneous ability to share risk.

27

Carcalho, Prina, and Sydnor (2013) provide suggestive evidence that even traditional savings account access can
make individuals more patient.

23

7.2.1 Intra‐household bargaining
If households are not unitary (Browning and Chiappori 1998), relaxing the community‐level
constraints on monitoring, screening and enforcement which may have prevented savings
groups from functioning well may also affect household outcomes by altering women’s ability
to implement their preferences on expenditure patterns. Anderson and Baland (2002) suggest
that women participate in ROSCAs in order to impose female preferences over consumption
and savings onto husbands, altering the resource allocation within the household. If households
are inefficient as Anderson and Baland suggest, then SfC may then enable women to better
implement their preferences vis‐à‐vis the men in their households. we would then expect to see
women reporting more influence on decisions – for example, being more able to decide about
food expenses. However, as discussed in section 5.5.2, we find no evidence of changes in
women’s decision‐making power. Table 7 shows the treatment effects on an index capturing
intrahousehold decision‐making. Of particular interest given the empirical results, is the
question on whether the female respondent was free to make decisions on food expenses. The
point estimate on women’s influence on food expenses in particular is very small and
statistically insignificant (‐0.01 pp, se = 0.02, mean in the control group of 0.41). We find no
direct evidence on this channel with what we expected to be a directly related measure of
women’s ability to influence food security. We also find no evidence of women with baseline
low bargaining power benefiting more from SfC, as shown by tests of treatment
heterogeneity.28
8

Conclusion

By promoting a specific form of an accumulating savings and credit association which is more
flexible than existing informal savings groups while maintaining the role of commitment, our
partner NGOs facilitated an increased access to financial management tools. This led to
increases in savings and access to loans in treatment villages. While we do not observe any
increase in small enterprise activity, as anticipated by the NGOs, access to SfC in treatment
villages did increase investments in livestock and improve food security and consumption
smoothing. We also saw evidence of increased agricultural output, although no accompanying
statistically significant increase in inputs. We found no evidence of changes in health or
education investments or in women’s standing in the village.
The group‐based micro‐savings movement is quickly expanding, with millions of participants
worldwide. It is inexpensive compared to microcredit, does not require outside capital, and has
low administrative costs. Using financial and administrative data from OA/FFH and our take‐up
28

These estimates are available from the authors upon request.

24

data, we estimate implementation costs per household to be under $20. The structure of the
savings groups promotes replication of other savings groups, though this experiment has shown
the replication process does require some involvement by the NGOs. Future research could
further disentangle the underlying mechanisms of how savings groups improve households’
consumption smoothing. Furthermore, since the aspiration of such programs is to increase the
level of consumption, further innovation could explore, e.g., combining this approach with
infusions of outside capital, if in fact the lack of infusion of capital is a hindrance to growth.

25

References
Allen, Hugh. 2013. “Global Outreach of Savings Groups: Current Information, VSL Associates.”
http://www.savingsgroups.com/.
Anderson, Siwan, and Jean‐Marie Baland. 2002. “The Economics of Roscas and Intra‐household
Resource Allocation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3): 963–95.
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence
from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
Banco.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121
(2): 673–97.
Attanasio, Augsburg, Britta Augsburg, Ralph de Haas, Fitz Fitzsimons, and Heike Harmgart.
2014. “Group Lending or Individual Lending? Evidence from a Randomised Field
Experiment in Mongolia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 136.
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph de Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2014. “Microfinance at
the Margin: Experimental Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2014. “The Miracle of
Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “Six Randomized Evaluations of
Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps.”
Basu, Karna. 2011. “Hyperbolic Discounting and the Sustainability of Rotational Savings
Arrangements.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (4): 143–71.
Browning, Martin, and Pierre‐Andre Chiappori. 1998. “Efficient Intra‐Household Allocations: A
General Characterization and Empirical Tests.” Econometrica 66 (6): 1241–78.
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4):
200–232.
Bundervoet, T. 2012. “ Small Wonders? A Randomized Controlled Trial of Village Savings and
Loans Associations in Burundi.” Manuscript, International Rescue Committee.
Carcalho, Leandro, Silvia Prina, and Justin Sydnor. 2013. “The Effects of Savings on Risk‐Taking
and Intertemporal Choice Behavior: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Working
Paper, February.
Crepon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. 2014. “Impact of
Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2009. “Measuring Microenterprise
Profits: Must We Ask How the Sausage Is Made?” Journal of Development Economics 88
(1): 19–31.
Dean, Mark, and Anja Sautmann. 2014. “Credit Constraints and the Measurement of Time
Preferences.” Available at SSRN 2423951.
26

Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence
from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review Forthcoming.
Feigenberg, Benjamin, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande. 2013. “The Economic Returns to Social
Interaction: Experimental Evidence from Microfinance.” The Review of Economic
Studies, April.
Greaney, Brian, Joseph P Kaboski, and Eva Van Leemput. 2013. Can Self‐Help Groups Really Be“
Self‐Help”? National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gugerty, Mary Kay. 2006. “You Can’t Save Alone: Testing Theories of Rotating Savings and
Credit Organizations.” Economic Development and Cultural Change forthcoming.
Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry. 2013. “Consulting and Capital Experiments
with Micro and Small Tailoring Enterprises in Ghana.” Yale University Working Paper.
Karlan, Dean, and Leigh L. Linden. 2014. Loose Knots: Strong Versus Weak Commitments to Save
for Education in Uganda. Working Paper 19863. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Karlan, Dean, Benni Savonitto, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2012. “Impact
Assessment of Savings Groups.” IPA Final Report.
Kazianga, Harounan, and Christopher Udry. 2006. “Consumption Smoothing? Livestock,
Insurance and Drought in Rural Burkina Faso.” Journal of Development Economics 79 (2):
413–46.
Kinnan, Cynthia. 2012. Distinguishing Barriers to Insurance in Thai Villages. Mimeo,
Northwestern University.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1): 83–120.
Ksoll, Christopher, HB Lilleor, JH Lonborg, and Ole Dahl Rasmussen. 2013. “Impact of Village
Savings and Loans Associations: Evidence from a Cluster Randomized Trial” Study Paper
No. 56.
Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas, and Tim Worrall. 2002. “Informal Insurance Arrangements
with Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies.” The Review of
Economic Studies 69 (1): 209–44.
Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson. 2014. “On the Impact of Microcredit:
Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Rural Ethiopia.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics.
Townsend, R. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India.” Econometrica 62 (3): 539–91.

27

Table 1: Number of observations

A. Full Sample
Observations
Baseline
Resurveyed at endline
Endline
B. High Frequency Sample
Observations
Original sample
Sample of households with at least one
consumption measurement

Nb. of villages

Nb. of
households

500
500
500

5,954
5,579
5,603

120

684

120

579

Table 2: Take-up
Control villages
Member of SfC 1
1

6.27%

All
29.65%

"Tekereni/Applause Group" that has regular meetings and received training.

Treatment villages
Structured
33.56%

Organic
25.73%

Table 3: Comparison of baseline characteristics of SfC members vs. non-members
in treatment villages
Difference
from
Standard
regression
NonMembers
errors for
with
Members
difference
communefixed effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Household characteristics
Household size
6.79
7.55
***
(0.16)
Household head is a woman (0/1)
0.06
0.07
(0.01)
Bobo (0/1)
0.38
0.25
(0.02)
Food consumption per adult equivalent ($)
2.68
2.92
***
(0.08)
Resorted to costly strategy to cope with shock (0/1)
0.16
0.20
**
(0.02)
FFH food insecurity index (0/1)
0.27
0.31
*
(0.02)
B. Characteristics of primary female respondent
Age
Can read and write (0/1)
Married (0/1)
Not first wife (0/1)
Leader in the village (0/1)
Involved in a ROSCA (0/1)
Held savings other than in tontine (0/1)
Took a loan in past year (0/1)
Had a business (0/1)
Owned livestock (0/1)
Index of intra-household decision making power
Index of community action
Social integration index (0/1)
Patient (0/1)
Time inconsistent (0/1)
Observations

33.73
0.13
0.95
0.15
0.15
0.20
0.42
0.31
0.44
0.50
0.05
-0.08
-0.05
0.36
0.08

36.68
0.14
0.95
0.15
0.22
0.29
0.41
0.40
0.56
0.51
0.14
0.22
0.20
0.36
0.11

1,384

839

***

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

(0.60)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.02)
(0.01)

1 Means are presented in columns (1) and (2). Columns (3) and (4) show the statistical significance between columns
(1) and (2) using a regression which also includes commune fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the village
level.

Table 4A: Impacts on financial management - savings (Female respondent)
Member of any
savings groups
(0/1)
(1)
Village Offered SfC

0.049

Total savings
amount ($)

(2)
***

3.654

Savings amount Savings amount
in ASCAs ($)
at home ($)

(3)
***

3.213

***

Savings amount
in formal
institutions ($)

(4)

(5)

1.497

-1.104

Net savings
($)

(6)
**

3.372

Member of an
Member of SfC
ASCA/ROSCA
(0/1)
not SfC (0/1)
(7)

**

0.246

(8)
***

-0.197

(0.016)

(1.321)

(0.840)

(0.920)

(0.561)

(1.508)

(0.017)

(0.019)

0.76

11.96

2.31

7.23

1.23

4.06

0.06

0.70

SD control

0.43

54.60

25.10

35.44

30.04

62.65

0.24

0.46

Obs.

5437

5437

5262

5432

5435

5437

5437

5437

Mean control

Notes
1 The specification in all columns includes commune fixed effects, the lagged (baseline) dependent variable, and controls used in the re-randomization routine
(number of households in the village, distance to paved road, distance to market, availability of electricity and the presence of formal credit, schools, a health
center and ROSCAs). Standard errors are clustered at the level of the village.
2 The variable net savings in column 6 is calculated as total savings minus outstanding loans.

***

Table 4B: Impacts on financial management - loans (Female respondent)
Received a loan Total amount
(last 12 months, borrowed (last
0/1)
12 months, $)
(1)

Took a loan
from saving
groups (0/1)

(2)

(3)

1.330

0.124

(0.016)

(1.228)

(0.014)

0.56

13.42

0.10

SD control

0.50

46.63

0.30

Obs.

5435

5383

5435

Village Offered SfC
Mean control

0.033

**

Took a loan
from
family/friends
(0/1)
(4)

***

Took a loan
from formal
sources (0/1)

Amount
borrowed from
saving groups
($)

(5)

(6)

-0.002

3.831

(0.016)

(0.004)

(0.528)

0.42

0.02

2.29

0.49

0.14

10.95

5435

5435

5436

-0.044

***

***

Notes
1 The specification in all columns includes commune fixed effects, the lagged (baseline) dependent variable, and controls used in the rerandomization routine (number of households in the village, distance to paved road, distance to market, availability of electricity and the
presence of formal credit, schools, a health center and ROSCAs). Standard errors are clustered at the level of the village.

Table 5: Impacts on economic activities and food security
Female respondent

Household
Value of
agricultural
output ($)
(1)
Village Offered SfC

Value of
agricultural
output ($)
(3)

Value of
livestock ($)
(2)

6.41

119.94

***

5.93

Profits from
business ($)

**

Household
Monthly non-food
Weekly food
expenses: PAE ($) consumption: PAE
($)

(4)

(5)

(6)

5.13

-0.04

0.13

FFH food
insecurity index
(0/1)
(7)

*

-0.039

(14.68)

(41.33)

(2.37)

(3.82)

(0.11)

(0.07)

(0.02)

Mean control

270.45

895.78

25.88

41.20

2.85

3.89

0.43

SD control

528.11

1,421.73

67.01

114.43

4.43

2.50

0.50

Obs.

5,572

5,572

8,379

8,458

5,555

5,535

5,428

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.
2 Column (4) is self-reported profits from small businsses from primary female respondents.
3 PAE stands for per adult equivalent.
4 Monthly non-food expenditure includes expenses on non-durable household assets, transport and communication, energy and tobacco.
5 FFH food insecurity index equals 1 if the household was considered chronically food insecure.

**

Table 6: Weekly food consumption per adult equivalency (highfrequency sample)
Treatment

-0.26
(0.23)

Lean season

-0.36

***

(0.11)
Treatment*lean season

0.36

**

(0.15)
Year 2011

0.05
(0.07)

Year 2012

-0.29

*

(0.17)
Constant

1.67

***

(0.22)
Obs.

1,936

Notes
1 Lean season is defined as months June through September,
between planting and harvest.
2 The estimates are from a household random effects specification
which also includes an indicator for whether the household was
interviewed every 3 months or every 2 weeks. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level.

Table 7: Impacts on secondary outcomes
Health
index

Education
index

Housing
index

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.0008

0.02

0.06

(0.03)

(0.02)

Mean control

0.00

SD control
Obs.

Village Offered SfC

Community
action index

Social
integration
index

Female Respondent
IntraHH
Timedecision
inconsistent
making power
index

Patient

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.03

0.02

0.02

-0.003

0.022

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.007)

(0.012)

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.07

0.19

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.26

0.39

5,579

17,814

5,566

5,425

5,421

5,425

5,375

5,375

**

*

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.
2 Health index includes: At least one member of the HH experienced serious illness last month and could not work during more than 7 days (0/1); At least one

member of the HH consulted a health center last month (0/1); Total HH health expenditures last month ($); Financing health expenses by sale of assets (0/1);
Financing health expenses by loan from savings group (0/1); Financing health expenses by loan from other source (0/1).
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

Education index includes: Male child between 6 and 12 years old is enrolled in school (0/1); Female child between 6 and 12 years old is enrolled in school
(0/1); Male child between 13 and 18 years old is enrolled in school (0/1); Female child between 13 and 18 years old is enrolled in school (0/1); Educational
expenses last 12 months ($).
Housing index includes: Hard roof (0/1); Hard walls (0/1); Hard floor (0/1); Access to water in the house (0/1); Electric lighting (0/1); Toilet/latrines (0/1);
Use of coal or gas for cooking (0/1).
Community Action index includes: Talked to village chief in past year (0/1); Participated in a village meeting in past year (0/1); Spoke at a village meeting in
past year (0/1); Voted in last elections (0/1).
Social integration index includes: Would ask other woman in sample for money (0/1); Would give money to other woman in sample (0/1); Go to market with
other woman in sample (0/1).
IntraHH decision making includes: Free to decide about food expenses (0/1); Free to decide about educational expenses (0/1); Free to take decisions about
business (0/1) .
Time-inconsistent is equal to 1 if the respondent was patient during first test but not patient during second test.
Time preference is equal to 1 if the respondent was patient.

Table 8: Treatment effects in organic vs structured replication villages

Treatment effect in
organic villages (1)
Treatment effect in
structured villages (2)
p-value (1)=(2)

Member of
SfC (0/1)

Total
Savings
Amount
($)

Received a
loan (last 12
months, 0/1)

Net saving
($)

Value of
agriculture
output ($)

Total value
of livestock
($)

Housing
index

Consumption
per adult
equivalent total ($)

FFH food
insecurity
index (0/1)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

2.08

0.02

3.24

14.28

89.55

0.02

0.06

-0.01

(18.91)

(48.95)

-1.46

150.35

0.21

***

(0.02)
0.28

(1.42)
***

(0.02)
0.01

**

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.

5.21

(0.02)
***

0.04

(2.39)
**

4.43

*

*

(0.04)
***

0.10

(1.83)

(0.02)

(2.67)

(18.54)

(57.09)

(0.04)

0.11

0.45

0.70

0.50

0.37

0.08

(0.10)
***

*

0.20

(0.02)
**

-0.06

(0.10)

(0.02)

0.26

0.08

***

*

Table A1: Characteristics and uses of SfC
Contributions
Number of months since respondent joined SfC group
SfC weekly contributions ($)
Share-outs
Ever received a share-out (0/1)
Number of share-outs
Most recent share amount ($)
Share-out uses (0/1)
Food
Education
Livestock
Agriculture spending
Business
House repairs
Health
Loans
Received at least one loan from SfC (0/1)*
Received at least one loan from SfC in last12 mths (0/1)
Number of loans (last 12 mths)
Loan amount ($)
Interest payment ($)
Loan uses (0/1)
Food
Education
Livestock
Agriculture spending
Business
House repairs
Health

Mean

Obs.

23.68
0.48

813
839

0.83
1.68
30.64

844
844
685

0.47
0.01
0.12
0.06
0.23
0.06
0.04

696
696
696
696
696
696
696

0.83
0.43
0.59
20.39
2.82

844
853
853
368
361

0.38
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.42
0.05
0.06

356
356
356
356
356
356
356

* Since first participation in SfC.
Sample includes only individuals who identified themselves as SfC members.

Table A2: Balance check using baseline survey data
Full sample

High Frequency Sample

Mean Control

Diff:
C-T

p-value

N

Mean Control

Diff:
C-T

p-value

N

Index of financial management
Member of a tontine (0/1)1
Total Savings Amount ($)
Received a loan (12 mths, 0/1)
Gave a loan (12 mths, 0/1)
B. Economic activities

0.00
0.22
7.77
0.35
0.29

0.01
0.01
-0.29
-0.01
0.01

0.89
0.58
0.71
0.47
0.49

5,963
5,958
5,954
5,940
5,942

-0.02
0.20
6.21
0.39
0.27

0.02
-0.02
0.73
-0.01
0.05

0.80
0.52
0.70
0.73
0.18

687
687
686
683
683

Index of economic activity

0.00

0.00

0.97

5,989

-0.04

0.08

0.37

689

0.48
0.05

0.02
0.00

0.42
0.88

5,987
5,989

0.49
0.05

-0.01
0.03

0.91
0.11

688
689

27.14
246.13
769.53

-3.21
-4.25
5.92

0.20
0.77
0.88

5,989
5,988
5,989

24.19
243.20
685.14

3.37
-13.02
94.25

0.65
0.75
0.36

689
689
689

2.72

0.06

0.35

5,954

3.00

-0.15

0.36

688

Shock index
Resorted to costly strategy to cope with shock (0/1)
Household experienced shock with big impact (0/1)
FFH food insecurity index (0/1)
E. Health and education

0.00
0.18
0.42
0.40

-0.04
-0.01
-0.02
0.00

0.30
0.29
0.30
0.76

5,989
5,966
5,964
5,956

0.02
0.21
0.42
0.39

0.10
0.01
0.03
0.05

0.27
0.69
0.45
0.20

689
689
689
683

Health and education index

0.00

-0.04

0.31

5,989

0.04

-0.04

0.67

689

Health expenditures - past 30 days ($)
Educational expenses - past year ($)
Primary school enrollment (0/1)
F. Empowerment and social capital

5.39
18.34
0.51

-0.54
-0.80
0.00

0.10
0.56
0.94

5,974
5,985
3,884

6.01
17.59
0.52

-0.17
-0.79
-0.02

0.88
0.76
0.65

686
689
456

Social index
Index of intra-household decision making power
Index of community action
Social integration index (0-1)

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.05
0.06
0.01
0.02

0.27
0.09
0.73
0.68

5,975
5,972
5,962
5,952

0.01
0.04
0.01
-0.03

-0.02
-0.04
-0.03
0.03

0.81
0.62
0.69
0.80

688
687
686
686

Index of village remoteness
Village population
Distance to closest tarmac road (km)
Number of months reachable by truck
Presence of a primary school (0/1)
Presence of a health center (0/1)

0.00
1019
22.56
8.73
0.71
0.21

-0.10
-6.83
1.82
-0.33
0.00
-0.03

0.28
0.94
0.35
0.22
0.97
0.48

5,991
5,788
5,883
5,859
5,919
5,967

0.29
1033
15.29
9.56
0.65
0.32

-0.24
-87.54
0.42
-0.64
0.00
-0.12

0.20
0.58
0.90
0.22
0.96
0.15

689
662
667
677
685
689

F-test for joint equality of means of indices

0.61

A. Financial management
Female primary respondent

Female primary respondent

Has business (0/1)
Engaged in paid labor (0/1)
Household

Total input expenses for agriculture ($)
Value of agriculture output ($)
Total value of livestock ($)
C. Consumption
Weekly food consumption per adult equivalent - total
($)
D. Shocks and food security

Household

G. Village Characteristics

0.70

Standard errors are clustered at the village level. Also included in all specifications are dummy variables for a independent variable
which has a missing value (where the main variable then has a value of -9).

Table A3: Attrition tests
Full sample
Coeff
(s.e.)
Treatment
Treatment*Index of financial management
Treatment*Index of economic activity
Treatment*Food cons. per adult eq. - total ($)
Treatment*Shock index
Treatment*Health and education index
Treatment*Social index
Treatment*Index of village remoteness
F-test for joint significance of treatment and treatment
interaction coefficients
Notes

0.013
(0.007)

High-frequency sample

Coeff
(s.e.)
*

0.029
(0.013)
0.015
(0.009)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.006
(0.004)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.27

**
*

Coeff
(s.e.)

Coeff
(s.e.)

0.010
(0.024)

-0.024
(0.052)
0.018
(0.034)
-0.032
(0.030)
0.010
(0.016)
0.025
(0.023)
-0.008
(0.033)
0.038
(0.029)
0.030
(0.031)
0.59

1 Standard errors are clustered at the village level. Also included in all specifications are dummy variables for a independent variable which
has a missing value (where the main variable then has a value of -9).

Table A4A: Impacts on Agricultural Activities
Female respondent

Household

Cultivates
(0/1)

Total
input
expenses
($)

Land
size

Men's
unpaid
labor

Women's
unpaid
labor

Value
of sales
($)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.02

-0.10

0.044

0.82

0.56

1.97

(0.01)

(0.43)

(0.027)

(0.50)

(1.06)

Mean control

0.41

4.00

0.30

4.25

SD control

0.49

17.46

1.03

Obs.

8,604

8,598

8,602

Village Offered
SfC

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.

Cultivate
(0/1)

Total
input
expenses
($)

Land
size

Men's
unpaid
labor

Women's
unpaid
labor

Value
of sales
($)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.002

4.49

0.09

2.26

1.90

0.83

0.00

(0.014)

(3.79)

(0.10)

(5.11)

(3.93)

(5.32)

14.94

6.95

0.71

41.75

2.27

77.68

62.62

67.59

20.50

32.46

25.79

0.46

117.62

3.79

160.70

118.51

187.39

8,586

8,547

8,429

5,574

5,574

5,569

5,574

5,574

5,574

**

Table A4B: Impacts on Household Livestock (detailed)
Holds
livestock
(0/1)

Total value of
livestock ($,
trimmed)

Value of
male cows
($)

Value of
female
cows ($)

Value of
goats ($)

Value of
sheep ($)

Value of
poultry ($)

Village Offered SfC

(1)
0.01
(0.01)

(2)
87.71
(32.815)

(3)
49.73
(20.64)

(4)
22.76
(15.18)

(5)
11.47
(4.57)

(6)
12.282
(4.698)

(7)
1.23
(1.08)

Mean control
SD control
Obs.

0.88
0.32
5,572

819.22
1,147.62
5,517

123.89
541.95
5,572

104.30
154.87
5,572

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.

***

373.39
738.70
5,572

**

**

96.17
167.12
5,572

***

23.16
33.80
5,572

Total
expenditures
on animal
care ($)
(8)
6.22
*
(3.38)
43.05
111.54
5,572

Table A4C: Impacts on Women's Businesses (detailed)

Village Offered
SfC
Mean control
SD control
Obs.

Has business
(0/1)

Profits
(calculated)
($)

Expenses ($)

Sales ($)

(1)
0.018
(0.013)

(2)
-0.33
(2.35)

(3)
35.66
(20.77)

(4)
38.56
(22.75)

0.43
0.49
8,595

36.71
83.79
8,306

131.04
500.80
8,501

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.

*

176.47
593.70
8,464

*

Table A5: Impacts on Health and Education (detailed)
Household

Village Offered
SfC
Mean control
SD control
Obs.

All household members

Health
expenditures
($)

Financing
health
expenses sale of
assets (0/1)

Financing
health
expenses loan from
saving
groups (0/1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Financing
health
expenses loan from
other
sources
(0/1)
(6)

-0.001
(0.009)

0.004
(0.02)

0.21
(0.38)

-0.01
(0.01)

0.0002
(0.0006)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.50
(0.28)

0.15
0.35
5,547

0.45
0.50
4,824

6.35
12.70
5,570

0.30
0.46
5,570

0.00
0.02
5,570

0.01
0.10
5,570

0.40
0.49
5,559

0.36
0.48
3,144

0.48
0.50
5,448

0.43
0.50
3,663

6.06
13.64
17,639

Experienced
serious
illness (0/1)

Consulted
health
center (if
sickness,
0/1)

(1)

Notes
1 Additional controls are as listed in Table 4a.
2 Outcome(s): The dependent variables in columns (1) to (6) refer to last 30 days.

Boys

Girls
Primary
school
enrollment
(0/1)

Secondary
school
enrollment
(0/1)

Primary
school
enrollment
(0/1)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Secondary
school
Educational
enrollment expenses ($)
(0/1)

*

