NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HIGH MARGINAL TAX RATES ON THE TOP 1%? LESSONS FROM A LIFE CYCLE
MODEL WITH IDIOSYNCRATIC INCOME RISK
Fabian Kindermann
Dirk Krueger
Working Paper 20601
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20601

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We thank seminar participants at USC, the Wharton Macro Lunch, the 2014 Macro Tax conference
in Montreal, the 4th SEEK Conference in Mannheim, the 2014 SED in Toronto and the 2014 NBER
Summer Institute, as well as Juan Carlos Conesa and William Peterman for many useful comments.
Krueger thanks the National Science Foundation for support under grant SES 1123547. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Fabian Kindermann and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%? Lessons from a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic
Income Risk
Fabian Kindermann and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 20601
October 2014
JEL No. E62,H21,H24
ABSTRACT
In this paper we argue that very high marginal labor income tax rates are an effective tool for social
insurance even when households have preferences with high labor supply elasticity, make dynamic
savings decisions, and policies have general equilibrium effects. To make this point we construct a
large scale Overlapping Generations Model with uninsurable labor productivity risk, show that it has
a wealth distribution that matches the data well, and then use it to characterize fiscal policies that achieve
a desired degree of redistribution in society. We find that marginal tax rates on the top 1% of the earnings
distribution of close to 90% are optimal. We document that this result is robust to plausible variation
in the labor supply elasticity and holds regardless of whether social welfare is measured at the steady
state only or includes transitional generations.

Fabian Kindermann
University of Bonn
Institute for Macroeconomics and Econometrics
Adenauerallee 24-42
53113 Bonn, Germany
fabian.kindermann@uni-bonn.de
Dirk Krueger
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

In the last 40 years labor earnings, market income and wealth inequality have increased
substantially in the U.S. at the top end of the distribution. For example, Alvaredo
et al. (2013) report that the share of total household income accruing to the top 1%
income earners was about 10% in the early 1970’s and exceeded 20% in 2007. At the
same time the highest marginal tax rate declined from levels consistently above 60%
to below 40%. This triggered popular and academic calls to raise marginal income tax
rates at the top of the distribution, with the explicit objective of reversing the trend
of increasing economic inequality, see e.g. Diamond and Saez (2011), Piketty (2014),
Reich (2010), but also the Occupy Wall Street movement.
However, reducing inequality is not necessarily an objective in and of itself for a benevolent government. In this paper we ask what is the welfare-maximizing labor income
tax rate on the top 1% earners, where welfare is measured as the weighted sum of expected lifetime utility of households currently alive and born in the future.1 We are
especially interested in the question whether high marginal tax rates of the size advocated in the literature cited above can be rationalized on these normative grounds.
To answer this question we construct a quantitative overlapping generations economy
with ex-ante skill and thus earnings potential heterogeneity, idiosyncratic wage risk
and endogenous labor supply and savings choices. We follow Castaneda et al. (2003)
and assure, via an appropriate calibration of the labor productivity process, that the
model delivers an empirically plausible earnings and wealth distribution (relative to
the evidence from the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances), including at the very top
end of the distribution. Therefore in the model the top 1% look exactly as in the data,
at least with respect to their key economic characteristics.
We then use the calibrated version of the model to quantitatively determine the answer to the question above. To do so we compute, within a restricted class of income
tax functions which has as one of the policy choice variables the marginal tax rate
applying to the top 1%, the optimal one-time tax reform, which in turn induces an economic transition from the current status quo2 towards a new stationary equilibrium.
We find that the optimal marginal tax rates on the top 1% of earners is indeed very
high, in excess of 90%, and thus consistent with the empirically observed levels after
World War II. Note that since we explicitly consider the transition periods in our policy analysis, our results capture both short- and long-run consequences of the policy
reforms we consider. Interestingly, even when including welfare of current and future
top 1% earners in the social welfare function, and even when restricting attention only
to the long-run consequences of the policy reform (by adopting a steady state welfare
measure) we find very high optimal marginal tax rates, in the order of about 90%.
1

We alternatively include or exclude households in the top 1% in our measure of social welfare; as it
turns out, the differences in results is quantitatively small.

2

Which we take to be a stylized version of the current U.S. personal income tax code.

2

We then show that these results are primarily driven by the social insurance benefits
that these high taxes imply. Concretely, in order to match the very high concentration
of labor earnings and wealth in the data, our model requires that households, with
low probability, have the opportunity to work for very high wages (think of attractive
entrepreneurial, entertainment or professional sports opportunities). The labor supply
of these households is not prohibitively strongly affected even by very high marginal
tax rates even with a utility function with high Frisch labor supply elasticity, since it
is these periods of high labor productivity that households earn the majority of their
lifetime income from. From the perspective of implementing social insurance against
idiosyncratic labor productivity risk via the income tax code it is then optimal to tax
these incomes at a very high rate.

1.1

Related Literature

The basic point of departure for this paper is the static literature on optimal taxation
of labor income, starting from Mirrlees (1971), Diamond (1998) and Saez (2001). Diamond and Saez (2011) discuss the practical implications of this literature and provide
a concrete policy recommendation that advocates for taxing labor earnings at the high
end of the distribution at very high marginal rates, in excess of 75%. On the empirical
side the literature that motivates our analysis in the first place includes the papers by
Piketty and Saez (2003) and Alvaredo et al. (2013) who document an increasing concentration of labor earnings and income at the top end of the distribution, and argue
that this trend coincides with a reduction of marginal tax rates for top income earners.
Their work thus provides the empirical underpinning for the policy recommendation
by Diamond and Saez (2011) of increasing top marginal income tax rates substantially.
Methodologically, our paper is most closely related to the quantitative dynamic (optimal) taxation literature. Important examples include Domeij and Heathcote (2004),
Conesa and Krueger (2006), Conesa et al. (2009), Bakis et al. (2013) and Fehr and
Kindermann (2014). A subset of this literature (see e.g. Guner, Lopez-Daneri and Ventura, 2014, or Holter, Krueger and Stepanchuk, 2014) characterizes the relationship
between tax rates and tax revenues (that is, the Laffer curve). In this paper we show
that although the welfare-optimal top marginal tax rate is smaller than the revenuemaximizing rate (from the top 1%), it is quantitatively close.3
Especially relevant for our work is the complementary paper by Badel and Huggett
3

We study optimal progressive labor income taxes, thereby sidestepping the question whether capital
income taxation is a useful redistributive policy tool. The benchmark result by Chamley (1986) and
especially Judd (1985) suggests that positive capital income taxation is suboptimal, at least in the long
run, even if the social welfare function places all the weight on households not owning capital. The
ensuing theoretical literature on using capital income taxes for redistribution and social insurance
includes Bassetto (1999), Vogelgesang (2000) and Jacobs and Schindler (2012). Also relevant for our
study is the theoretical literature on optimal taxation over the life cycle, e.g. Erosa and Gervais (2002).

3

(2014). These authors study a dynamic economy with endogenous human capital accumulation to quantify the effects of high marginal income tax rates on the aggregate
level of economic activity as well as the distribution of wages (which is endogenous
in their model, due to the human capital accumulation decision of households) and
household incomes. They stress the negative long run effect of top marginal tax rates
on human capital accumulation and conclude that revenue-maximizing tax rates are
significantly smaller than the one we find (and not far away from the currently prevalent ones in the U.S.). Also complementary to our work is Brüggemann and Yoo (2014)
who study the aggregate and distributional steady state consequences of an increase in
the top marginal tax rate from the status quo to 70%, and consistent with our findings,
report substantial adverse aggregate and large positive distributional consequences,
resulting in net welfare gains from the policy reform they study.
Finally, for our quantitative analysis to be credible it is crucial for the model to deliver
an empirically plausible earnings and wealth distribution, at the low and especially
at the right tail of the distribution. We therefore build on the literature studying the
mechanisms to generate sufficient wealth concentration in dynamic general equilibrium model, especially Castaneda et al. (2003), but also Quadrini (1997), Krusell and
Smith (1998) as well as Cagetti and DeNardi (2006).

2

The Model

We study a standard large-scale overlapping generations model in the spirit of Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), but augmented by exogenous ex-ante heterogeneity across
households by education levels as well as ex-post heterogeneity due to uninsurable
idiosyncratic labor productivity and thus wage risk, as in Conesa, Kitao and Krueger
(2009). Given the focus of the paper it is especially important that the endogenous
earnings and wealth distributions predicted by the model well approximate their empirical counterparts, both at the low and the high end of the distribution.
In order to highlight the key ingredients of the model in its most transparent way for
a given government policy we first set out the model using recursive language and
define a stationary recursive competitive equilibrium. We then turn to a description of
the potential policy reforms and the transition dynamics induced by it.

2.1

Technology

The single good in this economy is produced by a continuum of representative, competitive firms that hire capital and labor on competitive spot markets to operate the
constant returns to scale technology
Y = ΩK e L1−e ,
4

(1)

where Ω ≥ 0 parametrizes the level of technology and the parameter e ∈ [0, 1] measures the elasticity of output with respect to capital. Capital depreciates at rate δk in
every period. Given our assumptions of perfect competition in all markets and constant returns to scale production technologies the number of operative firms as well as
their size is indeterminate and without loss of generality we can assume the existence
of a representative, competitively behaving firm producing according to the aggregate
production function (1).

2.2

Preferences and Endowments

Households in this economy are finitely lived, with maximal life span given by J and
generic age denoted by j. In each period a new age cohort is born whose size is 1 + n as
large as the previous cohort, so that n is the constant and exogenous population growth
rate. We denote by ψj+1 the conditional probability of survival of each household from
age j to age j + 1. At age jr < J households become unproductive and thus retire after
age jr .
Households have preferences defined over stochastic streams of consumption and labor {c j , n j } determined by the period utility function
U ( c j , n j ),
and the time discount factor β and are expected utility maximizers (with respect to
longevity risk and with respect to idiosyncratic wage risk described below).
Households are ex-ante heterogeneous with respect to the education they have acquired, a process we do not model endogenously. Let s ∈ {n, c} denote the education level of the household, with s = c denoting some college education and s = n
representing (less than or equal) high school education. The fraction of college educated households is exogenously given by φs . In addition, prior to labor market entry
households draw a fixed effect4 α from an education-specific distribution φs (α).
The wage a household faces in the labor market is given by
w · e( j, s, α, η )
where w is the aggregate wage per labor efficiency unit and e( j, s, α, η ) captures idiosyncratic wage variation that is a function of the age, education status and fixed
effect of the household as well as a random component η that follows an education
specific first order Markov chain with states η ∈ Es and transition matrix πs (η 0 |η ).
4

Both education and the fixed effect will shift life cycle wage profiles in a deterministic fashion in the
model, so we could have combined them into a single fixed effect. However, when mapping the
model to wage data it is more transparent to distinguish between the two components impacting the
deterministic part of wages. In addition, education affects the mean age profile of labor productivity
and variance of shock to it, whereas the fixed effect has no impact on these two features of the model.

5

Idiosyncratic wage risk (determined by the process for η) and mortality risk (parameterized by the survival probabilities ψj ) cannot be explicitly insured as markets are
incomplete as in Bewley (1986), Huggett (1993) or Aiyagari (1994); however, households can self-insure against these risks by saving at a risk-free after-tax interest rate
rn = r (1 − τk ). In addition to saving a0 − a the household spends her income, composed of earnings we( j, s, α, η )n, capital income rn a and transfers b j (s, α, η )5 on consumption (1 + τc )c, including consumption taxes, and on paying labor income taxes
T (we( j, s, α, η )n) as well as payroll taxes Tss (we( j, s, α, η )n). Implicit in these formulations is that the consumption and capital income tax is assumed to be linear, whereas
the labor earnings tax is given by the potentially nonlinear (but continuously differentiable) function T (.).
The individual state variables of the household thus include ( j, s, α, η, a), the exogenous
age, education and idiosyncratic wage shock, as well as the endogenously chosen asset
position. For given (time-invariant) prices, taxes and transfers, the dynamic programming problem of the household then reads as
v( j, s, α, η, a) = max U (c, n) + βψj+1 ∑ πs (η 0 |η )v( j + 1, s, α, η 0 , a0 )
c,n,a0

(2)

η0

subject to

(1 + τc )c + a0 + T (we( j, s, α, η )n) + Tss (we( j, s, α, η )n)
= (1 + rn ) a + b j (s, η ) + we( j, s, α, η )n

(3)

and subject to a tight borrowing limit α0 ≥ 0. The result of this dynamic programming problem is a value function v and policy functions c, n, a0 as functions of the state
( j, s, α, η, a) of a household.

2.3

Government Policy

The government uses tax revenues from labor earnings, capital income and consumption taxes to finance an exogenously given stream of government expenditures G and
the interest payments on government debt B. In addition it runs a balanced-budget
pay-as you go social security (and medicare program). Finally it collects accidental
bequests and redistributes them among the surviving population in a lump-sum fashion. Since the population is growing at a constant rate n in this economy ( G, B) should
be interpreted as per capita variables since these are constant in a stationary recursive
competitive equilibrium.
5

Transfers include social security for those that are retired as well as accidental bequests for all working households.

6

Letting by Φ denote the cross-sectional distribution6 of households (constant in a stationary equilibrium), the budget constraint of the government in a stationary recursive
competitive equilibrium with population growth reads as
rτk

Z

0

a ( j, s, α, η, a)dΦ + τc

Z

c( j, s, α, η, a)dΦ +

Z

T (we( j, s, α, η )n( j, s, α, η, a))dΦ

= G + (r − n ) B

(4)

In addition, the PAYGO social security system is characterized by a payroll tax rate
τss , an earnings threshold ȳss only below which households pay social security taxes,
and benefits p(s, α, η ) that depend on the last realization of the persistent wage shock η
of working age7 as well as education s and the fixed effect α (which in turn determine
expected wages over the life cycle). Thus (τss , ȳss ) completely determine the payroll tax
function Tss . The specific form of the function p(s, α, η ) is discussed in the calibration
section.
The budget constraint of the social security system then reads as
Z

p(s, α, η ) · 1{ j> jr } dΦ = τss

Z

min{ȳss , we( j, s, α, η )n( j, s, α, η, a))}dΦ.

(5)

Finally, we assume that accidental bequests are lump-sum redistributed among the
surviving working age population, and thus
R
(1 + r n )(1 − ψj+1 ) a0 ( j, s, α, η, a)dΦ
R
Tr =
.
(6)
1{ j≤ jr } dΦ
so that transfers received by households are given as
(
Tr
if j ≤ jr
b( j, s, α, η ) =
p(s, α, η ) if j > jr

2.4

(7)

Recursive Competitive Equilibrium (RCE)

Definition 1 Given government expenditures G, government debt B, a tax system characterized by (τc , τk , T ) and a social security system characterized by (τss , ȳss ), a stationary recursive
competitive equilibrium with population growth is a collection of value and policy functions
(v, c, n, a0 ) for the household, optimal input choices (K, L) of firms, transfers b prices (r, w)
and an invariant probability measure Φ
6

Formally, and given our notation, Φ is a measure and the total mass of households of age j = 1 is
normalized to 1.

7

This formulation has the advantage that we can capture the feature of the actual system that social
security benefits are increasing in earnings during working age, without adding an additional continuous state variable (such as average earnings during the working age). Since benefits depend on
the exogenous η rather than endogenous labor earnings, under our specification households do not
have an incentive to increase labor supply in their last working period to boost pension payments.

7

1. [Household maximization]: Given prices (r, w), transfers b j given by (7) and government policies (τc , τk , T, τss , ȳss ), the value function v satisfies the Bellman equation (2),
and (c, n, a0 ) are the associated policy functions.
2. [Firm maximization]: Given prices (r, w), the optimal choices of the representative firm
satisfy
 1− e
L
r = Ωe ·
− δk
K
 e
K
w = Ω (1 − e )
.
L
3. [Government Budget Constraints]: Government policies satisfy the government budget
constraints (4) and (5).
4. [Market clearing]:
(a) The labor market clears:
L=

Z

e( j, s, α, η )n( j, s, α, η, a)dΦ

(b) The capital market clears

(1 + n)(K + B) =

Z

a0 ( j, s, α, η, a)dΦ

(c) The goods market clears
Y=

Z

c( j, s, α, η, a)dΦ + (n + δ)K + G

5. [Consistency of Probability Measure Φ]: The invariant probability measure is consistent
with the population structure of the economy, with the exogenous processes πs , and the
household policy function a0 (.). A formal definition is provided in Appendix B.

2.5

Transition Paths

Our thought experiments will involve unexpected changes in government tax policy
that will induce the economy to undergo a deterministic transition path from the initial benchmark stationary recursive competitive equilibrium to a final RCE associated
with the new long-run policy. At any point of time the aggregate economy is characterized by a cross-sectional probability measure Φt over household types. The household
value functions, policy functions, prices, policies and transfers are now also indexed
by time, and the key equilibrium conditions, the government budget constraint and
the capital market clearing conditions now read as
G + (1 + rt ) Bt =(1 + n) Bt+1 + rt τk (Kt + Bt ) + τc
8

Z

ct ( j, s, α, η, a)dΦt

+

Z

Tt (wt e( j, s, α, η )nt ( j, s, α, η, a))dΦt

and

(1 + n)(Kt+1 + Bt+1 ) =

Z

a0t ( j, s, α, η, a)dΦt

Note that, in line with the policy experiments conducted below, the labor earnings tax
function Tt and government debt are now permitted to be functions of time t. For a
complete formal definition of a dynamic equilibrium with time varying policies in an
economy very close to ours, see e.g. Conesa, Kitao and Krueger (2009).

3

Mapping the Model into Data

Conceptually, we proceed in two steps when we map the initial stationary equilibrium
of our model into U.S. data. We first choose a subset of the parameters based on modelexogenous information. Then we calibrate the remaining parameters such that the
initial stationary equilibrium is consistent with selected aggregate and distributional
statistics of the U.S. economy. Even though it is understood that all model parameters
impact all equilibrium entities, the discussion below associates those parameters to
specific empirical targets that, in the model, impact the corresponding model statistics
most significantly.
Most of the calibration is fairly standard for quantitative OLG models with idiosyncratic risk. However, given the purpose of the paper it is important that the modelgenerated cross-sectional earnings and wealth distribution is characterized by the same
concentration as in the data, especially at the top of the earnings and wealth distribution. Broadly, we follow Castaneda et al. (2003) and augment fairly standard stochastic wage processes derived from the PSID with labor productivity states that occur
with low probability, but induce persistently large earnings when they occur. This allows the model to match the high earnings concentration and the even higher wealth
concentration at the top of the distribution. On the other hand, the explicit life cycle
structure, including a fully articulated social security system, permits us to generate
a distribution of earnings and wealth at the bottom and the middle that matches the
data quite well.

3.1

Demographics

We set the population growth rate at n = 1.1%, the long run average value for the U.S.
Data on survival probabilities from the Human Mortality Database for the US in 2010
is used to determine the age-dependent survival probabilities {ψj }.

9

3.2

Technology

The production side of the model is characterized by the three parameters (Ω, e, δk ).
We set the capital share in production to e = 0.33 and normalize the level of technology Ω such that the equilibrium wage rate per efficiency unit of labor is w = 1. The
depreciation rate on capital δk is set such that the initial equilibrium interest rate in the
economy is r = 4%; this requires an annual depreciation rate of δk = 7.6%.

3.3
3.3.1

Endowments and Preferences
Labor Productivity

In every period a household is endowed with one unit of time which can be used for
leisure and market work. One unit of work time yields a wage we( j, s, α, η ), where
e( j, s, α, η ) is the idiosyncratic labor productivity (and thus the idiosyncratic component of the wage) of the household which depends on the age j education s and the
fixed effect α of the household as well as its idiosyncratic shock η.
We assume that η ∈ Es can take on 7 (education-specific) values; we associate an η ∈
{ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,5 } with “normal” labor earnings observed in household data sets such as
the PSID, and reserve {ηs,6 , ηs,7 } for the very high labor productivity and thus earnings
realizations observed at the top of the cross-sectional distribution, but not captured by
any observations in the PSID. We then specify log-wages as
(
α + ε j,s + η if η ∈ {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,6 }
ln e( j, s, α, η ) =
η
if η = ηs,7
That is, as long as the labor productivity shock η ∈ {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,6 }, idiosyncratic wages
are (in logs) the sum of the fixed effect α that is constant over the life cycle, an educationspecific age-wage profile ε j,s and the random component η, as is fairly standard in
quantitative life cycle models with idiosyncratic risk (see e.g. Conesa et al., 2009). On
the other hand, if a household becomes highly productive, η = ηs,7 , wages are independent of education and the fixed effect. We think of these states as representing,
in a reduced form, successful entrepreneurial or artistic opportunities that yield very
high earnings and that are independent of the education level and fixed effect of the
household.8
Given these assumptions we need to specify the seven states of Markov chain {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,7 }
as well as the transition matrices πs ; in addition we need to determine the education8

Conceptually, nothing prevents us to specify
e( j, s, α, η ) = exp(α + ε j,s + η )
for η = η7 but it turns out that our chosen specification provides a better fit to the earnings and
wealth distributions.

10

specific distribution of the fixed effect φs (α) and the deterministic, education-specific
age-wage profile {ε j,s }. For the latter we use the direct estimates from the PSID by
Krueger and Ludwig (2013). Furthermore we assume that for each education group
s ∈ {n, c} the fixed effect α can take two values α ∈ {−σα,s , σα,s } with equal probability,
φs (−σα,s ) = φs (σα,s ) = 0.5. For the "normal" labor productivity states {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,5 }
we use a discretized (by the Rouwenhorst method) Markov chain of a continuous,
2 .
education-specific AR(1) process with persistence ρs and (conditional) variance ση,s
Thus the parameters governing this part of the labor productivity process are the
education-specific variances of the fixed effect, the AR(1) processes as well as their
2 , σ2 , ρ }, together with the share of households φ with a college edpersistences, {σα,s
s
η,s s
ucation. Table 1 summarizes our choices.

Table 1: Labor Productivity Process
ρs

2
ση,s

2
σα,s

φs

s=n

0.9850

0.0346

0.2061

0.59

s=c

0.9850

0.0180

0.1517

0.41

In order to account for very high earnings realizations we add to the Markov process
described above two more states {ηs,6 , ηs,7 }. We augment the 5 × 5 Markov transition
matrices πs = (πij,s ) as follows:


π11,s (1 − π16,s ) . . . π13,s (1 − π16,s ) . . . π15,s (1 − π16,s )
π16,s
0


..
..
..
..
..
..


.
.
.
.
.
.
0




πs = π51,s (1 − π56,s ) . . . π53,s (1 − π16,s ) . . . π55,s (1 − π56,s )
π56,s
0 




0
.
.
.
1
−
π
−
π
.
.
.
0
π
π
66,s
67,s
66,s
67,s 

0
...
0
...
0
1 − π77,s π77,s
and assume that π16,s = . . . = π56,s = π·6,s . Thus from each "normal" state {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,5 }
there is a (small) probability to climb to the high state ηs,6 . The highest state ηs,7 can
only be reached from state ηs,6 , and households at the highest state can only fall to
state ηs,6 . If wage productivity falls back to the "normal" range, it falls to ηs,3 with probability 1. The transition matrix above reflects these assumptions which will permit us
to match both the empirical earnings and wealth distribution (including at the top)
very accurately.9 In addition, we assume that ηn,7 = ηc,7 and π77,n = π77,c . This leaves
9

Recall that for the highest state wages are simply determined as w exp(η7 ) and thus do not depend
on the fixed effect α and the deterministic age profile; this formulation leads to a much better fit of
the age-earnings and age-asset distributions.

11

us with ten additional parameters characterizing the labor productivity process which
we summarize, including the empirical targets, in table 2. Appendix D gives the exact
values of the transition probabilities and states of the Markov chains.

Table 2: Earnings and Wealth Targets
Parameters

Targets

Prob. to high wage region (s = n)

π·6,n

95-99% Earnings

Prob. to high wage region (s = c)

π·6,c

99-100% Earnings

Persistence high shock (s = n)

π66,n

Share college in 95-99% Earnings

Persistence high shock (s = c)

π66,c

Share college in 99-100% Earnings

Prob. to highest wage (s = n)

π67,n

Gini Earnings

Prob. to highest wage (s = n)

π67,c

95-99% Wealth

Persistence highest shock

π77,n = π77,c

99-100% Wealth

High wage shock (s = n)

ηn,6

Share college in 95-99% Wealth

High wage shock (s = c)

ηc,6

Share college in 99-100% Wealth

Highest wage shock

ηn,7 = ηc,7

Gini Wealth

3.3.2

Preferences

We assume that the period utility function is given by
c 1− γ
n 1+ χ
−λ
1−γ
1+χ
We exogenously set risk aversion to γ = 2 and χ = 1.67 in order to obtain a Frisch
elasticity of labor supply of 1/χ = 0.6. The disutility of labor parameter λ is chosen
so that households spend, on average, one third of their time endowment on market
work. Finally, the time discount factor β is chosen such that the capital-output ratio in
the economy is equal to 2.9.
U (c, n) =

3.4

Government Policies

The two government policies we model explicitly are the tax system and the social
security system.10 The main focus of the paper is on the composition of the labor
earnings and the capital income tax schedule, as well as the progressivity of the former,
especially at the high end of the earnings distribution.
10

In addition the government collects and redistributes accidental bequests. This activity does not
require the specification of additional parameters, however.

12

3.4.1

The Tax System

We assume that the labor earnings tax function is characterized by the marginal tax
rate function T 0 (y) depicted in figure 1. It is thus characterized by two tax rates τl , τh
and two earnings thresholds ȳl , ȳh . Earnings below ȳl are not taxed, earnings above
ȳh are taxed at the highest marginal rate τh , and for earnings in the interval [ȳl , ȳh ]
marginal taxes increase linearly from τl to τh . This tax code strikes a balance between
approximating the current income tax code in the U.S., being parameterized by few
parameters and being continuously differentiable above the initial earnings threshold
ȳl , which is crucial for our computational algorithm. Varying τh permits us to control
the extent to which labor earnings at the top of the earnings distribution are taxed, and
changing ȳh controls at what income threshold the highest marginal tax rate sets in.
Furthermore, if an increase in τh is met by a reduction of the lowest positive marginal
tax rate τl (say, to restore government budget balance), the resulting new tax system is
more progressive than the original one.
For the initial equilibrium we choose the highest marginal tax rate τh = 39.6%, equal
to the current highest marginal income tax rate of the federal income tax code.11 That
tax rate applies to labor earnings in excess of 4 times average household income, or
ȳ2 = 4ȳ. Households below 35% of median income do not pay any taxes, ȳ1 = 0.35ymed
and we determine τl from budget balance in the initial stationary equilibrium, given
the other government policies discussed below.12 This requires τl = 12.2%, roughly
the midpoint of the two lowest marginal tax rates of the current U.S. federal income
tax code (10% and 15%). In the data the income thresholds at which the lowest and
highest marginal tax rates apply depend on the family structure and filing status of
the household. Krueger and Ludwig (2013) argue that the value of the tax exemption
and standard deduction constitute roughly 35% of median household income, fairly
independent of household composition.
The initial proportional capital income tax rate is set to τk = 28.3% and the consumption tax rate to τc = 5%. We choose exogenous government spending G such that it
constitutes 17% of GDP; outstanding government debt B is set such that the debt-toGDP ratio is 60% in the initial stationary equilibrium. These choices coincide with
those in Krueger and Ludwig (2013) who argue that these values reflect well U.S. policy prior to the great recession.
11

This value for the highest marginal tax rate is also close to the value assumed by Diamond and
Saez (2011) once taxes for Medicare are abstracted from (we interpret Medicare as part of the social
security system).

12

To interpret the upper income threshold ȳh , note that in the model about 2% of households in the
initial equilibrium have earnings that exceed this threshold.

13

Figure 1: Marginal Labor Income Tax Function

Marginal tax rate T’(y

tax

)

τh

τl

y

y

l

h

Taxable income y

3.4.2

tax

The Social Security System

We model the social security system as a flat labor earnings tax τss up to an earnings
threshold ȳss , together with a benefit formula that ties benefits to past earnings, but
without introducing an additional continuous state variable (such as average indexed
monthly earnings). Thus we compute, for every state (s, α, η ), average labor earnings
in the population for that state, ȳ(s, α, η ), and apply the actual progressive social security benefit formula f (y) to ȳ(s, α, η ). The social security benefit a household of type
(s, α) with shock η65 in the last period of her working life receives is then given by
p(s, α, η ) = f (ȳ(s, α, η = η65 )).
We discuss the details of the benefit formula in appendix D.

3.5

Calibration Summary

The following tables 3 and 4 summarize the choice of the remaining exogenously set
parameters as well as those endogenously calibrated within the model. The exogenously chosen parameters include policy parameters descibing current U.S. fiscal policy, as well as the capital share in production e and the preference parameters (γ, χ).
The choices for these paramters are standard relative to the literature, with the possible
exception of the Frisch labor supply elasticity 1/χ = 0.6, which is larger than the microeconomic estimates for white prime age males. However, it should be kept in mind

14

that we are modeling household labor supply, including the labor supply of the secondary earner. Note that this choice implies, ceteris paribus, strong disincentive effects
on labor supply from higher marginal tax rates at the top of the earnings distribution.

Table 3: Exogenously Chosen Parameters
Parameter

Value

Survival probabilities {ψj }

Target/Data
HMD 2010

Population growth rate n

1.1%

Capital share in production e

33%

Threshold positive taxation ȳl

35%

Top tax bracket ȳh

400%

Top marginal tax rate τh

39.6%

Consumption tax rate τc

5%

Capital income tax τk

as fraction of ymed
as fraction of ȳ

28.3%

Government debt to GDP B/Y

60%

Government consumption to GDP G/Y

17%

Bend points b1 , b2
Replacement rates r1 , r2 , r3

0.184, 1.114

SS data

90%, 32%, 15%

SS data

Pension cap ȳss

200%

Risk aversion γ

2

Inverse of Frisch elasticity χ

τp = 0.124

1.67

The set of parameters calibrated within the model include the technology parameters
(δk , Ω), the preference parameters ( β, λ) as well as the entry marginal tax rate τl . The
latter is chosen to assure government budget balance in the initial stationary equilibrium. The preference parameters are chosen so that the model equilbrium is consistent
with a capital-output ration of 2.9 and a share of time spent on market work equal to
33% of the total time endowment available to households. The technology parameters
are then determined to reproduce a real (pre-tax) return on capital of 4% and a wage
rate of 1, the latter being an innocuous normalization of Ω. Table 4 summarizes the
associated values of the parameters.

4

Characteristics of the Benchmark Economy

Prior to turning to our tax experiments we first briefly discuss the aggregate and distributional properties of the initial stationary equilibrium. This is perhaps more important than for most applications since a realistic earnings and wealth distribution,
15

Table 4: Endogenously Calibrated Parameters
Parameter

Value

Target/Data

Technology level Ω

0.922

w=1

Depreciation rate δk

7.6%

r = 4%

Initial marginal tax rate τl

12.2%

Time discount factor β

0.977

Disutility from labor λ

36

Budget balance
K/Y = 2.9
n̄ = 33%

especially at the top of the distribution, is required to evaluate a policy reform that
will entail potentially massive redistribution of the burden of taxation across different
members of the population.

4.1

Macroeconomic Aggregates

In table 5 we summarize the key macroeconomic aggregates implied by the initial stationary equilibrium of our model. It shows that the main source of government tax
revenues are taxes on labor earnings.

Table 5: Macroeconomic Variables
Variable

Value

Capital

288%

Government debt

60%

Consumption

58%

Investment

25%

Government Consumption

17%

Av. hours worked (in %)

33%

Interest rate (in %)

4%

Tax revenues
- Consumption

2.9%

- Labor

11.9%

- Capital income

3.9%

Pension System
Contribution rate (in %)

12.4%

Total pension payments

5.2%

All variables in % of GDP if not indicated otherwise

16

4.2

Earnings and Wealth Distribution

In this section we show that, given our earnings process with small but positive probability of very high earnings realizations, the model is able to reproduce an empirically
realistic cross-sectional earnings and wealth distribution.

Table 6: Labor Earnings Distribution in Benchmark Economy
Share of total sample (in %)
Quintiles

Model
US Data

Top (%)

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

90-95

95-99

99-100

Gini

0.0

5.8

11.0

17.6

65.6

11.7

18.9

21.4

0.642

-0.1

4.2

11.7

20.8

63.5

11.7

16.6

18.7

0.636

Table 6 displays the model-implied earnings distribution and table 7 does the same
for the wealth distribution. When comparing the model-implied earnings and wealth
quintiles to the corresponding statistics from the data13 we observe that the model fits
the data very well, even at the top of the distribution. The same is true for the Gini
coefficients of earnings and wealth.

Table 7: Wealth Distribution in Benchmark Economy
Share of total sample (in %)
Quintiles

Model
US Data

Top (%)

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

90-95

95-99

99-100

Gini

0.0

0.8

4.1

11.6

83.6

14.6

23.3

31.8

0.810

-0.2

1.1

4.5

11.2

83.4

11.1

26.7

33.6

0.816

An important aspect of the wealth data is that the bottom 40% of the population has
essentially no net worth, something our model reproduces. Since a binding borrowing
constraint significantly affects consumption, savings and labor supply choices, from
the perspective of the model it is important to understand who are these households.
In figure 2 we plot the share of each age cohort, in the initial stationary equilibrium,
that has zero wealth. Not unexpectedly, binding liquidy constraints are mainly prevalent among young households and then are again observed among the very elderly
who have outlived their resources and find it optimal to finance their consumption exclusively through social security benefits. We should note, however, that these elderly
13

As reported by Diaz-Gimenez et al. (2011), based on the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances.

17

households make up a fairly small fraction of the overall population since population growth as well as survival risk make cohort sizes above age 80 small relative to
younger households.
Figure 2: Fraction of Households with a = 0, by Age
100

Fraction of Liquidity Constrained Households

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20

30

40

50

60
Age

70

80

90

100

Overall, we do not view the ability of the model to reproduce the earnings and wealth
distributions as a success per se, since the stochastic wage process (and especially the
two high-wage states) were designed for exactly that purpose. However, that fact that
our approach is indeed successful gives us some confidence that ours is an appropriate
model to study tax policy experiments that are highly redistributive across households
at different parts of the earnings and wealth distribution in nature.

5

Quantitative Results

In this section we set out our main results. We first describe the thought experiment
we consider, and then turn to the optimal tax analysis. We do so in three steps. First we
display top income Laffer curves, showing at what top marginal tax rate tax revenues
from the top 1% earners is maximized, and relate our findings to the static analysis
of Saez (2001) and Diamond and Saez (2011). However, revenue maximization does
not imply welfare maximization in our dynamic general equilibrium model, partly because the top 1% of the population might enter social welfare, but also because their
behavioral response triggers potentially important general equilibrium effects. In a
second step we argue that the welfare-maximizing top marginal tax rate is lower but
quantitatively fairly close to the revenue maximizing rate. In a third step we then
dissect the sources of the substantial welfare gains from the optimal tax reform by a)
18

documenting the magnitude of the adverse impact on macroeconomic aggregates of
significantly raising top marginal rates, and b) quantifying the distributional benefits
of such tax reforms, both in terms of enhanced ex-ante redistribution among different
education and productivity groups as well as in terms of insurance against ex-post
labor productivity risk. We will conclude that the significant welfare gains from increasing top marginal labor income tax rates above 80% stem primarily from enhanced
insurance against not ascending to the very top of the earnings ladder, and only secondarily from redistribution across ex-ante heterogeneous households, and that these
gains outweigh the macroeconomic costs (as measured by the decline in aggregate
consumption) of the reform. In a last subsection we argue that these conclusions are
robust to alternative preference specifications of households, but that they do crucially
depend on a productivity and thus earnings process that delivers the empirically observed earnings and wealth inequality in the data.

5.1

The Thought Experiments

We now describe our fiscal policy thought experiments. Starting from the initial steady
state fiscal constitution we consider one-time, unexpected (by private households and
firms) tax reforms that change the top marginal labor earnings tax rate. The unexpected
reform induces a transition of the economy to a new stationary equilibrium, and we
model this transition path explicitly. Given the initial outstanding debt and given the
change in τh the government in addition (and again permanently) adjusts the entry
marginal tax rate τl (but not the threshold ȳl ) as well as ȳh to assure both that the intertemporal budget constraint holds and that the top 1% earners are defined by the
threshold ȳh (in the first period of the policy-induced transition path). An appropriate sequence of government debt along the transition path insures that the sequential
government budget constraints hold for very period t along the transition.
In the aggregate, a transition path is thus characterized by deterministic sequences of
interest rates, wages and government debt {rt , wt , Bt+1 }tT=1 converging to the new stationary equilibrium indexed by a new policy (τl , τh , ȳl , ȳh ). For every period t ≥ 1 along
the transition path the analysis delivers new lifetime utilities vt ( j, s, α, η, a) of households with individual states ( j, s, α, η, a). The optimal tax experiment then consists in
maximizing a weighted sum of these lifetime utilities over τh , using adjustments in τl
to insure that the intertemporal government budget constraint is satisfied.

19

5.2
5.2.1

Top Marginal Tax Rates and Tax Revenues
The Top 1% Laffer Curve in Our Economy

In figure 3 we plot (in % deviation from the initial stationary equilibrium) labor income
tax receipts from the top 1% earners against the top marginal labor income tax rate.14
The three lines correspond to tax revenues in the first period of the transition (the
"Short Run"), new steady state tax revenues (the "Long Run") and the present value
discounted of all tax receipts along the entire transition path (and the final steady state),
where the discount rates used are the time-varying interest rates along the transition
path.
Figure 3: Laffer Curve of Labor Income Tax Receipts from Top 1%

Change in top 1% labor tax revenue (in %)

150

Short Run
Long Run
Present Value

100

50

0

−50

−100
0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75
0.8
0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

0.95

1

From this figure we observe that the revenue maximizing top marginal tax rate, independent of the time horizon used, is very high, 86% in the short run and 98% in
the long run (and not surprisingly, in the middle at 95% when based on the present
value of tax revenues). As we will see when displaying transition paths induced by
the policy reform, in the short run top 1% earners have more wealth, and thus their
labor supply responds more negatively to changes in the top marginal tax rate, lowering the revenue maximizing rate relative to the long run in which top earners are
wealth-poorer and thus more inelastic towards tax changes.
Revenue-maximizing tax rates of course need not be welfare maximizing, even when
the current top 1% earners have no weight in the social welfare function. Therefore we
move to an explicit characterization of socially optimal rates next. Prior to this analysis
14

By construction this plot would be zero at a top marginal rate of 39.6%, but since the peek of this
"Top 1% Laffer curve" is substantially to the right of the status quo we truncate the x-axis at 60%.

20

we first want to explore why the revenue-maximizing tax rates we find in our dynamic
general equilibrium model are quite higher still than the 73% rate Diamond and Saez
have advocated for.

5.2.2

Connecting Our Results to the Static Optimal Taxation Literature

Diamond and Saez’ recommendation are based on the seminal paper by Saez (2001)
who derives a concise formula for the revenue-maximizing top marginal tax rate in a
static model of household labor supply that reads as:15
τh =

1
1

+

a·e
|{z}c

Subst. effect

−

( ec − eu )
| {z }
Inc. effect

The parameter a governs the relationship between the top earnings threshold and
mean labor earnings above this threshold.16 The entities eu , ec are, respectively, the
average (within the top 1% of earners) uncompensated and compensated elasticity of
earnings with respect to 1 minus the constant marginal tax rate τ. Diamond and Saez
(2011) assume that eu = ec (that is, the absence of income effects), based on empirical
studies argue for values of a = 1.5 and eu = ec = 0.25 for the top 1% of earners and
thus end up with a revenue maximizing (and thus optimal) top marginal earnings tax
rate of τh = 73%. We can compute the values of a, eu , ec implied by our model as well,17
and if we do so we obtain values of a = 1.59, ec = 0.34, ec − eu = 0.34, which, using
Saez’ formula, implies an optimal tax rate at the top of τh = 83.5%, close to our revenue
maximization tax rate of τh = 86% in the short run.18 The slight difference between
our result and that from Saez’ formula is likely mainly due to the earnings elasticities
not being completely policy invariant in our model.
The reason we find a still larger revenue-maximizing top marginal tax rate than Diamond and Saez (2011) recommend primarily stems from the fact that they implicitly
assume that the income effect of tax changes on labor supply and thus earnings is zero,
whereas it is significantly positive in our model for high income earners.
To summarize this discussion, the main reason that very high marginal tax rates are
15

As long as the social welfare weight of top earners is negligible, this is also the welfare-maximizing
top marginal tax rate.

16

When earnings above the top earnings threshold follow a Pareto distribution then a is exactly the
Pareto parameter of this distribution. Yet Saez (2001) formula doesn’t rely on a Pareto distribution,
but only on the relation between the top earners threshold y1% and mean income above this threshold
y1%
m whereas a is defined as

y1%
m
1% .
y1%
m −y

17

Details on the computation of these elasticities can be found in the appendix.

18

The peak of the short-run Laffer curve is most comparable to the revenue-maximizing rate in the
static models of Saez (2001) and Diamond and Saez (2011).

21

revenue (from the top earners) maximizing in our model is that a) the very top earners (the η7 households) pay a dominant share of labor income taxes and b) their labor
supply does not collapse even under very high marginal tax rates because of a strong
income effect. Being in the rare (and fairly mean-reverting) high productivity state constitutes the chance of earning a large part of lifetime earnings for these households, and
continues to be so even if marginal taxes rise to very high levels for these households.
After having discussed the revenue implications from increasing top marginal tax rates
we now turn to our analysis of socially optimal rates. To do so we now have to first
describe in detail how we measure social welfare, a task we tackle next.

5.3
5.3.1

Welfare-Maximizing Tax Rates
Measuring Social Welfare

The welfare measure we employ is constructed as follows. After solving for the equilibrium path of a specific tax reform, we calculate the amount of initial wealth transfers
needed to compensate every individual back to their initial equilibrium utility level,
ex post for the currently living and ex ante for future generations.19 That is, for each
household currently alive we find the transfer Ψ0 ( j, s, α, η, a) that satisfies
v1 ( j, s, α, η, a + Ψ0 ( j, s, α, η, a)) = v0 ( j, s, α, η, a)
where v0 denotes the value function in the initial steady state and for households born
in period t ≥ 1 we find the number Ψt such that
Evt ( j = 1, s, α, η̄, Ψt ) = Ev0 ( j = 1, s, α, η̄, 0)
where expectations are taken with respect to initial fixed effect and education. Note
that positive Ψ’s constitute welfare losses from a given reform, relative to the status
quo.
The total present discounted value of all transfers is then given by

Z
∞ 
Ψ0 ( j, s, α, η, a)
1+n t
W=
Ψt .
dΦ0 + µ1 ∑
1 + r0
1 + r0
t =1
When top 1% households are excluded from the social welfare function only transfers
to the bottom 99% of the current earnings distribution are included in the calculations.
19

These wealth transfers induce behavioral responses which we capture when computing the transfers
necessary to make a household indifferent. We do however, abstract from the general equilibrium
effects these hypothetical transfers would induce.
For future cohort the transfer is one number per cohort, for currently alive households the required
transfers differ by characteristics ( j, s, α, η, a). Future transfers are discounted to the present at rate
1+ n
1+r0 where r0 is the interest rate in the initial stationary equilibrium and our aggregate welfare measure is the sum of these transfers, with positive numbers indicating welfare gains.

22

In order to turn the welfare measure into easily interpretable numbers we turn the
present value of the transfers into an annuity that pays out over the whole transition
path and in the new long-run equilibrium and express the size of this annuity as a
percent of initial aggregate consumption. That is, we calculate

∞ 
1+n t
= −W
C∑
1
+
r
0
t =0
where we again recall that positive required transfers W signal welfare losses from
reform, and thus negative W constitute welfare gains. Expressing welfare gains in
percent of consumption,
C
CEV = 100 ∗
C0
This idea of calculating the welfare consequences of policy reforms follows closely that
of Huang et al. (1997), and more generally, the hypothetical lump-sum redistribution
authority originally envisioned by Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) which would implement the transfer scheme described above. The advantage of this way of measuring
aggregate welfare over alternative approaches is that it separates aggregate efficiency
considerations from the potential desire of the policy maker to engage in intertemporal
or intragenerational redistribution.20
Finally, we also compute and report a steady state welfare measure that asks what
uniform (over time and across states) percentage increase in consumption a household
born into the old steady state, under the veil of ignorance (that is, prior to the education
level s and fixed effect α being realized), would need to receive to be indifferent to being
born into the steady state associated with a new policy configuration.21
5.3.2

Optimal Size of the Top Marginal Earnings Tax Rate

In this section we document the optimal top marginal labor earnings tax rate. In figure
4 we plot three welfare measures against the top marginal tax rate τh . The black line
plots the aggregate welfare measure, derived by compensating all current and future
generations so that their (remaining) lifetime utility is the same as it would have been
under the status quo fiscal policy. The blue line shows exactly the same plot, but ignoring lifetime welfare of the top 1% earnings households in the calculation of aggregate
welfare. Finally the red line displays "long run welfare" measured as expected lifetime utility of households born into the steady state associated with a particular top
marginal tax rate τh .
20

Fehr and Kindermann (2014) show that, to a first approximation of the value function, maximizing
our welfare measure is equivalent to maximizing the weighted sum of (remaining) lifetime utilities,
with weights given by the inverse of the marginal utility of wealth in the value function, or equivalently (by the envelope theorem) the inverse of the marginal utility of current consumption.

21

This is the same long-run welfare measure as employed by Conesa et al. (2009) in their study of
optimal capital taxation.

23

Figure 4: Three Aggregate Welfare Measures as Functions of τh
7

6

Aggregate Welfare
− 1% Earners
Long−run Welfare

Welfare effects

5

4

3

2

1

0
0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75
0.8
0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

0.95

The optimal top marginal tax rate is indeed very high, around 90%, under all three
welfare measures. Welfare (as defined above) including the top 1% households, and
including the transition effects is hump-shaped and maximized at τh = 89%. Recall
that the top marginal tax rate that maximizes the present discounted value of tax revenues from the top 1% earners is 95%, somewhat higher than this welfare-optimal rate,
but quantitatively close.22
Excluding the top earnings group on which the top marginal tax rates apply leaves the
figure broadly unchanged, but, not surprisingly raises the optimal top rate further, to
τh = 92%. Focusing exclusively on welfare in the long run the optimal top marginal
rate is even larger, at τh = 95%. Below we explore the sources of these welfare gains
in greater detail. It is also noteworthy that the welfare gains induced by the very high
marginal tax rates are very substantial, in the order of 2% of consumption when including the transition and in excess of 6% when comparing steady states.
As discussed above, in these thought experiments, as we vary τh we adjust the upper
bend point ȳh above which the highest marginal tax rate applies so that (in the first
period of the transition) the top 1% of earners face this marginal tax rate. The intertemporal budget constraint of the government is balanced by adjusting the entry marginal
22

Since this welfare measure include short- and long-run welfare effects, a comparison with the present
discounted value Laffer curve is most appropriate.

24

tax rate τl (and holding fixed the lower bend point ȳl at which this rate applies).23
Figure 5: Upper Bend Point ȳh as Fraction of Median Income, Bottom Marginal Tax Rate τh
12

0.2

11

0.15
0.1
Bottom marginal tax rate

Upper bend−point

10
9
8
7
6

0
−0.05
−0.1

5

−0.15

4
3
0.3

0.05

0.4

0.5

0.6
0.7
Top marginal tax rate

0.8

−0.2
0.3

0.9

0.4

0.5

0.6
0.7
Top marginal tax rate

0.8

0.9

In figure 5 we plot the required upper bend point ȳh (left panel, as fraction of initial
equilibrium median income) and the entry marginal tax (or subsidy) rate (right panel)
against the top marginal tax rate τh . We observe that as the top marginal tax rate τh
increases, due to endogenous responses in labor supply the earnings distribution compresses and the top 1% of earnings are obtained at a lower fraction of median earnings:
the plot in the left panel is uniformly downward sloping. Second, since an increase
in the highest marginal tax rate generates additional revenues for the government, the
entry tax rate can fall and households pay lower taxes at the bottom of the distribution,
and for sufficiently large τh even receive wage subsidies. These subsidies are initially
increasing in τh (τl becomes more negative), but as the top marginal tax rate exceeds
its ’peak of the Laffer curve’ level at around τh = 95% wage subsidies start to fall.

5.4

Understanding the Welfare Gains

In order to interpret the reported welfare gains from the optimal tax reform (and to
understand why it is optimal in the first place) we now proceed in two steps. First
we display the transition paths of key macroeconomic variables that the tax reform
induces, documenting the significant adverse consequences on output, aggregate consumption and the capital stock in the economy. Second, we quantify the redistributive
23

If the required τl is non-negative, all households with earnings below ȳl pay zero taxes, if τl is negative, all households with earnings below ȳl receive a subsidy of τl per dollar earned, akin to the
Earned Income Tax Credit in the U.S. Note that this slight asymmetry about how income below ȳl
is treated induces a small kink both in the welfare plot, figure 4 as well as in figure 5 when τl turns
from positive to negative. This is of course irrelevant for the determination of the optimal tax code,
as the kink occurs far to the left of the optimal τh .

25

and insurance benefits of the reform, arguing that the latter are crucial for understanding our overall welfare results.

5.4.1

The Dynamics of Aggregates Along the Transition

In figure 6 we plot the evolution of key macroeconomic aggregates along the transition
from the old to the new stationary equilibrium. The path for all variables are expressed
in % deviations from their initial steady state values. Figure 7 displays the transition
path of hours worked, separately for the bottom 99% and the top 1% of the earnings
distribution, as well as the time path of wages and interest rates in the economy. Finally, figure 8 shows how revenues for consumption, labor income, and capital income
taxes as well as pre-tax earnings and wealth inequality (as measured by the Gini coefficient) evolve over time.
Figure 6: Capital, Assets, Government Debt; Labor Supply, Consumption and Output along
Transition
2
Capital
Private Assets
Public Debt

5

Changes in % of initial equilbrium value

Changes in % of initial equilbrium value

10

0

−5

−10

−15

−20
0

10

20

30
40
50
Year of Transition

60

70

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

−10

−12
0

80

Labor Supply
Consumption
Output
10

20

30
40
50
Year of Transition

60

70

80

The right panel of figure 6 shows that on impact the massive increase in marginal tax
rates at the top of the earnings distribution leads to a contraction of labor input by 10%
and a corresponding fall of output by close to 7% (since capital is predetermined and
thus fixed in the short run). The left panel of figure 7 indicates that the collapse in labor
input is entirely due to the reduction in hours worked by the highly productive top 1%
of the earnings distribution, whose hours fall on average by 40%. Thus even though
this group is small, because of their massive behavioral response and their high relative
productivity this 1% of earners drives down aggregate labor input substantially. The
ensuing partial recovery is owed to wages rising above initial steady state levels temporarily as the capital-labor ratio falls early in the transition. Furthermore, over time
the top group reduces its wealth holdings: a negative wealth effect on leisure (positive
wealth effect on labor supply) results.
In the medium run the capital stock falls significantly, partially being crowded out by
26

Figure 7: Hours and Prices along Transition
4

35
Interest rate
Wage rate
5.5

20

15

5
0
4.5
−2
4

10
−4

3.5

5

Wage rate (change in %)

2

25
Interest rate (in %)

In % of time endowment

30

Labor Hours (total)
Labor Hours (top 1 %)
0
0

10

20

30
40
50
Year of Transition

60

70

3
0

80

10

20

30
40
50
Year of Transition

60

70

−6
80

higher public debt used to finance the tax transition, but mainly driven by the decline
in private saving of the high earners that are now subject to much higher marginal (and
significantly higher average) labor earnings tax rates under the new tax system. Thus
whereas in the short run most of the loss in output is absorbed by lower investment,
in the long run aggregate consumption declines significantly as well, by about 7% (see
again the right panel of figure 6).
The left panel of Figure 8 displays the evolution of tax revenue along the transition.
Even though overall economic activity falls in response of the tax reform, tax revenues
of the government decline only temporarily (which in turn explains the temporary increase in government debt present in figure 6). The composition of tax revenue changes
substantially as well. Since aggregate consumption falls, so does revenue from the
consumption tax. On the other hand, once hours of the high productivity, high earnings top 1% have partially recovered, labor income tax revenues increase, on account
of the significantly higher taxes these individuals pay. In fact, in the long run this
group accounts for close to 90% of all revenue from the labor earnings tax. Interestingly, revenues from capital income taxes also rise due to the higher return a reduced
capital-labor ratio implies, despite the decline in the tax base for this tax.
Finally, the right panel of figure 8 shows that the tax reform leads to a reduction of
both earnings and wealth inequality. The Gini index for pre-tax labor earnings falls
significantly on impact, reflecting primarily the decline in hours worked (and thus
earnings) of the top 1% earners. As hours of this group partially recover (due to a
negative wealth effect on leisure in light of falling net worth for this group), so does
earnings inequality, without reaching its pre-reform level. Wealth inequality, on the
other hand, is monotonically declining over time as the lower labor earnings of the
households at the top of the distribution translates into lower wealth holdings of that
group and thus a lesser net worth concentration in the population.

27

Figure 8: Tax Revenues and Inequality along Transition
1
Labor Earnings
Wealth

10
0.9
5
0.8
0
Gini Index

Changes in % of initial equilbrium value

15

−5

0.7

−10
0.6
−15
Consumption Tax
Earnings Tax
Capital Income Tax
Total Revenue

−20
−25
0

10

20

30
40
50
Year of Transition

60

70

0.5

0.4
0

80

10

20

30
40
50
Year of Transition

60

70

80

To summarize, the aggregate statistics indicate a massive decline in aggregate output
and a (somewhat delayed) fall in aggregate consumption, coupled with a reduction of
hours worked (mainly at the top of the earnings distribution). Furthermore, earnings
and wealth inequality are significantly lower under the tax system featuring very high
marginal tax rates at the top. These aggregate statistics suggest that the sources of the
welfare gains from the tax reform documented in section 5.3.2 come from enhanced social insurance and/or redistribution rather than from stimulating aggregate economic
activity. In the next section we will provide a series of decompositions to argue that the
main source of the welfare gains along the transition, but especially in the new steady
state, comes from better consumption insurance (rather than more ex-ante redistribution) under the new tax system with high marginal tax rates at the top. These insurance
benefits offset (by a significant margin) the aggregate consumption losses, since these
losses accrue exclusively to those few households that happen to rise to the very top of
the earnings distribution.

5.4.2

Ex-Ante Redistribution or Ex-Post Insurance?

In order to understand why the tax system we characterized as optimal implies such
substantial welfare gains despite its adverse impact on macroeconomic aggregates we
start our decomposition analysis with a display of the welfare consequences from the
tax reform for households with different characteristics.
The left panel of figure 9 plots these gains against the age of a household cohort; all
cohorts to the left of zero on the x-axis are already alive at the time of the reform, everyone to the right is born into the transition. For cohorts currently alive we distinguish
between welfare for the top 1% earners (in the initial steady state) and welfare of the
rest, always aggregated as discussed in section 5.1.

28

Figure 9: Welfare Effects of Policy Reform by Age Cohort
15

15
low skilled/low shock
low skilled/high shock
high skilled/low shock
high skilled/high shock

10

Welfare Effect (CEV)

Welfare Effect (CEV)

5
0
−5
−10

10

5

−15
current (−1% earners)
current (1% earners)
future

−20
−25

−50

0
50
Cohort Entry Year

0

100

20

40

60
80
Cohort Entry Year

100

120

Not surprisingly, the welfare impact of the reform on the top 1% earners currently alive
(which are evidently of working age) is very strongly negative, whereas the reform has
very little impact on current retirees (the cohorts economically born 45 years prior to
the reform or earlier). For current non-top earners the welfare gains are larger the
younger the cohort is, since younger workers spend a larger share of their working life
under the new tax regime. Finally, the welfare impact of future generations is positive
and large, in excess of 6% of lifetime consumption. It is slightly declining along the
transition as the economy consumes part of its capital stock, however.24
The right panel of figure 9 focuses on generations born after the implementation of the
reform, but takes an ex-post (that is, after household type has been realized) perspective by disaggregating welfare gains from the tax reform by household type. Recall
that our economy is populated by households that differ by education (skill) status
and by a productivity fixed effect. Thus a total of four ex-ante heterogeneous household types is born in every transition period, and the right panel of figure 9 displays
the lifetime welfare gain from the reform for each of these types. We wish to highlight three observations: First (and consistent with the left panel), for all types the
welfare gains are somewhat declining over time, reflecting the reduction in aggregate
consumption induced by a fall in the aggregate capital stock. Second, the welfare consequences are very substantially positive for all four household types, clarifying that
the welfare gains do not stem primarily from beneficial redistribution towards lowskilled households. Third, the welfare gains display considerable heterogeneity across
the four types. Notably, the welfare gains of one group, the low-skilled with high fixed
24

The aggregate welfare measures in section 5.3.2 aggregated the welfare impact of all current and
future generations, and thus is a convex combination of small welfare gains of retired households,
large welfare losses of the current top 1% (if included in welfare), sizable welfare gains for current
working age households, and substantial welfare gains of future generations. The steady state welfare gains in contrast only capture the large gain of future generations, and thus display a larger
benefit from the tax reform than the welfare measures that include transitional generations.

29

effect is significantly larger than the gains the other groups realize.
To understand this last finding, it is instructive to display how marginal and average
tax rates changes between the benchmark and the optimal tax system. Figure 10 plots
both marginal (left panel) and average (right panel) tax rates against labor earnings in
the initial and the final steady state.
Figure 10: Marginal Tax Schedules, Average Tax Schedule: Benchmark and Optimum
100

100
Initial Steady State
Final Steady State

80

80

60

60

Average tax rate

Marginal tax rate

Initial Steady State
Final Steady State

40

40

20

20

0

0

−20
0

2

4
6
Fraction of median income

8

−20
0

10

2

4
6
Fraction of median income

8

10

It shows that households with up to about four times median (initial steady state) earnings face lower average taxes whereas (not surprisingly, given the very high marginal
taxes at the very top) high earners face massively higher marginal and average taxes.
In figures 11 and 12 we display the differences in marginal and average tax rates between the two tax codes and insert box plots to summarize the earnings distribution in
the model, both in the initial (figure 11) and final (figure 12) steady state. As our model
is populated by four ex-ante heterogeneous household types who differ by their level
of education and earnings fixed effect each panel of these figures includes four box
plots associated with the earnings distribution of each of the four types. The box in
the middle contains 50% of the probability mass, with median earnings of the group
signified by the vertical line in the middle of the box. The ends of the box plots give
the positions of the 2.5%-tile and the 97.5%-tile of the earnings distribution.
We want to draw attention to three main findings evident in these figures. First, the
overwhelming majority of households is located in parts of the earnings distribution
that faces lower average (but also lower marginal) tax rates under the optimal, relative to the benchmark tax system. Second, the earnings distributions shift to the left
between figure 11 and figure 12, indicating a decline in overall pre-tax labor earnings
induced by the tax reform. Third, the largest reduction in marginal and especially average tax rates occurs among the middle class, households with earnings between 50%
and 150% of median income. This naturally makes the low-skilled, high fixed effect
group and the high-skilled, low fixed effect group the largest beneficiaries of the reform, see the box plots of these two groups. The main difference between these two
30

60

60

50

50

40

40

Difference in average tax rate

Difference in marginal tax rate

Figure 11: Difference in Tax Schedules and Earnings Distribution (by Type) in Initial Steady
State

30
20
10
0
−10

low skilled/low shock
low skilled/high shock
high skilled/low shock
high skilled/high shock

−20
−30
0

1

2

3
4
5
Fraction of median income

6

7

low skilled/low shock
low skilled/high shock
high skilled/low shock
high skilled/high shock

30
20
10
0
−10
−20
−30
0

8

1

2

3
4
5
Fraction of median income

6

7

8

60

60

50

50

40

40

Difference in average tax rate

Difference in marginal tax rate

Figure 12: Difference in Tax Schedules and Earnings Distribution (by Type) in Final Steady State

30
20
10
0
−10

low skilled/low shock
low skilled/high shock
high skilled/low shock
high skilled/high shock

−20
−30
0

1

2

3
4
5
Fraction of median income

6

7

low skilled/low shock
low skilled/high shock
high skilled/low shock
high skilled/high shock

30
20
10
0
−10
−20
−30
0

8

1

2

3
4
5
Fraction of median income

6

7

8

groups is that high-skilled (college) households have a nontrivial chance of rising to
the very top of the earnings distribution (where they are hurt by the high marginal tax
rates), whereas the low-skilled face an essentially zero change if experiencing the same
fate. This combination (middle class earnings in expectation and almost no chance
of becoming very earnings rich) makes this group benefit dis-proportionally from the
proposed tax reform.
The previous discussion, however, does not clarify what are the common sources of
the welfare gains of each of these four groups. To make progress along this front,
in figure 13 we plot average consumption and hours worked over the life cycle, not
counting consumption and hours occurring when households have one of the two high
labor productivity shocks (that is, roughly, excluding hours and consumption of the
top 1%). Figure 14 does the same for the cohort variance of consumption of hours, and
31

Figure 13: Average Consumption and Hours over the Life Cycles, w/o Top 2 Shocks

0.9

0.4
Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State

Mean Labor Hours (without Top Shocks)

Mean Consumption (without Top Shocks)

1

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
20

25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
20

60

Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State
25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

60

figures 15 and 16 repeat the same for the entire population, that is, they include the top
productivity states in the calculation of the means and the variances.
Figure 14: Variance of Consumption and Hours over the Life Cycles, w/o Top 2 Shocks

0.6

0.25
Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State

Variance log(Labor Hours) (without Top Shocks)

Variance log(Consumption) (without Top Shocks)

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
20

25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State
0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
20

60

25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

60

The key observation comes from comparing figures 13 and 15. Average consumption
of households outside the top 1% is actually uniformly larger under the new, relative
to the old tax system (comparing steady states), despite the fact that aggregate consumption is 7% lower. As figure 15 shows, the reduction of consumption is heavily
concentrated among older household at the top of the earnings distribution. In addition, hours worked remain roughly constant (and decline significantly at older ages in
the new, relative to the old steady state). Couple this with a very sizable reduction of
lifetime consumption risk (approximated by the within-cohort consumption variance),
see the left panel of either figure 14 or 16, and the 7% steady state welfare gains emerge.

32

Figure 15: Average Consumption and Hours over the Life Cycles, Entire Population
1
0.9

0.4
Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State

0.35

0.8

Mean Labor Hours

Mean Consumption

0.3
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.25
0.2
0.15

0.3
0.1
0.2
0.05

0.1
0
20

25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

0
20

60

Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State
25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

60

Figure 16: Variance of Consumption and Hours over the Life Cycles, Entire Population
0.7

0.6

0.25
Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State

Initial Steady State
Period 1 of Transition
Final Steady State
Variance log(Labor Hours)

Variance log(Consumption)

0.2
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05
0.1

0
20

5.5

25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

0
20

60

25

30

35

40
45
Age

50

55

60

Sensitivity Analysis

In this section we want to discuss the sensitivity of our results to the key modeling and
parametric assumptions we have made so far.25
25

Details on how we adjust the model to produce these results can be found in the appendix.

33

5.5.1

Realistic Income Inequality is Key for the Results

Suppose instead households face a labor productivity process that does not contain
the small chance of very high wage and thus earnings realizations.26 By implication,
in this version of the model the earnings, income and wealth distributions will not
display the degree of concentration observed in U.S. data, and thus it won’t paint an
accurate picture of who the top 1% are and what are their economic circumstances.
This economy serves, however, a useful role for understanding what drives our results
of desirable high marginal income tax rates for the top earners in society.
Figure 17: Laffer Curves and Welfare as Function of τh , Absent Top Productivity Shocks

10

0.4
Short Run
Long Run
Present Value

5

0

0

−5

−0.2

−0.4

−10

−0.6

−15

−0.8

−20
0.2

Aggregate Welfare
− 1% Earners
Long−run Welfare

0.2

Welfare effects

Change in top 1% labor tax revenue (in %)

15

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55
Top marginal tax rate

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

−1
0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35
0.4
0.45
Top marginal tax rate

0.5

0.55

0.6

Figure 17 displays the top 1% Laffer curves (left panel) and welfare (right panel). As the
figure shows, in the absence of the top two productivity shocks, and thus in the absence
of a realistic degree of earnings and wealth dispersion, the optimal top marginal labor
earnings tax rate falls, and independent of the welfare metric applied, is fairly close to
the current rate of 39.6%. This happens for two reasons. First, the revenue-maximizing
top marginal tax rate falls, to between 65% and 70% (rather than above 85%, as in the
benchmark economy), on account of a smaller income effect of the now less-earnings
rich top 1%. However, now the divergence between revenue-maximizing (from the top
1%) top tax rates (still above 65%) and welfare maximizing top tax rates (below 40%)
is much more significant. Since the largest productivity realizations are now much less
severe, the large social insurance benefits of high tax progressivity vanish.27
Overall, we conclude from this section that our main result of very high marginal tax
26

One interpretation of this version of the model is that it describes the 1960’s and early 1970’s, the
period prior to the large increase in the income share of the top 1% of the distribution. Hsu and Yang
(2013) study steady state optimal (piecewise) linear income taxation in an infinite horizon model
very similar to this version of the model.

27

Taking a steady state perspective the optimal labor income tax system is still substantially progressive, consistent with the findings in Conesa and Krueger (2006) and Fehr and Kindermann (2014).

34

rates for top earners depends crucially on a productivity process capable of producing
earnings- and wealth rich household to the same extent as they are present in the data.

5.5.2

Labor Supply Elasticity

As most clearly seen in the simple formula by Diamond and Saez (2011) based on
their static model, the optimal top marginal tax rate depends on the parameters governing elasticity of labor supply with respect to tax rates. Therefore we now conduct
sensitivity analysis with respect to the Frisch elasticity parameter that governs the (intertemporal) labor supply elasticity in the dynamic model. In table 8 and figure 18 we
document how our optimal tax and welfare results depend on the Frisch labor supply
elasticity.28
Table 8: Sensitivity with Respect to Frisch Labor Supply Elasticity
τ

τ

K

L

LR Wel.

Agg Wel.

Frisch elasticity = 0.25

92.00

-13.33

-15.82

-2.33

6.01

2.60

Benchmark =0.60

89.00

-11.05

-17.24

-3.74

5.76

2.47

Frisch elasticity = 1.50

82.00

-7.97

-17.19

-4.82

4.67

2.10

Scenario

Figure 18: Aggregate Welfare as Function of τh , Different Frisch Elasticities
3.5

3

Frisch elasticity = 0.25
Frisch elasticity = 0.6 (Benchmark)
Frisch elasticity = 1.5

Aggregate Welfare

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.6

28

0.65

0.7

0.75
0.8
0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

0.95

For a high Frisch elasticity and tax rates above 92% we experienced convergence problems with our
algorithm.

35

The key finding from the previous figure and table is that although the positive and
normative results change in the expected direction (a larger elasticity reduces the size
of the top marginal tax rate and the associated welfare gains from the policy reform),
the differences are quantitatively fairly small. Even with a household-level Frisch labor
supply elasticity of 1.5, arguably at the upper bound of empirical estimates the optimal
top marginal tax rate exceeds 80%.
As we have shown above in section 5.2.2 the optimal tax rate in our model is strongly
affected not only by the substitution effect, but also by the income effect of households
at the very top of the earnings distribution which remains broadly unaffected by the
change in the parameter governing the Frisch elasticity. We conclude that our results
are qualitatively, and to a very large extent quantitatively robust to plausible changes
in the Frisch labor supply elasticity.
5.5.3

Size of the Income Effect

Given the importance of the income effect we now document how changes in its magnitude affect our results. To this end we now vary γ from 2 to 1, thereby assuming
log-utility in consumption and making our preference specification consistent with
balanced growth. In our model γ controls the size of the income effect, with smaller
values implying smaller income effects and thus overall stronger responses of labor
supply at the top to changes in marginal tax rates.
Figure 19: Laffer Curve and Aggregate Welfare, γ = 2 vs. γ = 1
80

3
γ = 2 (Benchmark)
γ=1

60

2

40

1

Aggregate Welfare

Change in Top 1% Tax Revenue

γ = 2 (Benchmark)
γ=1

20

0

−20

−40
0.5

0

−1

−2

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

−3
0.5

0.95

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

0.95

In figure 19 we plot the top earner Laffer curve (the present discounted value version),
both for risk aversion of γ = 1 and γ = 2, whereas the right panel does the same
for aggregate welfare. We observe that the magnitude of the income effect is quantitatively very important for our findings, but that the key result (top marginal tax rate
significantly above current levels) remains unaffected. With log-utility the revenue
maximizing top rate is 77% and the welfare maximizing rate is 68%. Turning back to
36

the interpretation of the results through the lens of the compensated earnings elasticity
and the income effect, the former rises (on average, for the top 1%) from ec = 0.34 in
the benchmark economy to ec = 0.45 with log-utility, and the income effect falls from
ec − eu = 0.34 to ec − eu = 0.23. Thus the income effect does not offset the compensated
elasticity and the revenue-maximizing tax rate falls from 0.95 to 0.77, rather close to the
original recommendation by Diamond and Saez (2011).
Second, as in the previous subsection (and in contrast to the benchmark model) the
divergence between revenue maximization and welfare maximization becomes more
important now as lower risk aversion shrinks the insurance benefits of highly progressive labor income taxes. Thus the socially optimal top rate is even lower now, but still
at a very sizable 68%, substantially higher than the current values in the U.S.
We think of the parameter configuration with log-utility as delivering a plausible lower
bound for what the top marginal tax rate should be, since logarithmic utility implies a
risk aversion at the low end of commonly used values and leads to a high elasticity of
earnings with respect to taxes at the upper bound of empirical estimates. 29

5.5.4

Persistence of High Productivity States

As final robustness check we assess to what extent our results depend on the fact that
the large productivity shocks are persistent, but far from permanent (and thus a progressive tax system provides both insurance against the risk of never becoming highly
productive and becoming unproductive again after a spell of stardom). To model permanent superstars, but be consistent with our benchmark model in which the probability of becoming very productive is essentially zero before age 30 we proceed as follows. We now assume that there is one shock at age 30 which transports an (educationspecific) fraction of the population to the η7 shock.30 When a household climbs up to
η7 she will stay there forever. Reversely, after age 30 there is no chance of climbing up
to this shock anymore.31
Figure 20 again plots the Laffer curve and aggregate welfare, both for the benchmark
economy and the economy with permanent superstars. We observe that both the revenue maximizing tax rate (moderately) and the welfare maximizing tax rate (more significantly) falls, relative to the benchmark. The revenue-maximizing tax rate falls since
the upper tail of the earnings distribution becomes significantly thinner (since permanently highly productive households strongly reduce their labor supply), and thus av29

As an important additional distinction, with log preferences hours worked increase with productivity, whereas in the benchmark the correlation between productivity and hours was slightly negative.

30

The persistence and probabilities for the η6 shock remains untouched.

31

This change in the model affects its ability to reproduce the empirically observed earnings and especially the wealth distribution. Whereas the earnings Gini remains close to its empirical counterpart,
the wealth Gini falls from 81% to 77% and the wealth share of the top 1% decreases from 32% to 19%.

37

Figure 20: Laffer Curve and Aggregate Welfare, Persistent vs. Permanent Highest Wage Shocks
3

80

2.5

Benchmark
Permanent Highest Shock

2
60

1.5
Aggregate Welfare

Change in Top 1% Tax Revenue

70

Benchmark
Permanent Highest Shock

50
40
30

1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1

20

−1.5
10
0
0.5

−2
0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

−2.5
0.5

0.95

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85
Top marginal tax rate

0.9

0.95

erage income within the top 1% earners falls. Second, again the difference between revenue maximization and welfare maximization becomes more sizable because, relative
to the benchmark, in the economy with permanent superstars the insurance benefit of
progressive taxes from falling back into the normal range of productivity disappears.
However, even with these changes our main message remains robust: marginal tax
rates on the top 1% earners in excess of 70% remain optimal from a social welfare point
of view.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we have numerically characterized the optimal marginal earnings tax
rate τh faced by the top 1% of the cross-sectional earnings distribution. We found it
to be very high, in the order of 90%, fairly independently of whether the top 1% is
included or excluded in the social welfare function, and independently of whether
transitional or long run welfare is considered. We have argued that such high marginal
tax rates provide optimal social insurance in a world where very high labor incomes
are generated by rare (but somewhat persistent) earnings opportunity, coupled with
endogenous, and fairly elastic, labor supply choices of households.
The crucial model ingredient that generates realistic earnings and wealth inequality is
a policy-invariant labor productivity process where individuals with small probability
receive very high realizations, and these realizations are persistent but mean reverting.
Given the centrality of this assumption for our result, important next steps of inquiry
are to empirically assess for which share of earners at the very top of the distribution such an abstraction is plausible. Sports and entertainment stars as well as some
entrepreneurs are likely well-described by our model, whereas high earnings professionals for whom long-term human capital investment decisions are crucial are likely
38

not. Furthermore, it would be interesting to conduct the same tax reform analysis in
other models known to be able to generate a realistic earnings and wealth distribution,
such as the model of entrepreneurial choice of Quadrini (1997), Cagetti and De Nardi
(2006), or the human capital model analyzed in Badel and Huggett (2014).

References
[1] Aiyagari, R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 659-684.
[2] Alvaredo, F., A. Atkinson, T. Piketty and E. Saez (2013), “The Top 1 Percent in
International and Historical Perspective , ” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27, 320.
[3] Auerbach, A. and L. Kotlikoff (1987), Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge University
Press.
[4] Badel, A. and M. Huggett (2013), “Taxing Top Earners: A Human Capital Perspective,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper, 2014-017A.
[5] Bakis, O., B. Kaymak and M. Poschke (2013), “On the Optimality of Progressive
Income Redistribution,” Working paper.
[6] Bassetto, M. (1999), “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents,” Working
paper.
[7] Bewley, T. (1986), “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium With a Continuum of Independently Fluctuating Consumers,” in: W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell (eds.):
Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gérard Debreu, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 79-102.
[8] Brüggemann, B. and J. Yoo (2014), “Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Increasing Taxes on Top Income Earners,” Mimeo.
[9] Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi (2006), “Entrepreneurship, Frictions and Wealth,”
Journal of Political Economy, 106, 835-870.
[10] Castaneda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez and V. Rios-Rull (2003), “Accounting for the U.S.
Earnings and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111, 818-857
[11] Chamley, C. (1986), “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium
with Infinite Lives,” Econometrica, 54, 607-622.
[12] Conesa, J. and D. Krueger (2006), “On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income
Tax Code,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 1425-1450.

39

[13] Conesa, J., S. Kitao and D. Krueger (2009), “Taxing Capital: Not a Bad Idea after
All!,” American Economic Review, 99, 25-48.
[14] Diamond, P. (1998),“Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of Optimal Marginal Tax Rates,” American Economic Review, 88, 83-95.
[15] Diamond, P. and E. Saez (2011), “The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research to Policy Recommendations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, 165-190.
[16] Diaz-Gimenez, J., A. Glover and V. Rios-Rull (2011), “Facts on the Distributions of
Earnings, Income, and Wealth in the United States: 2007 Update,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 34 No. 1.
[17] Domeij, D. and J. Heathcote (2004), “On the Distributional Effects of Reducing
Capital Taxes,” International Economic Review, 45, 523-554.
[18] Erosa, A. and M. Gervais (2002), “Optimal Taxation in Life Cycle Economies,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 105, 338-369.
[19] Fehr, H. and F. Kindermann (2014), “Optimal Taxation with Current and Future
Cohorts,” forthcoming: Journal of Economicy Dynamics & Control.
[20] Guner, N., M. Lopez-Daneri and G. Ventura (2014), “Heterogeneity and Government Revenues: Higher Taxes at the Top?,” Working Paper.
[21] Holter, H., D. Krueger and S. Stepanchuk (2014), “How Does Tax Progressivity
and Household Heterogeneity Affect Laffer Curves?,” Working Paper.
[22] Hsu, M. and C.C. Yang (2013), “Optimal Linear and Two-Bracket Income Taxes
with Idiosyncratic Earnings Risk,” Journal of Public Economics, 105, 58-71.
[23] Huang, H., T.J. Sargent and S. Imrohoroglu (1997), “Two Computations to Fund
Social Security,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1, 7-44.
[24] Huggett, M. (1993), “The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incompleteinsurance economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 17, 953-969.
[25] Jacobs, B. and D. Schindler (2012), “On the Desirability of Taxing Capital Income
in Optimal Social Insurance,” Journal of Public Economics, 96, 853-868.
[26] Judd, K. (1985), “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model,”
Journal of Public Economics, 28, 59-83.
[27] Krueger, D. and A. Ludwig (2013), “Optimal Progressive Labor Income Taxation
and Education Subsidies When Education Decisions and Intergenerational Transfers are Endogenous,” American Economic Review, 103, 496-501.
[28] Krusell, P. and Smith, A. (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.
40

[29] Mirrlees, J. (1971), “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation,”
Review of Economic Studies, 38, 175-208.
[30] Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[31] Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1-39.
[32] Quadrini, V. (1997), “Entrepreneurship, Saving and Social Mobility,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 3, 1-40.
[33] Reich, R. (2010), Aftershock. Random House, New York, NY.
[34] Saez, E. (2001), “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68, 205-229.
[35] Vogelgesang, U. (2000), “Optimal Capital Income Taxation and Redistribution,”
Finanzarchiv, 57, 412-434.

41

A

Appendix: Details of the Computational Approach

In order to solve the model outlined in this paper, we need three distinct algorithms:
one that determines policy and value functions, one that solves for equilibrium quantities and prices, and one that delivers compensation payments.

A.1

Computation of Policy and Value Functions

We solve for policy and value functions using the method of endogenous gridpoints.
Formally, these functions exist on the state space

( j, s, α, η, a) ∈ {1, . . . , J } × {n, c} × {−σα , +σα } × {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,7 } × [0, ∞].
In order to be able to represent them on a computer, we however have to discretize the
continuous elements of the state space, namely the asset dimension. For this purpose
we chose a set of discrete points { â1 . . . , â100 } such that the state space above can be
approximated by

( j, s, α, η, a) ∈ {1, . . . , J } × {n, c} × {−σα , +σα } × {ηs,1 , . . . , ηs,7 } × { â1 . . . , â100 }.
Note that the choice of âi is not straightforward. Specifically we let
âi = ā ·

(1 + g a ) i −1 − 1
,
(1 + ga )99 − 1

which leaves us with two parameters that define our discrete grid space. ā is the upper
limit of the asset grid which we chose such that no individual in our simulated model
would like to save more than this amount.32 A ga of 0 would result in equidistantly
spaced gridpoints. Setting ga > 0 the distance between two successive gridpoints âi
and âi+1 grows at the rate ga in i. In our preferred parameterization we let ga = 0.08.
We consequently located many grid points at the lower end of the grid space where
Figure 21: Discretized asset state space

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

borrowing constraints may occur and therefore policy functions may have kinks or be
32

In our model this leads to ā = 1800.

42

sharply curved. At the upper end of the grid space where policy and value functions
are almost linear, we consequently use a much smaller amount of points. Figure 21
visualizes our discrete asset grid.
The discretization of the asset state space makes the solution for policy and value functions feasible via backward induction. We start out by solving the optimization problem at the last possible age an individual may have J. Since the agent is retired and
dies with certainty, she will consume all her remaining resources and work zero hours,

(1 + rn ) âi + p(s, α, η )
,
1 + τc
a0 ( J, s, α, η, âi ) = 0 for all i = 1, . . . , 100.
c( J, s, α, η, âi ) =

n( J, s, α, η, âi ) = 0

,

In order to simplify the computation of the value function we will actually keep track
of two different value functions, the one for consumption and the one for labor. This is
possible due to the additive separability assumption we made. Consequently we have

[c( J, s, α, η, âi )]1−γ
vc ( J, s, α, η, â ) =
1−γ
i

and

vn ( J, s, α, η, âi ) = 0.

Knowing the policy and value function in the last period of life, we can now iterate
backward over ages to determine the remaining household decisions. Since the algorithm is very similar for retired and working individuals, we will restrict ourselves to
the case of workers. Assume that we had already calculated policy and value functions
at age j + 1. The problem we need to solve for an individual at state ( j, s, α, η, a) then
reads
max
c,n,a0



n 1+ χ
c 1− γ
−α
+ βψj+1 ∑ πs (η 0 |η ) vc ( j + 1, s, α, η 0 , a0 ) − vl ( j + 1, s, α, η 0 , a0 )
1−γ
1+χ
η0

subject to the constraints

(1 + τc )c + a0 + T (we( j, s, α, η )n) + Tss (we( j, s, α, η )n)
= (1 + rn ) a + b j (s, η ) + we( j, s, α, η )n
as well as 0 ≤ n ≤ 1 and a0 ≥ 0. The first order conditions (ignoring the constraint on
n and the borrowing constraint) then are
c = [λ(1 + τc )]−1/γ


0
αnχ = λwe( j, s, α, η ) 1 − T 0 (we( j, s, α, η )n) − Tss
(we( j, s, α, η )n)
λ = βψj+1 (1 + rn0 )(1 + τc0 ) ∑ c( j + 1, s, α, η 0 , a0 )−γ .
η0

We now apply the method of endogenous gridpoints as follows: We assume that savings for tomorrow would amount to a0 = âi for all i = 1, . . . , 100. Under this assumption, we can compute for each combination of (s, α, η ) the respective λ from the last first
43

order condition. λ then defines a certain level of consumption ce ( j, s, α, η, âi ) and labor
supply ne ( j, s, α, η, âi ).33 Plugging these into the budget constraint, we can determine
the endogenous gridpoint as
1 h
ae ( j, s, α, η, âi ) =
(1 + τc )ce ( j, s, α, η, âi ) + a0 + T (we( j, s, α, η )n)+
1 + rn
i
Tss (we( j, s, α, η )n) − b j (s, η ) − we( j, s, α, η )ne ( j, s, α, η, âi ) .
Finally, we can compute the value functions as
vec ( j, s, α, η, âi )

[ce ( j, s, α, η, âi )]1−γ
+ βψj+1 ∑ πs (η 0 |η )vc ( j + 1, s, α, η 0 , âi )
=
1−γ
η0

ven ( j, s, α, η, âi )

α[ne ( j, s, α, η, âi )]1+χ
=
+ βψj+1 ∑ πs (η 0 |η )vn ( j + 1, s, α, η 0 , âi ).
1+χ
η0

Using the interpolation data
n
o100
e
i
e
i
a ( j, s, α, η, â ), c ( j, s, α, η, â )
i =1
n
o100
ae ( j, s, α, η, âi ), vec ( j, s, α, η, âi )
i =1

,

n

,

n

e

i

e

i

a ( j, s, α, η, â ), n ( j, s, α, η, â )

ae ( j, s, α, η, âi ), ven ( j, s, α, η, âi )

o100
i =1
o100
i =1

,
,

we can finally determine the (discrete) policy and value functions
c( j, s, α, η, âi )

,

n( j, s, α, η, âi )

,

vc ( j, s, α, η, âi )

and

vn ( j, s, α, η, âi )

for each today’s asset value âi , i = 1, . . . , 100 by piecewise linear interpolation.34
Before applying this interpolation scheme, we however check for the occurrence of
liquidity constraints. Liquidity constraints occur if ae ( j, s, α, η, 0) > 0. In this case, we
extend the above interpolation data by another point of value 0 on the left. The policy
and value functions at this point are determined under the assumption that a = a0 = 0,
i.e. the policy function values solve the equation system
c−γ
=λ
1 + τc


0
(we( j, s, α, η )n)
αnχ = λwe( j, s, α, η ) 1 − T 0 (we( j, s, α, η )n) − Tss

(1 + τc )c = b j (s, η ) + we( j, s, α, η )n − T (we( j, s, α, η )n) − Tss (we( j, s, α, η )n).
33

Note that we can not solve for labor supply analytically due to the non linearity of the labor earnings
tax schedule. Instead we use a quasi-Newton rootfinding routine to determine the solution to the
respective first order condition. We thereby have to respect the constraint 0 ≤ n ≤ 1 as well as the
fact that there is a cap on contributions to the social security system. However, due to the additive
separability of the utility function in consumption and labor supply, the constraints on n will not
affect the individual’s choice of consumption c.

34

We do not interpolate vec and ven directly, but rather [(1 − γ)vec ]1/(1−γ) and [(1 + χ)ven ]1/(1+χ) and
then transform them back to their original shape. This leads to much more accurate results in the
high curvature region of the asset grid.

44

A.2

Determining Aggregate Quantities and Prices

Our algorithm to determine aggregate quantities and prices follows closely the GaussSeidel method already proposed in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987). Specifically, in order to determine an equilibrium path of the economy, we start with an initial guess
of quantities {Kt , Lt }t≥0 as well as tax rates {τl , τss,t }t≥0 and transfers { Trt }t≥0 . Our
algorithm then iterates over the following steps:
1. Determine factor prices {rt , wt }t≥0 that correspond to the quantities {Kt , Lt }t≥0 .
2. Solve the household optimization problem using these factor prices and the guesses
for tax rates. Determine the measure of households.
3. Solve for the tax rate τl that balances the intertemporal budget constraint of the
government by means of a quasi-Newton rootfinding method. Then calculate the
path of government debt { Bt }t≥0 .
4. Determine the budget balancing payroll tax rates τss,t using the social security
system’s sequential budget constraints.
5. Calculate lump-sum transfers Tr such that the sum of transfers equals the sum of
bequests left by the non-surviving households.
6. Determine the new quantities {Ktnew , Lnew
t }t≥0 by aggregating individual decisions. Calculate updated quantities through
Kt = (1 − ω )Kt + ωKtnew

and

Lt = (1 − ω ) Lt + ωLnew
t .

ω thereby serves as a damping factor. Our preferred value for ω is 0.3.
7. Check whether the economy is in equilibrium, i.e.
max
t ≥0

Yt − Ct − It − Gt
< ε.
Yt

This means that the relative difference between aggregate demand and supply of
goods should be smaller than a given tolerance level. If this is not the case, start
with the updated guesses of quantities, tax rates and transfers at step 1. If this is
the case, we have found an equilibrium path of the economy. To determine the
initial equilibrium we use a tolerance level of ε = 10−9 while for the transition
path we set ε = 10−6 .

A.3

Calculation of Compensating Transfers

The calculation of compensating transfers is straightforward. In order to do so, we use
a quasi-Newton rootfinding method that numerically determines the solutions to the
equations
v1 ( j, s, α, η, a + Ψ0 ( j, s, α, η, a)) = v0 ( j, s, α, η, a)
45

and
Evt ( j = 1, s, α, η̄, Ψt ) = Ev0 ( j = 1, s, α, η̄, 0),
respectively. Note that in each iteration of the rootfinding method, we have to solve
for the optimal household decisions.

B

Appendix: Computation of Elasticities

In order to apply Saez’ formula
τh =

1
1

+

a·e
|{z}c

−

( ec − eu )
| {z }

Subst. effect

Inc. effect

to all individuals above the 1% earnings threshold (henceforth denoted by y1% ), we
have to estimate the parameter a as well as the compensated and uncompensated elasticities of earnings with respect to the net of tax rate 1 − τ in our model.
The parameter a can be easily calculated from
a=

y1%
m
1%
ym − y1%

R
with

y1%
m =

y · 1 1% dΦ0
R y≥y
.
1y≥y1% dΦ0

1%
y1%
m denotes mean labor earnings of households above the 1% earnings threshold y .
Note that Saez’ formula also works when incomes are not Pareto distributed at the top,
meaning it just relies on the relation between the threshold above which individuals
should be taxed and the mean earnings above this threshold. Yet, if incomes are Pareto
distributed at the top then a is the parameter of the Pareto distribution.

Determining the (Hicksian) compensated elasticity is complicated. Yet, we can exploit
the Slutzky equation
ec = eu − i,
∂y

where i = (1 − τ ) ∂T is the income effect associated to a marginal change in the net
of tax rate, see Saez (2001). In order to determine the income effect i we proceed as
follows: Starting from the initial equilibrium household decisions n( j, s, α, η, a) with
a distribution over the state space of Φ0 , we adjust the tax schedule T (y), such that
each household has to pay a lump-sum transfer equal to 1% of his initial equilibrium
income, i.e. we set
T̃ (y) = T (y) + tr

with

tr = 0.01 · w · e( j, s, α, η ) · n( j, s, α, η, a).

We then resolve the household optimization problem and determine new labor supply decisions ñ( j, s, α, η, a). We can now determine the individual income effect of a
household as
w( j, s, α, η ) · [ñ( j, s, α, η, a) − n( j, s, α, η, a)]
i ( j, s, α, η, a) = (1 − T 0 (y)) ·
−0.01 · w( j, s, α, η ) · n( j, s, α, η, a)
46

The total income effect then is

R
i=

i ( j, s, α, η, a) · 1y≥y1% dΦ0
R
.
1y≥y1% dΦ0

The derivation of the uncompensated elasticity of earnings with respect to the net of
∂y
tax rate as well as the uncompensated elasticity eu = ∂(1−τ ) · 1−y τ is equally straightforward. We therefore adjust the tax schedule so that marginal tax rates increase by 1%,
i.e.
T̂ 0 (y) = T 0 (y) + 0.01.
We then again solve the household optimization problem to determine the new labor
supply decisions n̂( j, s, α, η, a). The individual uncompensated elasticity of earnings
then can be calculated from
w( j, s, α, η ) · [n̂( j, s, α, η, a) − n( j, s, α, η, a)]
1 − T 0 (y)·
eu ( j, s, α, η, a) =
·
.
−0.01
w( j, s, α, η ) · n( j, s, α, η, a)
According to Saez (2001) the correct uncompensated elasticity to use for his formula is
income weighted, i.e.
R
eu ( j, s, α, η, a) · y · 1y≥y1% dΦ0
R
eu =
.
y · 1y≥y1% dΦ0
Finally using the uncompensated elasticity and the income effect we can calculate the
compensated elasticity from the formula given above.

C

Appendix: Definition of Invariant Probability Measure

First we construct the share of the population in each age group. Let µ̃1 = 1, and for
each j ∈ {2, . . . , J } define recursively
ψj µ̃ j−1
.
1+n

µ̃ j =

Then the share of the population in each age group is given by
µj =

µ̃ j
.
∑ι µ̃ι

Next, we construct the measure of households of age 1 across characteristics (s, α, η, a).
By assumption (see the calibration section, section 3 of the paper) newborn households
enter the economy with zero assets, a = 0 and at the mean idiosyncratic productivity
47

shock η̄. The share of college-educated households is exogenously given by φc and
φn = 1 − φc , and the fixed effect is drawn from a discrete pdf φs (α). Thus
Φ({ j = 1}, {α}, {s}, {η̄ }, {0}) = µ1 φs φs (α)
for s = {n, c} and zero else.
Finally we construct the probability measure for all ages j > 1. For all Borel sets of
assets A we have
ψ j +1 π s ( η 0 | η ) Z
Φ({ j + 1}, {α}, {s}, {η }, A) =
1{a0 ( j,s,α,η,a)∈A} Φ({ j}, {α}, {s}, {η }, da)
1+n
0

where

Z

1{a0 ( j,s,α,η,a)∈A} Φ({ j}, {α}, {s}, {η }, da)

is the measure of assets a today such that, for fixed ( j, s, α, η ), the optimal choice today
of assets for tomorrow, a0 ( j, s, α, η, a) lies in A.

D

Appendix: Details of the Calibration

D.1

Markov Chain for Labor Productivity

The Markov chain governing idiosyncratic labor productivity for both education groups
is given by
s=n
i, j

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.969680
0.007328
0.000055
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

0.029310
0.969846
0.014656
0.000166
0.000002
0.000000
0.000000

0.000332
0.021984
0.969901
0.021984
0.000332
0.024837
0.000000

0.000002
0.000166
0.014656
0.969846
0.029310
0.000000
0.000000

0.000000
0.000000
0.000055
0.007328
0.969680
0.000000
0.000000

0.000676
0.000676
0.000676
0.000676
0.000676
0.949980
0.267852

0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.025183
0.732148

0.1159

0.3405

1.0000

2.9369

8.6255

15.8180

1284.3139

exp(ηn,i )

and

48

s=c
i, j

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.957899
0.007239
0.000055
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

0.028954
0.958063
0.014478
0.000164
0.000002
0.000000
0.000000

0.000328
0.021717
0.958118
0.021717
0.000328
0.028087
0.000000

0.000002
0.000164
0.014478
0.958063
0.028954
0.000000
0.000000

0.000000
0.000000
0.000055
0.007239
0.957899
0.000000
0.000000

0.012817
0.012817
0.012817
0.012817
0.012817
0.969688
0.267852

0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.002225
0.732148

0.2112

0.4595

1.0000

2.1761

4.7353

7.3949

1284.3139

exp(ηc,i )

D.2

The Social Security System

We use the US pension formula to calculate pension payments. Specifically, for a given
average labor earnings ȳ we set


if ȳ < b1 ymed

r1 ȳ
p(s, α, η ) = f (ȳ) =

r1 b1 ymed + r2 (ȳ − b1 ymed )


r b ymed + r (b − b )ymed + r (ȳ − b ymed )
2 2
3
2
1 1
1

if ỹ < b2 ymed
otherwise

Here r1 , r2 , r3 are the respective replacement rates and b1 and b2 the bend points. We
express these points in terms of median household income ymed which is the median
of income from labor and assets (including bequests and pension payments). We use
ymed = 50, 000 as a reference value for this (see US Census Bureau for 2009). Consequently, the bend points are b1 = 0.184 and b2 = 1.144 and the respective replacement
rates are r1 = 0.90, r2 = 0.32 and r3 = 0.15. The maximum amount of pension benefit a
household can receive is therefore 30, 396, or 0.608 times the median income. All data
is taken from the information site of the social security system for 2012. Finally, we calibrate the contribution cap of the pension system ȳss in order to obtain a contribution
rate of 12.4 percent.

E

Appendix: Sensitivity analysis

When doing sensitivity analysis, we have to partly recalibrate the model in order to
make results comparable. For each different specification of the model we therefore
recalibrate the technology level Ω such that the wage rate for effective labor is again
equal to w = 1 as well as the depreciation rate δk such that the interest rate remains at
4%. The former insures stability of our computational algorithm, the latter is necessary
to guarantee equal weights of generations in the social welfare function. Finally we
recalibrate the taste parameter for the disutility of labor α so that average hours worked

49

remain at 33% of the time endowment. We furthermore do some specific adjustments
for different sensitivity scenarios which we outline in the following.

E.1

Size of the Income Effect

When we impose log preferences the relationship between hours worked and individual labor productivity changes dramatically. As a consequence we have to completely
recalibrate the total income process. The following table shows which probabilities and
productivity levels we have to choose in this case to obtain the same fit for the earnings
and wealth distribution in our model:
s=n
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
exp(ηn,i )

0.969813
0.007329
0.000055
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

0.029314
0.969979
0.014658
0.000166
0.000002
0.000000
0.000000

0.000332
0.021987
0.970034
0.021987
0.000332
0.029262
0.000000

0.000002
0.000166
0.014658
0.969979
0.029314
0.000000
0.000000

0.000000
0.000000
0.000055
0.007329
0.969813
0.000000
0.000000

0.000539
0.000539
0.000539
0.000539
0.000539
0.949874
0.181122

0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.020864
0.818878

0.1722

0.4149

1.0000

2.4101

5.8085

8.6515

276.8624

and
s=c
i, j

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.958451
0.007243
0.000055
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

0.028971
0.958615
0.014486
0.000164
0.000002
0.000000
0.000000

0.000328
0.021729
0.958670
0.021729
0.000328
0.070700
0.000000

0.000002
0.000164
0.014486
0.958615
0.028971
0.000000
0.000000

0.000000
0.000000
0.000055
0.007243
0.958451
0.000000
0.000000

0.012248
0.012248
0.012248
0.012248
0.012248
0.927047
0.181122

0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.002253
0.818878

0.2809

0.5300

1.0000

1.8867

3.5597

4.3846

276.8624

exp(ηc,i )

E.2

Persistence of High Productivity States

To make the highest productivity state completely permanent we again have to adjust
the transition probabilities in our model. This time we assume that only at age 30 there
is a certain probability that individuals can climb up to the highest productivity region. This probability is the same for each individual of an education level. In order to

50

determine this probability we calculate the fraction of individuals in the highest productivity region between the ages 30 and jr for each education level in the benchmark
model. We then choose the probability to get a permanent very high income shock in
the sensitivity model such that the fraction of households in the highest income region
is exactly the same as in the benchmark model.

51

