                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DIRECTED GIVING:
         EVIDENCE FROM AN INTER-HOUSEHOLD TRANSFER EXPERIMENT

                                           Catia Batista
                                          Dan Silverman
                                           Dean Yang

                                       Working Paper 20605
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20605


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




We appreciate comments and suggestions of seminar participants at Northwestern University, the
University of Michigan, and Stanford University. Cheney Wells, our IPA Project Associate, deserves
special thanks for superb work on all aspects of project implementation and data management. This
project would not have been possible without the collaboration of Banco Oportunidade de Mocambique
(BOM); we greatly appreciate the support of Kathryn Larcombe and Douglas Pond at BOM. This
study was funded by the International Growth Centre (IGC) and the Agricultural Technology Adoption
Initiative (ATAI). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Catia Batista, Dan Silverman, and Dean Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Directed Giving: Evidence from an Inter-Household Transfer Experiment
Catia Batista, Dan Silverman, and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20605
October 2014
JEL No. C92,C93,D01,D03,D64,O17

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate the determinants of giving in a lab-in-the-field experiment with large stakes. Study
participants in urban Mozambique play dictator games where their counterpart is the closest person
to them outside their household. When given the option, dictators do a large fraction of giving in kind
(in the form of goods) rather than cash. In addition, they share more in total when they have the option
of giving in kind, compared to giving that can only be in cash. Qualitative post-experiment responses
suggest that this effect is driven by a desire to control how recipients use gifted resources. Standard
economic determinants such as the rate of return to giving and the size of the endowment also affect
giving, but the effects of even large changes in these determinants are significantly smaller than the
effect of the in-kind option. Our results support theories of giving where the utility of givers depends
on the composition (not just the level) of gift-recipient expenditures, and givers thus seek control over
transferred resources.


Catia Batista                                       Dean Yang
Faculdade de Economia                               University of Michigan
Universidade Nova de Lisboa                         Department of Economics and
Campus de Campolide                                 Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
1099-032 Lisboa                                     735 S. State Street, Room 3316
Portugal                                            Ann Arbor, MI 48109
catia.batista@novasbe.pt                            and NBER
                                                    deanyang@umich.edu
Dan Silverman
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
P.O. Box 879801
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
and NBER
dsilver3@asu.edu
1.   Introduction
     In both rich and poor countries, transfers of resources across individuals and across
households are common and often large in magnitude. In developing countries, inter-household
transfers play an important role in replacing public transfers when those public sources are not
available (Cox and Jimenez, 1992; Cox et al. 2004; Jensen 2004; Kazianga 2006). Similarly,
informal transfer and credit relationships between households also augment missing insurance
markets in developing countries (Townsend 1994, Udry 1994, Jalan and Ravallion 1999,
Angelucci et al 2010). In developed countries, inter-household transfers are also widespread
(Altonji et al 1992, 1997; Bernheim et al 2004; Arrondel and Masson 2006).
     Becker’s (1974) model of altruism is the seminal theory of inter-household transfers. This
model was subject to an early test by Cox (1987), who found that inter vivos transfers were more
consistent with exchange-related motives than with pure altruism. A recent literature has used
experiments to examine motivations behind giving. Studies have explored the existence and
nature of altruistic motives for giving, such as Andreoni and Vesterlund (2001), Andreoni and
Miller (2002), Binzel and Fehr (2013), Camerer and Fehr (2004), and DellaVigna et al (2012).
Other work, such as Leider et al (2009) and Ligon and Schechter (2010), has highlighted that
transfers may reflect selfish or “exchange” motives – desires on the part of givers to reward
recipients for past behavior or to influence future behavior – in addition to altruism.1
     In this paper, we examine a cross-cutting issue: whether and how givers seek to influence or
control the consumption patterns of gift recipients. Would an ability to wield control over
recipient consumption out of gifted resources affect givers’ expected utility from giving, and
their giving decisions overall? While in-kind transfers by governments have been the subject of a
great deal of study (see, Currie and Gahvari, 2007, for a review), whether and how individual
givers value “directed” giving has received less attention. Understanding how individuals value
directed giving has potentially important theoretical and practical implications. From a
theoretical standpoint, evidence of a desire for control on the part of givers rules out certain
models of the giving decision – for example, it is inconsistent with a simple model of pure
altruism and perfect rationality on the part of givers and recipients.


1
 Barr and Genicot (2008) and Attanasio et al (2012) use experiments to examine the determinants of the
composition and functioning of informal risk-sharing networks.

                                                                                                         1
    Evidence on directed giving motives could also have important practical or policy
implications. If such motives exist and play a quantitatively substantial role, real-world transfer
behavior may be affected by regulatory or technological developments that facilitate givers’
control over recipient consumption. For example, new technologies such as the Internet facilitate
in-kind giving over distances (via online merchants), and telecommunications can improve long-
distance monitoring of transfer recipients. In the legal realm, trusts and other legal instruments
allow givers to place limits on how recipients can use inter-vivos transfers and bequests. In the
charitable giving context, directed giving motives might explain the strategy of soliciting
donations for specific, defined uses, rather than general ones.
    The question we pose is also related to research on the motivations behind in-kind giving.
Giving often takes the form of cash transfers, but a substantial share of giving is in-kind.
Standard models of giving imply that givers, who may not be fully aware of recipient
preferences, cannot do better at raising recipient utility than by giving cash (as opposed to
making in-kind gifts), which allows recipients to make utility-maximizing consumption choices
on their own.2 The prevalence of in-kind giving is therefore a puzzle for very standard models.
    The prevalence of in-kind giving is especially interesting because research on the effects of
in-kind government transfers has mostly shown that they are inframarginal; they do not seem to
change food consumption patterns relative to cash transfers (for example, see Moffitt (1989) on
the Puerto Rican case, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) on the US Stamp Food program, and
Cunha (2014) on a similar Mexican program.) Though, Cunha, Di Giorgi and Jayachandran
(2011) point to a pecuniary benefit for consumers of goods provided by in-kind transfers, arising
from the negative equilibrium effect on prices that these transfers have in local markets (via
increased supply of goods transferred in-kind).
    Elaborations of standard models can, however, explain in-kind giving in the absence price
effects. Pollak (1988) models in-kind gifts, or tied transfers, within the family as direct
consequences of paternalistic preferences, where parents derive utility from their children’s
consumption of only a subset of goods. In-kind gifts are just a way to promote the consumption
of those preferred goods. Waldfogel (1993) hypothesizes that individuals may give in-kind gifts

2
  An exception would occur when an altruistic gift-giver is faced with the “Samaritan’s dilemma,” i.e. when the
recipient’s optimal dynamic strategy is to over-spend in early periods in the expectation that the giver will increase
the value of gifts at later periods if the recipient’s income is low at that time. In this setting, in-kind gifts in early
periods would be a way to rein in over-spending by the recipient, which would likely be welfare-enhancing. This
argument is formalized by Bruce and Waldman (1991).

                                                                                                                             2
if they think they know the recipient’s preferences better than recipients do themselves. His data
reject this hypothesis, however: undergraduates report valuing in-kind gifts received at large
discounts relative to market prices. Prendergast and Stole (2001) instead rationalize in-kind gifts
in a signaling model. They hypothesize that in-kind gifts allow givers to send positive signals to
recipients, by putting in the effort to select a gift and to show the recipient that the giver knows
the recipient’s preferences well.
    A number of theories can generate directed giving, or giving in which givers seek control
over the use of transferred resources. In the examples we discuss, givers’ desire for control arises
because giver utility depends on the composition (not just the level) of gift-recipient
expenditures. For example, in a paternalistic model, givers may value the utility recipients gain
from consumption of “virtue” goods, but not recipient utility from consumption of “vice” goods.
This makes it possible for givers to raise their own utility from giving by making in-kind gifts.
An alternative model is one where gift recipients may consume either “public” goods (goods
which generate utility for givers as well as recipients) or “private” goods (which generate utility
only for recipients).3 In this public goods model, givers can raise their own utility by making in-
kind gifts of public goods. In both the paternalistic and public goods models, giver utility rises
with in-kind giving because givers can control recipient consumption patterns better with in-kind
gifts than with cash gifts. Both models make ambiguous predictions as to whether the possibility
of making in-kind gifts leads to more or less gift-giving overall.4
    The main contribution of our paper is to provide the first direct experimental evidence
supporting a class of models that generate motives for directed giving. In addition, we reveal a
pattern in the results that is distinctive of the paternalistic model and thus suggests this model
more relevant than either the public goods or the signaling model of giving. We conduct a lab-in-
the-field experiment with large stakes. Respondents were clients of a microfinance institution in
urban Mozambique, and played a series of dictator games in which their counterpart (the
recipient of gifted funds) was, according to the respondents, the closest person to them outside of
their own household. Experimental rounds vary on, among other things, whether giving to the



3
  Examples of public goods in this context include housing and other household durables, which may be enjoyed by
givers on occasion, or investments in children in the recipient household who are related to the giver.
4
  A review of the theoretical motivations for in-kind giving is provided by Currie and Gahvari (2007) who highlight
the relevance of paternalistic arguments in explaining existing social in-kind transfer programs.

                                                                                                                  3
counterpart can be in cash alone, or can be either cash or in-kind.5 One of the choices made by
each respondent is, at the end of the experiment, chosen at random to be implemented in reality.6
    Our focus on transfers between members of a social network distinguishes our research from
the vast majority of dictator game experiments on willingness to give anonymously to unknown
recipients with whom no future interaction is expected. Leider et al (2009), Ligon and Schechter
(2010), and Binzel and Fehr (2013a,b) are recent exceptions that also study individuals with
social ties. In our view, experiments on non-anonymous giving in social networks merit greater
attention. Many have observed that the level of sharing in anonymous lab settings is high relative
to similar interactions of strangers outside the lab (e.g., DellaVigna, 2009). This suggests that the
motives behind giving in classic dictator game experiments may be different from those that
inspire the large amounts of giving that occurs between members of social networks.7 Our
experiment is designed to understand better the motives for giving among friends and family.
    By studying giving within a social network, we lose an advantage of anonymous giving
experiments. Because our subjects interact after the experiment, the possibility that they are
playing a repeated game makes interpretation of their experimental behavior more difficult. To
aid interpretation, we use our experimental results and a survey of the participants to investigate
the role of repeated interaction. In particular, we look for evidence of favor trading after the
experiment and for evidence that givers favored durable goods that could serve as tangible
reminders of their favor to recipients. We also look for evidence of standard economic
advantages of giving in-kind rather than cash, such as convenience or price, that would motivate
in-kind giving in repeated games among agents with standard preferences. This is important
because the advantages of cash giving in static models also apply to many dynamic ones.
    We find that in-kind giving is appealing to our study respondents. As a baseline, we find that
when we only allow respondents to give in the form of cash, they give 39.6% of their
endowments to their counterparts on average. In contrast, when respondents can freely choose to


5
  In-kind options were presented in the form of a catalog with categories for housing, education, grocery, clothing,
health, agricultural inputs, and other.
6
  A key advantage of the Mozambique sample is that income levels are relatively low by developed-country
standards, allowing us to implement a high-stakes experiment (from the respondent standpoint) on a reasonable
research budget. The value of the endowment allocated by respondents ranged across experimental choices from 4 to
16% of median monthly household consumption in the sample.
7
  The findings of Bezu and Holden (2013), who compare giving in a dictator game to a spouse to giving to an
anonymous recipient are consistent with this natural view. Goeree et al (2010), and D’Exelle and Riedl (2010) also
find evidence, beyond family ties, of the importance of social distance for giving.

                                                                                                                  4
give to counterparts in some combination of cash or in kind, they give 25.9% of the endowment
in cash and 19.2% in kind. In other words, in-kind giving displaces a substantial share of giving
that would otherwise be in cash.8 As a result, when in-kind giving is an option, a large share of
giving (42.6%) is in kind, rather than in cash.
    Our other key finding is that offering respondents the option of in-kind giving leads to
substantially more total giving. When respondents also have the option of making in-kind gifts
(in addition to cash gifts), they give 45.1% of their endowments, in comparison to 39.6% of their
endowments when giving can only be in cash. This 5.5 percentage point effect is about three-
tenths of a standard deviation of the percentage given in the experiment.
    The in-kind effect is also large relative to the effect of other determinants of giving in our
experiment. A very large increase in the rate of return to giving (moving from 0% to 200%
return) raises the fraction shared by 2.4 percentage points,9 while a four-fold increase in the size
of the endowment given to respondents (from 300 to 1200 meticais) leads sharing to fall by 2.7
percentage points.10 The in-kind effect is therefore at least twice as large in magnitude as the
effects of these very large changes in other economic determinants of giving.
    These results are consistent with both directed giving models (paternalistic and public goods
models), as well as a signaling model of giving (Prendergast and Stole 2001) where givers seek
to demonstrate how well they know the preferences of their recipients. To distinguish among
these models, we implemented additional experimental choices where givers could not make the
exact in-kind consumption choices themselves. In these rounds, givers only specified the money
amounts allocated to in-kind goods, and recipients made the final choice of goods purchased
with these in-kind funds.11 The goods that recipients could choose among in these in-kind
allocations included both public and private goods; in other words, givers could not control
whether recipients chose public vs. private goods. The manner of selection of the in-kind goods
by gift recipients was such that recipients could not use the in-kind resources for expenditures
such as alcohol, tobacco, or entertainment, that would be viewed by givers as unproductive or

8
  The in-kind giving choices in this and the following paragraph refer to experimental rounds 5-8, the “in kind with
respondent purchase” rounds. See Section 3 and the Appendix for further details.
9
  In experimental rounds with a rate of return to giving of x%, each amount a respondent gave out of their
endowment to the counterpart was “matched” by the experiment with funds amounting to an additional x% and then
shared with the counterpart.
10
   One US dollar was worth roughly 27 Mozambican meticais during the time period of this experiment.
11
   This is analogous to “gift cards” that are common in more developed economies, which provide funds that are to
be used in specific establishments (stores, restaurants, etc.) but cannot be directly converted to cash.

                                                                                                                   5
inappropriate (vice goods). Making in-kind gifts in this fashion would also presumably have no
signaling value. If in-kind giving is little affected by the ability to ensure the gift takes the form
of public goods, then paternalism, rather than public good consumption or signaling, is the
dominant motive behind in-kind giving.
    We find that offering this form of the in-kind option also has a statistically significant
positive effect on giving. This effect is only slightly smaller than the effect of the main in-kind
option (where respondents make final purchase decisions), and the two in-kind effects are
statistically indistinguishable from one another. The fact that the in-kind effect is still positive
and significant when recipients make final purchase decisions suggests that the paternalistic
model of giving is the most empirically relevant in this context.
    Additional analysis helps us evaluate other explanations for the results. We provide evidence
– based on an examination of heterogeneity in the treatment effect – against the hypotheses that
the “in-kind effect” reflects the value of free delivery of the in-kind items, the opportunity for
counterparts to consume goods not available in their local areas, or the opportunity to give the
counterpart a tangible reminder of the giver’s generosity.
    As a final test of whether the in-kind effect is driven by directed giving as opposed to other
motivations, we examine qualitative respondent self-reports on their own motivations for in-kind
giving. These data reveal that a desire to control how recipients use gifted resources figures
prominently in decisions to give in kind, and these individual-level responses correlate positively
with the extent to which respondents increase their own giving in response to the in-kind option
in the experiment. Other motivations for in-kind giving figure much less prominently in these
qualitative data.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model of directed
giving. Section 3 describes the experiment and the baseline data. Section 4 presents the main
empirical results, quantifying the in-kind effect. Section 5 presents additional empirical analyses
intended to reveal the mechanisms behind the in-kind effect. Section 6 concludes.


2. Directed Giving in Theory
    We present here two simple models that generate directed giving, or giving in which givers
seek control over the use of transferred resources: a paternalistic model and a public goods
model. In both cases, the giver’s desire for control arises because giver utility depends on the


                                                                                                         6
composition, not just the level, of the recipient’s expenditures. Givers therefore prefer to give in-
kind because doing so permits better control over recipient consumption patterns than does
giving cash. The basic mechanisms underlying these models appear in the literature on in-kind
government transfers (see Currie and Ghavari, 2007, for a review), and they make intuitive
predictions. We provide them (a) to fix ideas, (b) to show how predictions regarding in-kind
giving can be refined, and (c) to show that these models make ambiguous predictions as to
whether the possibility of making in-kind gifts leads to more or less gift-giving overall.
A paternalistic model of giving
     In this model, givers value the utility recipients gain from consumption of “virtue” goods, but
not recipient utility from consumption of “vice” goods. This makes it possible for givers prefer
making gifts in-kind.12
     An altruistic giver decides how much of a windfall to donate to a recipient, either in cash or

in kind. Suppose, for simplicity, that there are two composite goods x and y with prices p x

and p y denominated in meticais. To make the discussion more vivid, we will call x the virtue

good, and y the vice good.

     In the absence of a gift, a recipient with wealth  would solve
                                                  max u  x   v y 
                                                   x, y

                                             s.t.   p x x  p y y  0
                                                  x, y  0
     Under standard assumptions, the recipient's indirect utility is a well-behaved function of

wealth, R; so if the giver donates some amount of cash g to the recipient then the benefit
                                                ∗      ∗
to the recipient is R  g − R. Denote by x g, y g the optimal choices associated

with a cash gift of size g.

     Suppose instead that the giver allocates an amount k of the virtue good to the recipient.

Assume that this gift is infinitely divisible, has a retail value of g p x k  g , and can be sold

for cash only at some discount (1   ) . In this case, the recipient solves


12
  The model is reminiscent of Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010), who model the conflict between the present and
future self over consumption of temptation goods. In our case, the conflict is between the giver and recipient over
the recipient’s consumption.

                                                                                                                      7
                                         max u  x  1  s k   v y 
                                          x, y,s

                                     s.t.   p x  x  sk   p y y  0
          (P)
                                         x, y, s  0
                                         s  0,1
where s is the fraction of the virtue good gift that is sold instead of being consumed.
          If the solution to this problem involves no sale of the virtue good ( s  0 ) and additional

purchases of the virtue good ( x  0) , then the recipient's optimal choices x̃ ,              ỹ satisfy
 u ′ x̃ k         px
                         ,   x̃  k  x ∗ g, and ỹ  y ∗ g. In other words, the giver's demand that the
     v ′ ỹ        py


recipient consume at least k of the virtue good is not binding in this case; and the recipient's

ultimate consumption does not depend on whether the gift with a market value of g meticais
was cash or in-kind.13
          In the more interesting case, there is some cost to selling the in-kind gift (  1) and the size
of the in-kind gift, (k ) , exceeds the amount of the virtue good that the recipient would have
                                          ∗
chosen were the gift to be made in cash, x g. A standard argument about the advantages of
                                                   ∗
cash over in-kind assistance then applies. If k  x g , then the recipient is worse off than she

would be with the gift’s cash equivalent, g. We know this is true because the allocation
x, y  k, ỹ  is feasible when the recipient is allocated the cash gift g, but she does not
choose it.

          We will denote by K, k  the indirect utility of the recipient with wealth  who has been

given an in-kind gift of size k. Using this notation, the argument given above implies that for a

gift composed of a cash amount i and an in-kind amount k, such that, p x k  i  g,

                               R  g ≥ K  i, k 
          (1)
                                     ∗
and the inequality is strict if k  x g.
          Inequality (1) makes in-kind giving a puzzle for basic models of altruism. We present here a
simple theory of in-kind gifts that blends altruism and paternalism. In a standard model of

13
     The same is, of course, also true if there is no cost to selling the gift   (  1) .


                                                                                                                8
altruism, when given a money windfall of size m the giver solves

                                       max1 − Vc  K  i, k 
                                        c,i,k

                                                  i − p x k 
                                  s. t. m − c                 ≥0
                                                     1r
                                       c, i, k ≥ 0

where Vc is the giver’s utility from consumption of a composite good c denominated in

meticais,  ∈ 0, 1 gives the altruistic weight on the recipient’s utility, and all other variables
are defined as above. Anticipating our experiments, we also introduce a relative price of giving
r. When r is higher, giving is cheaper. Inequality (1) from above implies that giving nothing
          ∗
in kind, k  0, solves this altruistic giver’s problem. If, in addition, we set aside cases where
the in-kind gift would not bind, then in-kind giving is never optimal.
   Suppose, instead, that the giver, while altruistic, does not entirely respect the preferences of
the recipient. He cares about her well-being only along certain dimensions. For simplicity,
assume that the giver respects only the recipient’s consumption of virtue goods. In this case, the
giver solves

                                                             
                                           max1 − Vc  ui, k 
                                            c,i,k

                                                    i  p x k 
                                    s. t. m − c −                ≥0
                                                       1r
                                          c, i, k ≥ 0

       
where ui, k  is the value from virtue good consumption to a recipient who received a gift

consisting of cash i and in-kind amount k. That is,

                                        
                                        ui, k  ≡ ux ∗   i, k 

       ∗
where x   i, k  solves problem (P) above given wealth   i and in-kind gift k.
   This simple model of altruism tinged by paternalism makes sense of in-kind gifts. More
precisely, this model implies:

   Result 1: The giver strictly prefers an in-kind gift k with market value g to a cash gift of


                                                                                                       9
g if and only if k  x ∗ g.
   In other words, the giver prefers to give in-kind whenever it generates more consumption of
the virtue good than would occur if he just gave cash. That is true because the giver places zero
value on the recipient's vice good consumption and values her virtue good consumption
monotonically. If we set aside knife-edge cases of indifference, this model also predicts that gifts
would never combine of cash and in-kind. A richer model of giver preferences that, instead of
entirely ignoring vice utility only gave it a weight less than one, would predict that some gifts
would consist of both cash and in-kind. In these cases, the giver would equate the marginal
altruistic utility from giving in-kind with the marginal altruistic utility from giving cash.
   Result 2: The level of virtue good consumption is weakly higher when the option to give in-
kind is available.

   Proof: Let ĝ denote the optimal gift when only cash can be given, and i, k  the optimal

gift when both forms of giving are possible. If ĝ  0, the claim is trivially true. Suppose

instead ĝ  0 and, contrary to the claim, x i, k  x gˆ . Consider an alternative allocation
                                                       



0, k where x 0, k  x gˆ . This allocation generates the same utility from altruism as
ĝ , 0. The positive costs of selling any part of the in-kind gift imply
   (2)                                 px k   ĝ
because giving in-kind weakly raises the relative price of the vice good for the recipient; every
meticais-worth of the gift she liquidates to purchase the vice costs her 1   meticais. It follows
                                                ′′
that if the gift ĝ was feasible then so is 0, k , and this alternative gift leaves the giver with

at least as much own consumption as the strictly cash gift ĝ. By construction, marginal utility
                                                    ′′
to the giver from altruism is the same at gift 0, k  as at ĝ, 0, and we have just argued that
                                                                         ′′
marginal utility from own consumption is weakly lower. Thus, either 0, k  is optimal, or an

even larger in-kind gift is preferred. 
   Inequality (2) isolates the key effect on the giver of providing the in-kind option. The

possibility of giving in-kind lowers the effective price, in terms of own consumption c, of
producing virtue good consumption and thus altruistic utility. This effective price change
generates income and substitution effects which both point in the same direction. The


                                                                                                     10
substitution effect gives incentive to buy more virtue good and less own consumption, and the
income effect creates incentive to buy more of both.
    If we understand that the introduction of the in-kind option effectively reduces the price to
the giver of generating recipient virtue good consumption, it is straightforward to see that the net
effect on the total market value of the gift, or its complement c , is ambiguous. The lower
effective price of getting the recipient to consume the virtue good creates incentive for the giver
to substitute out of own consumption and into giving (the substitution effect). But the lower

effective price makes every level of virtue good production cheaper, in terms of c, to obtain,
and thus creates incentive to purchase more own consumption (income effect). Whether the
market value of the gift increases when the in-kind option becomes available depends, therefore,
on the relative magnitude of these income and substitution effects.
    Result 3: The introduction of the in-kind option has an ambiguous effect on the total market
value of the gift.


A public goods model of giving
    A related model of directed giving is one where gift recipients may consume either “public”
goods (goods which generate utility for givers as well as recipients) or “private” goods (which
generate utility only for recipients). In this public goods model, givers can raise their own utility
from giving by making in-kind gifts of public goods.
    In the interest of brevity, we provide the formal exposition of this model in Appendix A, and
simply note here that the model makes similar predictions to the paternalistic model. In
particular, analogs of Results 1 through 3, discussed above in the context of the paternalistic
model, also hold in the public goods model.
Impure altruism and in-kind giving
    These two models of giving address the puzzle that in-kind giving presents for standard and
basic models of altruism. In a standard model of altruism, where all goods are private and the
donor's utility simply includes a positive weight on the utility of their recipient, giving in-kind
can never help, and might hurt.
    This observation has motivated alternative models of giving that rationalize in-kind gifts.
Waldfogel (1993) offers a model of altruistic donors, and recipients who may not know, with
certainty, what consumption bundle they would prefer. The model thus opens the possibility that

                                                                                                      11
a donor may know his recipient better than she knows herself. At a minimum, it creates the
incentive for a donor to take on a bit of risk by giving in-kind with the hope that the realization
of the utility from the gift beats the safe return from giving cash. Prendergast and Stole (2001)
take a different approach. They motivate non-monetary gifts with a donor’s preference to be
perceived as confident about what the receiver likes. By purchasing a gift, the donor issues a
costly signal that he is so confident in recipient preferences that he is willing to give in-kind
rather than cash. That model explains both why people give non-monetary gifts, and why “the
thought alone” does not count as much as the thought backed up by an actual purchase.
   The two simple models presented above suggest alternative motivations for giving in kind,
motivations that have been discussed in the literature on in-kind government transfers (see the
review by Currie and Ghavari, 2007, and Cuhna 2010) . In the paternalistic model, the donor
simply gains utility from the recipient's consumption of some goods (virtue goods), but not
others (vice goods). In the public goods model, the mechanism behind in-kind giving is shared
consumption. In many settings, both donor and recipient may gain utility from a gift, not because
the donor is altruistic, but because the donor, in effect, consumes the gift as well.
   These are different forms of impure altruism than the one developed in Andreoni (1989,
1990). In Andreoni’s models, the donor is motivated by the warm glow he derives from the gift.
This impure altruism doesn't induce preferences over in-kind vs. cash giving. In our models, the
donor’s altruism is impure but structured in particular ways. The common feature of the models
we present is that the donor’s utility is influenced by the composition of recipient expenditures
(even when the level of recipient expenditures is held constant). The donor gives in kind, and
thus benefits the recipient, because she either induces consumption of the particular (“virtue”)
goods she differentially values, or procures valuable public goods for herself.
Distinguishing among the models
   While the paternalistic and the public goods model share many predictions, a test allows us to
distinguish between them and, as a byproduct, shed light on the relevance of the signaling model.
The test examines whether givers still seek in-kind giving if the in-kind allocations can only be
made to a very broad set of goods that includes a mixture of public and private goods, but that
excludes “vice” goods. To be specific (and anticipating our experimental setup), consider a
situation where in-kind giving involves providing recipients with something akin to a gift card,



                                                                                                      12
that can be used for purchases of a wide range of goods from a catalog, but that rules out use for
vices (e.g., alcohol, tobacco, or sex services).
     In such a scenario, paternalistic givers would value in-kind giving just as much as they did
when they directly controlled the purchases, so long as vice goods are not in the catalog. Because
the catalog includes both private and public goods, however, givers motivated by their interest in
consuming public goods will value this form of giving much less than when they directly
controlled the purchases. The value to the giver of an in-kind gift is diminished, in this scenario,
by the recipients’ purchases of private goods.14 In addition, there would also be no value of in-
kind giving under the signaling model, as givers would be unable to signal their knowledge of
recipient preferences.
     Result 4: If givers assign the same value to direct control of an in-kind option as to an in-
kind option that excludes only vice goods, this would be consistent with a paternalistic model,
but not with either a public goods or signaling model of giving.
     This result motivates our first analysis in Section 5 below.


3. Background, Sample, and Description of Intervention
Sample and baseline survey
     Participants were individuals with savings accounts at Banco Oportunidade de Moçambique
(BOM), our local project partner. BOM is a microfinance bank in the Opportunity International
network. It has two branches in the Maputo capital city area at which we conducted this study.
Participants were interviewed immediately before the experiment between May and July 2012,
along with their counterparts.15
     The interviewer team had a desk at each of the two Maputo branches of BOM and invited
savings account holders visiting the branch when the team was present to participate in the




14
   The value of the in-kind option without direct control does not go to zero so long as, by constraining the recipient
to choose from the catalog, the giver induces more public good consumption than she would by giving a cash
amount of equal value.
15
   A simultaneous 10-minute phone interview was conducted with the counterpart of each participant. At the
beginning of the phone interview, clients were asked to briefly talk to their counterpart, reassuring them that they
were collaborating with the research team conducting the interviews and summarizing the purpose of the project. It
was not possible to contact 29 counterparts (or 12.1%) of the clients interviewed. A few counterpart interviews
(6.9%) were not conducted at the same time as client interviews, but sometime within the week following the initial
client interview.

                                                                                                                     13
experiment.16 To be considered eligible, a respondent had to identify a counterpart at their “most
closely connected household” (MCCH) outside of their own home who owned a cell phone and
had a bank account (other than one shared with the respondent). This selection criterion was
designed to allow for phone interviews of the counterpart and bank transfers of the monetary
payoffs from the experiment.17
     The baseline survey was administered immediately before the experiment and asked
questions about the participants’ demographic characteristics, labor market status, expenditure
patterns and property ownership, as well as on gift giving (and receiving) behavior.
     Our sample of interest consists of 239 respondents who were administered the baseline
survey and asked to make the dictator-game allocations. We excluded a small number (5) of
individuals who did not provide complete responses to all experimental rounds.
     Table 1 presents summary statistics from the baseline survey. Nearly half of the sampled
respondents (47 percent) were females. Respondents had a median age of 34 years and 57
percent of these respondents had not been born in Maputo city. A majority (61 percent) were or
had been married before, and the median household size was 5 people. A large fraction (80
percent) of the respondents in our sample had completed primary school and 27 percent had
finished high school. Most (77 percent) of the respondents in our sample reported being
employed. Median monthly household expenditure was 7,425 meticais (roughly US$275), 74
percent of the respondents reported owning their home, 48 owned agricultural land, 41 owned
farm animals, and 27 percent owned a car.
     We note that 21 percent of the counterparts to our respondents do not live in the greater
Maputo city area, i.e. their closest relationship outside the home is in a distant location. In terms
of transfers made, 60 percent of the respondents in the baseline sample report having given cash
to their counterparts over the past year. The average of annual cash transfers is 5,668 meticais.
Many (46 percent) report having made in-kind transfers to their counterparts over the past year.
Annual in-kind transfers are valued at an average of 687 meticais. Overall, 66 percent of the
individuals in our sample state they have given money or goods to their counterpart in the
MCCH, and average annual transfers are valued at 6,355 meticais.

16
   Interviewer teams were present in the BOM branches during all working hours of all working days. For project
funding reasons, there were two spells of interviewer presence at BOM branches: May 2-17 and June 18 to July 20.
17
   Of a total of 283 individuals approached and willing to participate in the survey during the two fieldwork spells
described above, 26 (9.2%) could not be interviewed because their counterpart in the MCCH did not have access to
a bank account and 13 (4.6%) were excluded because their counterpart did not own a cell phone.

                                                                                                                 14
     Table 1 also presents data on transfers received by the participants in the experiment from
their counterparts in the MCCH, which are also substantial. More than half (56 percent) of the
baseline survey respondents report having received cash from their counterparts in the MCCH
(with an annual average value of 2,995), whereas 51 percent declare having received in-kind
gifts (with an average value of 1,453 meticais). In total, 66 percent of the respondents in the
baseline survey received either money or gifts from their counterparts in the MCCH, with an
average annual value of 4,448 meticais. The percentage of people sending remittances is
therefore very close to the percentage of people receiving transfers, although the annual amount
of cash received is only about 70% of the annual amount sent.
     Importantly, our experiment endows respondents with substantial real resources and then
asks them to make sharing decisions. The amounts involved in our experiment make them, in
fact, important real-world decisions. The minimum endowment of 300 meticais amounts to 4.7%
of total transfers to the counterpart in the last 12 months; for the maximum endowment of 1200
meticais the corresponding percentage is 18.9%.
     Table 2 shows the relationship between the respondents in the baseline sample and their
counterparts in the MCCH. Counterparts tend to be siblings (nearly one third), followed by
friends (about 17 percent), cousins and children (each around 10 percent).
Description of experiment
     The experiment was administered to respondents face-to-face, immediately after they
answered the baseline survey. While the respondent was making the experimental choices,
counterparts answered the baseline survey on the phone (fielded by another project staff
member), and were not told anything about the experimental choices the respondent was facing.
     The experiment offered respondents a number of choices, wherein they decided on the
allocation of a large real stake that could be as high as 3600 meticais (roughly US$133). This
amount is nearly half the median monthly household expenditure in the baseline sample.
     Respondents were offered 29 different choice rounds, which are detailed in the Appendix.
One of these choices would be implemented in reality, following a random draw made by the
individual at the end of the experiment, and respondents knew this in advance. A subset of 15 of
these rounds is the subject of the present paper.18


18
  Analysis of other rounds will be the subject of future papers.The other rounds not analyzed in the current paper
are aimed at examining present-bias in sharing decisions. These were four cash rounds where all payments were

                                                                                                                     15
    The first set of choices, rounds 1-4, asked respondents to decide on how to share an amount
of money between “self” and “other,” to be paid the day after.19 The “other” was the counterpart
identified by the respondent at the outset. The rounds varied in the rate of return to giving (i.e.
the amount by which the amount allocated to other was multiplied) and the overall amount at
stake. The rate of return to giving was either 0% or 200%.20 The overall amount at stake for
“self” was either 300 or 1,200 meticais. These rounds are referred to as “cash rounds” because
respondents could only share resources with counterparts in the form of cash.
    The second set of choices proposed to participants was the same as above, with an added
option: respondents could decide whether gifts to the counterpart would be made in the form of a
direct deposit to their counterpart’s account on the next day (cash), or in the form of a delivery of
goods (with the value that they choose to allocate) to their counterpart’s doorstep (in-kind). Prior
to making their choices, respondents were shown a catalog depicting sample items of goods they
could provide to counterparts, in the following categories: housing, education, grocery, clothing,
health, and agricultural inputs. They were told that they would be given the option of shopping
for these items with the project staff or of having the staff shop for these items. The project team
would deliver the goods directly to the counterpart’s doorstep. These rounds are referred to as
“in-kind rounds.” Due to time constraints, we did not ask in each in-kind round for the exact
goods to be purchased. The exact goods were only specified if an in-kind round was selected for
implementation at the end (and if that allocation had a nonzero in-kind allocation).
    In a first subset of choices (rounds 5-8), respondents were told that they would select the in-
kind goods if one of those rounds was chosen for implementation. These are the “in kind with
respondent purchase” rounds. In a second subset of choices (rounds 9-12), the in-kind goods
selection would be made by the counterpart (“in kind with counterpart purchase”). (See section 5
below for further discussion and analysis of rounds 9-12.)
    In two additional rounds, the entire endowment of 1200 meticais was allocated to the
counterpart, and the focus is on the respondent’s preferences for making the allocation in cash
vs. in-kind. In round 14, respondents were asked to divide the endowment into cash versus an in-


delayed 60 days, and another ten rounds measuring the time consistency of choices using the convex time budget
method. See the Appendix for further details.
19
   The value at stake would be deposited in the respondent’s or the counterpart’s bank account the next day.
20
   A rate of return of 0% meant that exactly the amount shared by the respondent was given to the counterpart, while
a 200% rate of return meant that the amount shared by the respondent from the endowment was tripled by the
experiment and then given to the counterpart.

                                                                                                                 16
kind gift with respondent purchase. The choice in round 15 was similar, but in this case the
options were cash vs. in-kind with counterpart purchase.
       In practice, the experiment was implemented as follows. Each participant was given a
number of tokens (which varied depending on each round, as detailed in the Appendix), and had
two bins placed in front of him/her as in Appendix Figure 1. Depending on the decision round,
he or she would be told that one bin represented a certain value for him or herself, whereas the
other represented value for his or her counterpart in the MCCH.21 Whenever the participant
needed to allocate value between cash or in kind, a smaller bin would be placed inside the
counterpart’s bin to represent the in-kind allocation. The order under which the different rounds
were presented to the experiment participants was randomized as detailed in Appendix B. The
actual round to be implemented was chosen randomly: the participant would pick a round from a
closed box, as shown in Appendix Figure 4.
       As noted in the introduction, we expect participants and their counterparts to meet again, and
the anticipation of these repeated interactions should influence participants’ choices. While our
model is static, it can capture in reduced form certain repeated interactions that simply involve
the donor’s future consumption of the virtue good. However, the model does not capture a form
of repeated interaction that involves the participant and counterpart playing, in effect, a trust
game or trading favors outside of the experiment. In such interactions, the pair takes advantage
of the high rate of return to giving that the experiment provides, and the counterpart returns part
of the gift (or some other favor) to the participant after it is delivered. We note, however, that in
kind gifts are much less divisible and fungible than money. This makes in kind gifts less
attractive for purposes of trust game or favor trading interactions. The relative difficulty of
returning gifts in kind, or recovering favors of equal monetary value, suggests that any such
interactions should dampen the effects of motives for giving in kind.


4.      Empirical Results
       Most empirical analyses of the paper contain multiple observations per respondent; each
respondent was asked to make choices in multiple versions of the dictator game and our interest
is in comparing sharing decisions across choices that vary in dimensions such as the availability
of the in-kind option, the endowment size, and the rate of return to giving. Some other empirical

21
     For each participant, the side on which each bin (representing “self” vs. “other”) was determined randomly.

                                                                                                                   17
analyses will be at the respondent level (one observation per respondent), for example when we
examine the relationship between a respondent’s propensity to share in the experimental
allocations and his or her transfer activity in the baseline survey.
      A key outcome in this investigation is the fraction of the endowment that a respondent
chooses to share with his or her counterpart. Table 1 presents some summary statistics on
fraction shared with the counterpart in various rounds, looking separately at the cash rounds (1-
4), the in-kind rounds with respondent purchase (5-8), and the in-kind rounds with counterpart
purchase (9-12). Respondents share substantial fractions of their endowments on average: in the
cash rounds the fraction shared is 0.396, while in the in-kind rounds the figure is 0.451 and 0.436
when the purchase decision is made, respectively, by respondents and counterparts.
      Table 3 provides a round-by-round examination of this outcome variable. Panel A presents
the fraction shared in the cash rounds (rounds 1-4), which ranges from 0.380 to 0.429. Panel B
presents the fraction shared in the in-kind rounds with respondent purchase (rounds 5-8), which
ranges from 0.428 to 0.480. Finally, Panel C displays the fraction shared in the in-kind rounds
with counterpart purchase (rounds 9-12); these figures range from 0.406 to 0.452.22
      When the in-kind option is offered, a substantial amount of sharing is shifted from sharing
in cash to sharing in kind. In Panels B and C, the average fraction shared in cash is only 0.259
and 0.267, respectively (compared to 0.396 in Panel A).23 And yet, the fraction shared in total in
Panels B and C is higher than in Panel A, so a substantial fraction of the sharing is done in kind.
In Panel B, 42.6% of sharing is in kind (0.192 divided by 0.451), while in Panel C the
corresponding figure is 38.8%.
Impact on sharing of in-kind option and other economic determinants: main results
     We now turn to estimating the impact on sharing of the in-kind option and other economic
determinants. To address this question, we focus on rounds 1-8 (the four cash rounds plus the
four in-kind rounds with respondent purchase), so there are eight observations per respondent.
     Our main regression equation is as follows:

22
   The fraction shared in the experiment is positively associated with transfer behavior as reported by respondents in
the baseline survey. In respondent-level regressions of total annual transfers to the counterpart (cash plus in-kind,
denominated in meticais) on the average fraction shared in rounds 1-8, the coefficient on fraction shared is positive
and significant at the 5% level.
23
   These differences in fraction shared in cash between the cash rounds, on the one hand, and the in-kind rounds, on
the other, are highly statistically significant. The t-statistic for the test that the difference between fractions shared in
cash between Panels A and B (0.396 vs. 0.259) is zero is 9.64. The t-statistic for the corresponding difference
between Panels A and C (0.396 vs. 0.267) is 9.27.

                                                                                                                          18
     (1)          yir =  + Kr + Rr + Er + i+ir,
where yir is the fraction of the endowment shared with the counterpart for respondent i in
experimental round r. Kr is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a round allows sharing with
counterparts in kind, and is 0 otherwise (if Kr = 0, the round only allows sharing in cash). Rr is
an indicator variable equal to 1 if there is a high rate of return to giving (200%) in that round,
and is 0 otherwise (if Rr = 0, rate of return to giving is 0%). Er is an indicator variable equal to 1
if the round involves a large endowment (1200 meticais), and is 0 otherwise (if Er = 0, the
endowment is 300 meticais). i is a respondent fixed effect, and ir is a mean-zero error term.
     The regression equation is estimated via ordinary least squares with standard errors clustered
at the respondent level. The variation in Kr, Rr, and Er across rounds is imposed by the
experiment and therefore exogenous. Coefficient estimates on these variables can therefore be
interpreted as causal.
     Results are in Table 4. We first exclude respondent fixed effects and in column 1 simply
regress the fraction of the endowment shared with the counterpart on indicator variables for the
in-kind rounds, rounds with the high rate of return to giving (200% instead of 0%), and rounds
with a large endowment (1200 instead of 300 meticais). The coefficient on the in-kind indicator
is positive and statistically significantly different from zero at the 1% level. Because each
respondent makes decisions for each round, the coefficients are mechanically identical when
individual fixed effects are included in the regression (column 2). Individual fixed effects explain
a substantial fraction of variation in giving: the R-squared of the regression rises from 0.02 to
0.51 between columns 1 and 2 of the table.24 The “in-kind effect” – 5.5 percentage points – is
large, amounting to about 14% of mean sharing across the cash rounds and 0.285 standard
deviations of the fraction shared in the cash rounds.
     Standard economic determinants also have statistically significant effects on sharing. In
rounds with the high rate of return to giving, respondents share 2.4 percentage points more. The
high endowment has the opposite effect, reducing fraction shared by 2.7 percentage points.
     Strikingly, the in-kind effect is larger in magnitude than the impacts of these large changes in
“standard” economic factors, the rate of return to giving and the endowment. P-values of linear
hypothesis tests reported at the bottom of the table (in both columns 1 and 2) indicate that the


24
  Even though more residual variation is being explained with the addition of the respondent fixed effects, standard
errors rise slightly owing to the reduction in degrees of freedom.

                                                                                                                  19
coefficient on the in-kind indicator () is statistically significantly different from that of the high
rate of return (), at the 5% level. The same is true for the test of the difference between the in-
kind coefficient and the coefficient on the high endowment indicator ().
   Figure 1 presents the cumulative distribution function of giving when transfers can be in cash
alone (top line) and when either in-kind or cash giving is allowed (bottom line). The CDF for
giving with the in-kind option is clearly shifted to the right, indicating that the in-kind option
increases giving across the full giving distribution.
   In column 3, we test whether the in-kind, rate of return, and endowment effects interact with
one another by adding to the right-hand-side of equation (1) all possible interactions among the
three indicator variables:
   (2)         yir =  + Kr + Rr + Er +Kr * Rr+  Kr * Er+ Er * Rr+ i+ir,
   The in-kind effect is independent of the rate of return and the endowment size: neither
interaction with the in-kind indicator is statistically significantly different from zero. The
endowment size and the rate of return to giving do interact: the coefficient on that interaction
term is negative and statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level. P-values of
hypothesis tests reported at the bottom of the table indicate that the rate of return effect is only
statistically significantly different from zero when the endowment is low; and the endowment
effect is only significantly different from zero when the rate of return to giving is high.


5. Discussion and Additional Analyses
   In the context of the theoretical model presented above, the results presented so far indicate
that respondents do value giving in kind, since in-kind sharing represents a substantial fraction of
giving in rounds where it is allowed. In addition, we find that the in-kind option leads to
increased sharing, a point on which the theory was ambiguous. The analyses we present in this
section are aimed at distinguishing among possible theories of these results.
Distinguishing among the paternalistic, public goods, and signaling models
   We begin with an evaluation of the paternalistic, public goods, and signaling motivations
behind in-kind giving. We test whether the “in-kind effect” changes when the choice of goods
from the catalog for in-kind allocations are given to the counterpart (instead of the respondent).
   In the rounds examined so far, where the respondents can ultimately choose exactly what the
counterpart is getting (the “in-kind with respondent purchase” rounds), paternalistic, public

                                                                                                       20
goods, and signaling motivations could all help explain demand for in-kind giving. But when the
ultimate choice of goods out of in-kind allocations is given to the counterpart (in the “in-kind
with counterpart purchase” rounds), counterparts could choose freely from among private or
public goods. As a result, if the public goods motive for giving were dominant then the demand
for in-kind giving by respondents should be importantly diminished in these rounds. In addition,
the “in-kind with counterpart purchase” rounds do not allow respondents to signal their
knowledge of counterpart preferences, and so in-kind giving in those rounds could not be
explained by the signaling model.
     By contrast, if clients are motivated by paternalistic giving motives, they could still increase
their giving in the “in-kind with counterpart purchase” rounds because that option makes it very
difficult to use the gifted resources for socially undesirable expenses such as gambling, sex
services, and possibly even alcohol. The “in-kind with counterpart purchase” rounds make vice
good purchases less likely because choices in the in-kind rounds are made from the catalog
presented at the outset of the experimental rounds, or by the requirement that the respondent
accompany the project staff to purchase the goods in question. This set-up is likely to exclude
socially undesirable purchases by counterparts, and – more to the point – is likely to discourage
purchases of which counterparts know respondents would not approve.
     For analysis of these “in-kind with counterpart purchase” rounds, we add four additional
observations per respondent to the dataset analyzed in Table 4. These are rounds 9-12, where
sharing is also allowed in-kind but if one of these rounds is chosen for implementation at the end
of the experiment, the counterpart (rather than the respondent) makes the final purchase decision
for any amounts allocated to in-kind by the respondent. 25 We estimate the following regression:
     (3)         yir =  + Kr + Rr + Er +Kr * Cr+ i+ir,
where Cr is an indicator variable equal to 1 for the “in-kind with counterpart purchase” rounds
(rounds 9-12), and 0 otherwise. The in-kind indicator variable Kr is equal to 1 for all in-kind
rounds (rounds 5-12). The coefficient  on the interaction term Kr * Cr is the difference in the
effect of the in-kind option when counterparts make the final purchase decision, relative to the
effect of the in-kind option when respondents make the final purchase decision. A large and
statistically significant negative interaction term coefficient () would be evidence in favor of the

25
 To be clear, these rounds were asked of respondents at the same time as all the other rounds of the experiment.
We simply introduce them now to the dataset for analysis alongside the other rounds.

                                                                                                                   21
signaling or public goods models, as would an inability to reject the hypothesis that the in-kind
effect is zero when counterparts make the final purchase decision ().
     Results are in Table 5. The evidence favors the paternalistic model, rather than the public
goods or signaling models of giving. While the coefficient on the interaction term coefficient  is
negative, it is small in magnitude (only about three-tenths the size of the “in-kind with
respondent purchase” coefficient ) and is not statistically significantly different from zero.26
     In the context of our theoretical model, these results indicate that the “in-kind with
counterpart choice” rounds still give sufficient assurance to respondents that counterparts will
use gifted resources in ways of which they approve, leading them to be about as willing to share
with counterparts in those rounds as they are in the “in-kind with respondent choice” rounds.
Because the “in-kind with counterpart choice” rounds offer respondents no ability to direct
counterpart consumption to public goods or to signal their knowledge of counterpart preferences,
we conclude that there is little evidence that either the public goods or signaling models could
explain the “in-kind effect” in this experiment.27
Are respondents and counterparts playing a favor exchange game?
     A possible alternative explanation for our results is that individuals are playing a favor
exchange game, as in Abdulkadiroglu and Bagwell (2013) or Hauser and Hopenhayn (2008).
Respondents, aware that they are in a repeated relationship with their counterparts, may make
transfers with the expectation of receiving a subsequent benefit. While existing favor exchange
models do not provide a rationale for making gifts in kind, one might imagine that in-kind gifts
are used as a system of accounting between parties to a transfer, being more tangible than cash
and thus more likely to ensure later reciprocity.
     We provide two pieces of suggestive evidence that respondents do not appear to be playing a
favor exchange game with counterparts, and that a (modified) favor exchange model is unlikely
to explain the in-kind effect we find. First, we analyze data from a post-experiment survey
(conducted 30 days after the experiment) and find no evidence of favor exchanges: real-world

26
   An F-test on the hypothesis that the in-kind effect is zero when counterparts make the purchase decision ()
is rejected at the 1% level (the p-value of the test, reported at the bottom of the table, is 0.001).
27
   These results are bolstered by a comparison of allocations to in-kind in rounds 14 and 15, wherein an endowment
of 1200 meticais was mandated to be given entirely to the counterpart, and respondents were simply asked to split
this money between cash and in-kind. In round 14 the respondent made the ultimate in-kind purchase decision, while
in round 15 the counterpart did so. The amounts allocated by respondents to in-kind across these rounds are very
similar and not statistically significantly different from one another (allocations to in-kind are 517 and 541 meticais
in rounds 14 and 15, respectively).

                                                                                                                   22
net transfers from counterparts to respondents do not respond to our experimental transfers from
respondents to counterparts. Second, we show that the in-kind effect is not larger for individuals
who are more inclined to make in-kind gifts of durable (as opposed to more immediately
consumable) goods; in other words, the in-kind effect does not seem to be motivated by a desire
to provide a longer-lasting, tangible reminder of the gift. We provide details and further
discussion of these analyses in Appendix C.
Are respondents simply valuing free delivery of in-kind goods?
     Another hypothesis about the mechanism behind the in-kind effect is that respondents simply
value the free delivery of the in-kind items, which was offered as part of the experiment. This
explanation says that the increase in total sharing in the in-kind rounds simply reflects
respondents “purchasing” the free delivery.
     One way of testing this hypothesis would be to test whether the in-kind effect is larger for
respondents whose counterparts live in another city, for whom delivery costs would be more
important than when respondents and counterparts both live nearby. All our respondents live in
Maputo City, while 21 percent of counterparts live outside of the city and its suburbs.
     We test the “free delivery” hypothesis by running the following regression:
     (5)          yir =  + Kr + Rr + Er +Kr * Farr+ i+ir,
where Farr is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the counterpart lives outside Maputo City, and 0
otherwise. If the “free delivery” hypothesis were true, it should be the case that >0.
     Results are in Table 6. We are missing information on counterpart location for 21
respondents, so we first confirm in column 1 that the original in-kind effect (equation 1) still
holds for this slightly smaller sample. Results are almost identical to those in the full sample.
     In column 2, we present results from estimation of equation (5). Contrary to the prediction of
the free delivery hypothesis, the coefficient on  is actually negative and not statistically
significantly different from zero at conventional levels. There is no support in these results for
the free delivery hypothesis.28
Evidence from post-experimental qualitative responses


28
   These results also are inconsistent with the related hypothesis that respondents like the in-kind option because it
allows them to purchase goods for their counterparts that the counterparts cannot obtain in their local areas. This
hypothesis arises because Maputo City is the country’s largest urban area with the largest variety of goods. This
“availability of goods” hypothesis would also predict that the in-kind effect would be larger for respondents whose
counterparts live outside Maputo City.

                                                                                                                     23
     Our last evidence on the relevance of static models of directed giving as explanations for the
in-kind effect comes from qualitative responses on the part of respondents. After all experimental
rounds had been completed, we asked respondents several questions related to their motivations
for giving in-kind. We instructed respondents to think about their responses in rounds 5-8 (in
kind with respondent purchase) in comparison to their responses in the cash rounds (1-4).
     Mean responses to these binary responses are presented at the bottom of Table 1. We first
asked respondents what effect the in-kind option had on their willingness to share their
endowments with counterparts. We were interested in the extent to which this qualitative
response accorded with our quantitative findings in the experiment. 70 percent of respondents
reported having shared more when the in-kind option was available.29
     We then asked respondents four other questions aimed at revealing mechanisms behind the
in-kind effect. 59 percent of respondents agreed with the statement, “I like the in-kind option
because it gives me more control over what my relative is purchasing” (which we take to be
representative of directed giving hypothesis). Smaller percentages agreed with other statements
representing alternative mechanisms: 33 percent agreed with the statement “I like the in-kind
option because of the free delivery of the in-kind items,” and 46 percent agreed that “I like the
in-kind option because I can get my relative items he/she can’t get in his/her local area.” Finally,
when we asked respondents to directly choose between two options by asking whether they
agreed with the statement “When it comes to the in-kind option, I prefer the control aspect over
the free delivery aspect,” 73 percent expressed agreement.
     We interpret these qualitative responses as supportive of the hypothesis that directed giving
preferences are an important source of in-kind giving in the experiment. In particular, the
responses reveal that respondents did believe that their in-kind transfers would in fact influence
counterpart expenditure composition, and would not just be inframarginal.
     It is useful to further test whether these qualitative responses are correlated with respondents’
actual behaviors in the experimental rounds. To this end, we created a variable intended to
capture each individual’s in-kind effect. We define the “individual in-kind effect” as the mean
fraction given to counterpart in in-kind rounds (5-8) minus the mean fraction given to
counterpart in the cash rounds (1-4), separately for each individual. The mean (std. dev.) of the


29
  The question refers to sharing with “relatives” but it should have been clear to respondents that this encompassed
sharing with counterparts who are not relatives.

                                                                                                                  24
individual in-kind effect is 0.055 (0.138), and its distribution is presented in Figure 2. The
individual in-kind effect is greater than zero for 60.7% of observations.
     We then regress the binary variables representing the answers to the qualitative questions just
described on the individual in-kind effect variable. Results are in Table 7. A first test of the
consistency of the qualitative self-reports is the result in column 1: the individual in-kind effect
strongly positively predicts whether a respondent reports that the in-kind option made him/her
share more with the counterpart.
     If a desire for control underlies the in-kind effect found in this experiment (our directed
giving hypothesis), then we should find that the individual in-kind effect is positively correlated
with the answers to the questions in columns 2 and 5 of the table (liking in-kind due to control,
and preferring control over free delivery). This is exactly what we find: the coefficients on the
individual in-kind effect are positive and significantly different from zero at conventional levels.
The coefficients are relatively sizable in magnitude. For example, a one-standard-deviation
higher in-kind effect leads is associated with a 5.4 percentage point higher (over a base of 56.4
percent) likelihood of liking the in-kind option because it gives the respondent more control over
counterpart purchases (column 2). If other mechanisms, such as a desire for free delivery and
obtaining hard-to-obtain goods for counterparts, were important, we should also find a positive
and significant relationship between the individual in-kind effect and the dependent variables in
columns 3 and 4 of the table. As it turns out, however, the evidence here is much weaker. While
the coefficients on the individual in-kind effect are positive in both columns, in neither case is
the coefficient statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels.30
     All told, it appears that respondents were attracted to the in-kind option because it gave them
more control over counterparts’ consumption. By contrast, other reasons why respondents may
have valued the in-kind option get much weaker (if any) support in these qualitative responses.
Evidence against the “two box” hypothesis
         Another interpretation of the “in-kind effect” is that it reflects a kind of experimenter
demand. In the in-kind rounds, respondents were presented with two boxes in which to place
their chips to be shared with counterparts. In the cash rounds, respondents were presented with
just one box for their shared chips. (In all cases there was only one box for chips kept by the


30
  That said, we cannot formally reject that the coefficients in columns 3 and 4 are equal in magnitude to those in
columns 2 and 5.

                                                                                                                     25
respondent.) A worry is that respondents may have felt some implicit demand to put at least
some chips in each box they were presented with. The question is whether the “in-kind effect”
we document derives simply from the fact that the in-kind rounds involved the addition of one
more box to receive shared allocations.
         If this alternative interpretation were true, the prediction would be that the in-kind effect
should be driven by (or at least be larger for) individuals who have a tendency to split their
sharing with the respondent into both cash and in-kind allocations (in the in-kind rounds). By
contrast, if the in-kind effect is just as large for individuals who do not split their in-kind
allocations, this “two box” hypothesis would have less credence. We test this hypothesis and find
no evidence in support of the “two box” hypothesis. We provide details of the analysis and a
discussion of the results in Appendix D.31


6. Conclusion
     We conducted an artefactual field (lab-in-the-field) experiment among microfinance bank
clients in urban Mozambique. Respondents made allocations in a dictator game where their
counterpart was the closest person to them outside of their household, and so are intended to
represent inter-household transfers from respondents to counterparts. Our aims were to test the
extent to which individuals seek to make gifts in kind (in the form of goods and services, instead
of purely cash), and to measure the impact on total giving when respondents could share
resources in kind as well as in cash. We find that in-kind giving is commonly chosen even when
respondents have the option of giving purely in cash. What’s more, the option to give in kind
raises total giving (compared to giving that can only be in cash). We provide auxiliary results
suggesting that these results are most consistent with a model where individuals seek to direct
recipient expenditures away from “vice” goods (a paternalistic giving model), rather than
alternative models (public goods or signaling models).
     In many developing country contexts, inter-household transfers are prevalent and large in
magnitude. It is therefore important to understand the economics underlying decisions over such

31
   In addition to the concern that the “in-kind effect” might reflect experimenter demand, one might also worry that
the level of in-kind allocations (presented in Table 3, for example) might also be influenced by experimenter
demand. If so, then we would expect that allocations to other in the in-kind rounds would be dominated by split
allocations, where respondents put some chips into both the cash and in-kind boxes. As it turns out, this is far from
the case. Out of all in-kind rounds (rounds 5-8) where there was a nonzero allocation to “other”, 45.1% are fully in
cash, and 27.9% are fully in kind, totaling nearly three-quarters (73.0%) that are not split.

                                                                                                                   26
transfers. Our experiment reveals that a perhaps underappreciated factor – a desire to direct or
control how gift recipients use transferred resources – has large effects on giving. We also show
that this “in-kind effect” is large in comparison to other economic determinants of giving, such
as the rate of return to giving and the size of the endowment to be shared. These findings should
inform future theoretical and empirical investigations of inter-household transfers.
   This study also advances our understanding of how artefactual field experiments can be used
to shed light on questions in development economics. Inter-household transfers are substantial in
practice, and research on them is voluminous, but they have rarely been the subject of
experimental studies. We show that a relatively simple experiment with modest budgetary
requirements can be used to shed light on key features of the economic decision problem facing
individuals who consider sharing resources with someone else in their social network. We
anticipate that artefactual field experimental designs will continue to yield insights into the
economics of inter-household transfer behavior in future research.
   These results also have potential implications for policy and the design of financial products.
Mechanisms that allow individuals to control or circumscribe how gift recipients use transferred
resources can have positive impacts on the total value of transferred resources. A context in
which such mechanisms could be highly relevant is in transfers from migrants to counterparts in
home areas. Remittances sent by migrants are a very large international financial flow to
developing countries, amounting to more than three times foreign aid (Yang 2012). There is an
emerging body of field evidence on whether migrants seek to monitor and control how recipients
use remittances. Ashraf, Aycinena, Martinez, and Yang (forthcoming) find in a randomized field
experiment that savings in remittance-recipient households in El Salvador rise when migrants (in
the US) are given new financial products that facilitate monitoring of remittance-recipient
savings. Torero and Viceisza (2013) test whether migrants share more with remittance recipients
in the form of groceries than in cash. Chen (2013) finds evidence of non-cooperative behavior
related to use of household resources in migrant households. Ambler (2014) tests whether
remittance recipients use resources differently when migrants can monitor use. Batista and
Narciso (2012) show that increased communication flows between migrants and their networks
cause an increase in the value of remittance flows to members of those networks.
   The giving that we studied was person-to-person, non-anonymous, and within a social
network. It thus differs substantially from government-sponsored transfer programs and also

                                                                                                   27
from charitable gifts to anonymous recipients. If, however, the desire to control the use of a
donation extends to charitable giving, it may help explain why non-profits often solicit donations
not to support cash transfers to anonymous beneficiaries but to purchase specific items for named
individuals. Many charities suggest that givers “adopt” a child or village and provide the
opportunity to control the use of the gift. For example, Heifer International offers donors the
opportunity to purchase specific farm animals that will be given to households in developing
countries (Heifer International 2012). A model of directed giving similar to ours could explain
the prevalence of such charitable appeals. An important avenue for future research would be to
conduct lab-in-the-field as well as randomized field experiments testing whether the option to
donate in kind increases charitable giving relative to giving that can only be in cash.32

References
     Abdulkadiroglu, Atila and Kyle Bagwell, “Trust, Reciprocity, and Favors in Cooperative
Relationships,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 5, No.2, 2013, pp. 213-59.
     Altonji, J., F. Hayashi and L. Kotlikoff, “Is the extended family altruistically linked? Direct
tests using micro data,” American Economic Review, 82, 1992, pp. 1177–1198.
     Altonji, J., F. Hayashi and L. Kotlikoff, “Parental Altruism and Inter Vivos Transfers:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 105 (6), 1997, pp. 1121-1166.
     Ambler, Catherine, “Don’t Tell on Me: Experimental Evidence of Asymmetric Information
in Transnational Households,” IFPRI, working paper, 2014.
     Angelucci, M., G. De Giorgi, M. Rangel, and I. Rasul, “Family networks and school
enrolment: Evidence from a randomized social experiment,” Journal of Public Economics, 94 (3-
4), 2010, pp. 197-221.
     Arrondel, Luc and Andre Masson, “Altruism, exchange or indirect reciprocity: what do the
data on family transfers show?” in S. Kolm & J.M. Ythier, eds., Handbook on the Economics of
Giving, Reciprocity and Altruism, Elsevier, Ed. 1, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2006.
     Ashraf, Nava, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martinez A., and Dean Yang, “Savings in
Transnational Households: A Field Experiment Among Migrants from El Salvador,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.


32
 In this vein, Eckel et al (2014) find in a field experiment that charitable giving to a public university is higher
when givers have the option of directing funds to a particular (rather than general) purpose.

                                                                                                                       28
   Ashraf, N., “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An Experimental Study
in the Philippines,” American Economic Review, 99(4), 2009, 1245-77.
   Attanasio, O., A. Barr, J. Cardenas, G. Genicot, and C. Meghir, “Risk Pooling, Risk
Preferences, and Social Networks,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 4(2),
April 2012, pp. 134-67.
   Banerjee, Abhijit and Sendhil Mullainathan (2010), “The Shape of Temptation: Implications
for the Economic Lives of the Poor,” working paper.
   Barr, A. and G. Genicot, “Risk Sharing, Commitment, and Information: An Experimental
Analysis,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(6), 2008, pp. 1151-1185.
   Batista, C. and G. Narciso, “Migrant Remittances and Information Flows: Evidence from a
Field Experiment,” Nova University of Lisbon, working paper, 2012.
   Becker, G. S., “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(4), 1974,
pp. 1063-1094.
   Benabou, R. and J. Tirole, “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic Review,
96 (5), 2006, pp. 1652-1678.
   Bernheim, B. Douglas, Robert J.Lemke, and John Karl Scholz, “Do estate and gift taxes
affect the timing of private transfers?” Journal of Public Economics, 88 (12), December 2004,
pp. 2617-2634.
   Bezu, Sosina, and Stein Terje Holden. "Generosity and social distance in dictator game field
experiments with and without a face." Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Centre for Land
Tenure Studies: CLTS Working Paper 1 (2013): 13.
   Binzel, Christine and Dietmar Fehr, “Giving and Sorting among Friends: Evidence from a
Lab-in-the-field Experiment,” Economics Letters, 121, (2013a), pp. 214-217.
   Binzel, Christine, and Dietmar Fehr. "Social distance and trust: Experimental evidence from
a slum in Cairo." Journal of Development Economics 103 (2013b): 99-106.
   Bruce, N., and M. Waldman, "Transfers in Kind: Why They Can Be Efficient and
Nonpaternalistic," The American Economic Review, 81(5), 1991, pp. 1345-51.
   Camerer, Colin F., “Gifts as economic signals and social symbols,” American Journal of
Sociology, 94 (Supplement), 1988, S180-S214.
   Camerer, C. and E. Fehr, “Measuring Social Norms and Preferences Using Experimental
Games: A Guide for Social Scientists,” Ch. 3 in J. Henrich, R. Boyd, and S. Bowles, eds.,

                                                                                                29
Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments And Ethnographic Evidence From
Fifteen Small-scale Societies, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
   Chen, Joyce, “Identifying Non-Cooperative Behavior Among Spouses: Child Outcomes in
Migrant-Sending Households,” Journal of Development Economics, 100(1), 2013, pp. 1-18.
   Cox, D., and E. Jimenez, "Social Security and Private Transfers in Developing Countries:
The Case of Peru," The World Bank Economic Review, 6 (1), 1992, pp. 155–169.
   Cox, D., B. Hansen and E. Jimenez, "How Responsive are Private Transfers to Income?
Evidence from a Laissez-Faire Economy," Journal of Public Economics, 88 (9-10), 2004, pp.
2193–2219.
   Cunha, Jesse M., “Testing Paternalism: Cash versus In-Kind Transfers,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2), 2014, pp. 195-230.
   Cunha, Jesse M., Giacomo De Giorgi, and Seema Jayachandran, “The Price Effects of Cash
Versus In-Kind Transfers”, NBER Working Paper 17456, 2011.
   Currie, J., and F. Gahvari, “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the Data,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 46 (2), 2008, pp. 333–383.
   DellaVigna, S., J. List, and U. Malmendier, “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure in
Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (1), 2012, pp. 1-56.
   d'Exelle, Ben, and Arno Riedl. “Directed generosity and network formation: network
dimension matters.” No. 5356. Discussion paper series, 2010.
   Eckel, Catherine, David Herberich, and Jonathan Meer, “A Field Experiment on Directed
Giving at a Public University,” NBER Working Paper 20180, May 2014.
   Goeree, Jacob K., et al. "The 1/d law of giving." American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics (2010): 183-203.
   Hauser, C., and H. Hopenhayn, “Trading Favors: Optimal Exchange and Forgiveness,”
Collegio Carlo Alberto working paper no. 88, December 2008.
   Heifer International, “The Most Important Gift Catalog in the World,” World Ark: The
Magazine of Heifer International, Holiday Issue, 2012.
   Hoynes, H. W., and D. W. Schanzenbach, “Consumption Responses to In-Kind Transfers:
Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 1 (4), 2009, pp. 109-139.



                                                                                              30
   Jalan, J., and M. Ravallion, “Are the Poor Less Well Insured? Evidence on Vulnerability to
Income Risk in Rural China,” Journal of Development Economics, 58 (1), 1999, pp. 61-81.
   Jensen, R. T., "Do private transfers 'displace' the benefits of public transfers? Evidence from
South Africa," Journal of Public Economics, 88(1-2), 2004, pp. 89-112.
   Kazianga, H., “Motives for household private transfers in Burkina Faso,” Journal of
Development Economics, 79 (1), 2006, pp. 73-117.
   Leider, S., M. Mobius, T. Rosenblat, and Q. Do, “Directed Altruism and Enforced
Reciprocity in Social Networks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (4), 2009, pp. 1815-1851.
   Ligon, E., and L. Schechter, “Motives for Sharing in Social Networks,” Journal of
Development Economics, 99, 2012, pp. 13-26.
   Moffitt, R., “Estimating the value of an in-kind transfer: The case of food stamps,”
Econometrica, 57 (2), 1989, pp. 385-409.
   Pollak, R., “Tied Transfers and Paternalistic Preferences”, American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 78 (5), 1988, pp. 240-244.
   Prendergast, C. and L. Stole, “The Non-monetary Nature of Gifts,” European Economic
Review, 45, 2001, pp. 1793-1810.
   Torero, M., and A. Viceisza, “To Remit or Not to Remit: That is the Question. A Remittance
Field Experiment,” Working paper, IFPRI, 2013.
   Townsend, R., “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62 (3), 1994, 539-591.
   Udry, C., “Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investigation in
Northern Nigeria,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 1994, pp. 495-526.
   Waldfogel, J., “The Deadweight Loss of Christmas,” American Economic Review, 83 (5),
1993, pp. 1328-1336.
   Waldfogel, J., Scroogenomics: Why You Shouldn't Buy Presents for the Holidays, Princeton
University Press, 2009.
   Yang, D., “Migrant Remittances,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (3), 2011, 129-152.




                                                                                                31
Figure 1: Cumulative Distribution Functions for Sharing in Cash vs. In-Kind Rounds

                                            Sharing in Cash vs. In-Kind Rounds
                    1
   Cumulative Distribution Function
     .2      .4     0 .6      .8




                                      0     .2           .4             .6              .8        1
                                                      Average Fraction Shared

                                                   Cash Rounds              In-Kind Rounds



Note - Distributions shown are 1) solid line: average fraction shared in cash rounds (rounds 1-4); 2) dashed line:
average fraction shared in in-kind rounds with respondent purchase (rounds 5-8).

Figure 2: Distribution of Individual-level In-Kind Effect (calculated using “in-kind with
respondent purchase” rounds)
                   10
                   8
                   6
   Density
                   4
                   2
                   0




                                      -.4    -.2         0             .2          .4        .6
                                                          inkindeffect



Note – N=239. Individual in-kind effect is mean fraction given to counterpart in in-kind rounds (rounds 5-8) minus
mean fraction given to counterpart in cash rounds (rounds 1-4), calculated separately for each individual. Mean (std.
dev.) of in-kind effect is 0.055 (0.138). Bin width = 0.01. Highest frequency bin is 0 (9.2% of observations). 60.7%
of observations are in a positive bin.

                                                                                                                     32
Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics
                                                                                                                         Mean Std. Dev.   Min.    10th pct.   Median   90th pct.      Max. Num. Obs.
Demographics
   Female (indic.)                                                                                                        0.47                                                                     239
   Age in years                                                                                                          35.69    11.17   18.00      22.00     34.00      52.00      77.00         239
   Born in Maputo City (indic.)                                                                                           0.43                                                                     238
   Ever married (indic.)                                                                                                  0.61                                                                     238
   Household size                                                                                                         5.49     2.21    1.00       3.00      5.00       8.00      15.00         237
   Highest education level completed: less than primary completion (indic.)                                               0.20                                                                     238
   Highest education level completed: primary, no high school degree (indic.)                                             0.45                                                                     238
   Highest education level completed: high school degree (indic.)                                                         0.27                                                                     238
   Highest education level completed: some post-high school (indic.)                                                      0.08                                                                     238

Labor, expenditures, and assets
   Currently employed (indic.)                                                                                            0.77                                                                     239
   Total household expenditure (monthly)                                                                                 7,425    5,284    750       3,000     6,000     12,000     44,000         236
   Has house (indic.)                                                                                                     0.74                                                                     239
   Has land (indic.)                                                                                                      0.48                                                                     239
   Has farm animals (indic.)                                                                                              0.41                                                                     239
   Has automobile (indic.)                                                                                                0.27                                                                     239

Transfer characterstics
   Counterpart lives outside Maputo City (indic.)                                                                         0.21                                                                     218
   Cash transfer made to counterpart (indic.)                                                                             0.60                                                                     239
   Amount of cash transfers to counterpart                                                                               5,668   14,411      0           0       100     13,175    102,550         239
   In-kind transfer made to counterpart (indic.)                                                                          0.46                                                                     238
   Value of in-kind transfers to counterpart                                                                               687    1,542      0           0         0      2,000     10,000         239
   Cash or in-kind transfer made to counterpart (indic.)                                                                  0.66                                                                     239
   Value of cash + in-kind transfers to counterpart                                                                      6,355   14,842      0           0       750     14,550    102,550         239
   Cash transfer received from counterpart (indic.)                                                                       0.56                                                                     239
   Amount of cash transfers from counterpart                                                                             2,995    9,958      0           0         0      8,600    120,000         239
   In-kind transfer received from counterpart (indic.)                                                                    0.51                                                                     239
   Value of in-kind transfers from counterpart                                                                           1,453    6,681      0           0         0      3,000     80,000         239
   Cash or in-kind transfer received from counterpart (indic.)                                                            0.66                                                                     239
   Value of cash + in-kind transfers from counterpart                                                                    4,448   12,061      0           0       400     12,000    120,200         239

Fraction shared with counterpart in experiment
   Cash rounds (rounds 1-4)                                                                                              0.396    0.193   0.000      0.163     0.381      0.625      1.000         239
   In-kind rounds with respondent purchase (rounds 5-8)                                                                  0.451    0.208   0.000      0.200     0.438      0.750      1.000         239
   In-kind rounds with counterpart purchase (rounds 9-12)                                                                0.436    0.216   0.000      0.175     0.412      0.750      1.000         239

Self-reported reasons for in-kind transfers
    Having the in-kind option made me give more to my relative (indic.)                                                   0.70                                                                     239
    I like the in-kind option because it gives me more control over what my relative is purchasing (indic.)               0.59                                                                     239
    I like the in-kind option because of the free delivery of the in-kind items (indic.)                                  0.33                                                                     239
    I like the in-kind option because I can get my relative items that he/she can't get in his/her local area (indic.)    0.46                                                                     239
    When it comes to the in-kind option, I prefer the control aspect over the free delivery aspect (indic.)               0.73                                                                     239
Notes: All variables are from 2012 baseline survey of respondents. Variables denominated in money terms are in Mozambican meticals (US$1 = 27 meticais during the mid-2012 study period). "indic." =
indicator variable. All transfer variables refer to last 12 months.
Table 2: Relationships of counterpart to respondent


                                      Count       Share of total Cumulative share

Sibling                                  77             32.4%              32.4%
Friend                                   41             17.2%              49.6%
Cousin                                   24             10.1%              59.7%
Child                                    23              9.7%              69.3%
Parent                                   20              8.4%              77.7%
Nephew/Niece                             17              7.1%              84.9%
Uncle/Aunt                               15              6.3%              91.2%
Other relative                           10              4.2%              95.4%
Spouse                                    6              2.5%              97.9%
Boyfriend/Girlfriend                      4              1.7%              99.6%
Grandparent                               1              0.4%             100.0%

Total                                   238            100.0%

Note: Counterpart's relationship to respondent reported by respondent in baseline
survey. Relationship not reported for one observation.
Table 3: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart across rounds

Panel A: Cash rounds
                                                                                            Fraction shared,
         Round         Endowment                ROR                                                    total

            1                  300               0%                                                   0.377
            2                1,200               0%                                                   0.382
            3                  300             200%                                                   0.433
            4                1,200             200%                                                   0.394
                           Average fraction shared:                                                   0.396

Panel B: In-kind rounds, respondent makes purchase
                                                        Fraction shared Fraction shared Fraction shared,
         Round         Endowment                ROR             in cash         in kind            total

            5                  300               0%              0.246              0.207             0.455
            6                1,200               0%              0.244              0.188             0.433
            7                  300             200%              0.296              0.191             0.484
            8                1,200             200%              0.251              0.183             0.433
                           Average fraction shared:              0.259              0.192             0.451

Panel C: In-kind rounds, counterpart makes purchase
                                                        Fraction shared Fraction shared Fraction shared,
         Round         Endowment                ROR             in cash         in kind            total
            9                  300               0%              0.254              0.177             0.431
           10                1,200               0%              0.237              0.172             0.409
           11                  300             200%              0.299              0.161             0.460
           12                1,200             200%              0.277              0.167             0.444
                           Average fraction shared:              0.267              0.169             0.436

Notes: Endowments are in Mozambican meticais (US$1=27 meticais). "ROR" is rate of return to giving
(each meticai shared with counterpart is multiplied by ROR and then shared). Figures based on full sample
of 239 observations. In "cash" rounds, sharing with counterpart can only be in cash. In "in-kind" rounds,
sharing with counterpart can be in any combination of cash or in kind. Prior to making choices in in-kind
rounds, respondent is shown catalog with range of goods that can be purchased with amounts allocated to
in-kind. Allocation of cash vs. in-kind sharing in rounds 5-12 is in money terms (e.g., x meticais shared in
cash and y meticais shared in-kind). One round is chosen randomly to be implemented at end of
experiment (including rounds described in Appendix that are not the focus of this paper.) Specific in-kind
purchase decisions only made if an in-kind round is randomly selected for implementation at end of
experiment. In "In-kind rounds, respondent makes purchase" (rounds 5-8), respondent makes actual
purchase decision using resources allocated to in-kind if one of these rounds is chosen for implementation.
In "In-kind rounds, counterpart makes purchase" (rounds 9-12), counterpart makes actual purchase
decision using resources allocated to in-kind if one of these rounds is chosen for implementation.
Table 4: Determinants of fraction of endowment shared with relative

    Dependent variable: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart
    Rounds: 1 through 8


                                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)

In-kind ( )                                                    0.055         0.055         0.075
                                                             (0.009)***    (0.010)***    (0.017)***
High rate of return to giving ( )                             0.024         0.024          0.053
                                                             (0.012)**      (0.013)*     (0.020)***
High endowment ( )                                            -0.027        -0.027         0.002
                                                             (0.009)***    (0.009)***      (0.015)
In-kind * High rate of return to giving ( )                                                -0.020
                                                                                           (0.018)
In-kind * High endowment ( )                                                               -0.020
                                                                                           (0.018)
High endowment * High rate of return to giving ( )                                         -0.037
                                                                                          (0.018)**
Constant                                                        0.398         0.398         0.379
                                                             (0.014)***    (0.010)***    (0.014)***


Respondent fixed effects                                          -             Y             Y

Number of observations                                          1912          1912          1912
R-squared                                                       0.02          0.51          0.51

    Linear hypothesis tests (p-values):
                                                          0.037          0.050         0.333
                                             abs        0.033          0.046         0.000
                                             abs        0.876          0.884         0.070
                                                   n.a.           n.a.         0.025
                                                       n.a.           n.a.         0.338
                                                       n.a.           n.a.         0.026

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by respondent.
Notes: Unit of observation is an allocation chosen by a respondent. 239 respondents included in
each regression. There are 8 observations per respondent, corresponding to rounds 1 through 8
described in Appendix (2 rates of return X 2 endowments X allow or not allow in-kind gifts). "In-
kind" is an indicator variable for the allocation allowing either in-kind or cash gifts to counterpart
(omitted category: only cash gifts allowed). "High rate of return to giving" is an indicator variable
for 200% rate of return to giving (omitted category: 0% rate of return). "High endowment" is an
indicator variable for the endowment equalling 1200 meticais (omitted category: endowment is 300
meticais).
Table 5: Determinants of fraction of endowment shared with relative,
    including rounds with in-kind allocations where counterparts choose

    Dependent variable: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart
    Rounds: 1 through 12


                                                          (1)           (2)

In-kind ( )                                             0.047         0.055
                                                      (0.009)***    (0.009)***
High rate of return to giving ( )                       0.027         0.027
                                                       (0.012)**     (0.012)**
High endowment ( )                                     -0.024        -0.024
                                                      (0.008)***    (0.008)***
In-kind, counterpart chooses exact gifts ( )                          -0.016
                                                                      (0.010)


Number of observations                                   2868          2868
R-squared                                                0.48          0.48

    Linear hypothesis test (p-value):
                                                 n.a.         0.001

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by respondent.
Notes: Unit of observation is an allocation chosen by a respondent. 239 respondents included
in each regression. Each regression includes respondent fixed effects. Compared to Table 3,
this table adds 4 observations per respondent (rounds 9-12), in which respondent's counterpart
makes the final decision on spending of resources allocated to "in-kind" (but where
respondent still chooses amount in meticais allocated to in-kind "basket"). "In-kind,
counterpart chooses" is indicator variable for these allocations (rounds 9-12). "In-kind" is
indicator variable equal to one for both kinds of in-kind rounds (rounds 5 through 12). See
Appendix for exact round definitions. See Table 3 for other variable definitions.
Table 6: Heterogeneity in impact of in-kind option, by location of counterpart

    Dependent variable: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart
    Rounds: 1 through 8


                                                                 (1)           (2)

In-kind ( )                                                     0.055        0.058
                                                              (0.010)***   (0.011)***
High rate of return to giving ( )                              0.026        0.026
                                                               (0.014)*     (0.014)*
High endowment ( )                                             -0.026       -0.026
                                                              (0.010)***   (0.010)***
In-kind * Counterpart lives outside Maputo City ( )                          -0.016
                                                                             (0.026)


Number of observations                                          1744          1744
R-squared                                                       0.50          0.50

    Linear hypothesis test (p-value):
                                                        n.a.         0.072

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by respondent.
Notes: Unit of observation is an allocation chosen by a respondent. 218 respondents
included in each regression. Each regression includes respondent fixed effects. Rounds
1-8 included in sample. See Appendix for specific round definitions. "Counterpart lives
outside Maputo City" is indicator variable for respondent's game counterpart living
outside Maputo City. Sample size is smaller because of some missing data on
counterpart location. See Appendix for exact round definitions. See Table 3 for other
variable definitions.
Table 7: Correlation between individual in-kind effect and self-reported reasons for allocating in-kind

        Dependent variable:       Having the in- I like the in-kind I like the in-kind I like the in-kind When it comes to
                                 kind option made option because it option because option because I          the in-kind
                                  me give more to gives me more         of the free        can get my      option, I prefer
                                    my relative      control over   delivery of the in- relative items       the control
                                                  what my relative      kind items     that he/she can't aspect over the
                                                    is purchasing                         get in his/her    free delivery
                                                                                            local area         aspect


                                        (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)

Individual in-kind effect              0.621             0.392              0.252             0.365             0.438
                                    (0.207)***          (0.232)*           (0.230)           (0.225)          (0.207)**
Constant                               0.665              0.564             0.312             0.444             0.704
                                    (0.033)***         (0.035)***        (0.033)***        (0.035)***        (0.032)***


Number of observations                  239               239               239               239                239
R-squared                               0.03              0.01              0.01              0.01               0.02

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is a respondent. "Individual in-kind effect" is mean fraction given to counterpart in in-kind
rounds (rounds 5-8) minus mean fraction given to counterpart in cash rounds (rounds 1-4), calculated separately for each
individual. See Appendix for exact round definitions. All dependent variables are indicators (1 if statement is true, 0
otherwise), and are self-reported.
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

APPENDIX FOR
Directed Giving: Evidence from an Inter-Household Transfer Experiment in
Mozambique
by
Catia Batista, Nova University of Lisbon and IZA
Dan Silverman, Arizona State University and NBER
Dean Yang, University of Michigan, NBER, and BREAD


Appendix A: Supplementary material for Section 2 (Directed Giving in Theory)

The public goods model of giving, in detail
    We consider the problem of a donor deciding how much of a windfall to give to a recipient.
There are two goods, x and G with prices p x and p G denominated in meticais. The good x is
private. The good G is public; its consumption is non-rival between the donor and the recipient.
Different from standard models of public good provision, we will assume that, under normal
circumstances, the donor cannot procure the public good himself. Only the recipient has control
over the means of production for the public good. Thus, if the donor wants to influence public
good production, his only means is to relax the recipient's budget constraint.
    The public good, and the non-standard assumption about its production, allow several
interpretations. The public good could be something like the health and welfare of shared
children who live mostly with one parent (the recipient), or housing which is used primarily by
the recipient and by the donor only on special occasions. In these cases, access to the technology
that produces the public good is, in effect, controlled by the recipient. Alternatively, G may be
thought of as an investment good that will improve the earnings capacity or self-sufficiency of
the recipient and thus reduce future needs to support the recipient (c.f. Bruce and Waldman,
1991). In this second interpretation, the donor values the public good because it amounts to an
investment in teaching the recipient how to fish. Such investments typically require the active
cooperation of the recipient in order to be productive.
    If no gift is provided, a recipient with wealth  chooses private good consumption x r 
and public good consumption G to solve

              max ux r   vG
              x r ,G

        s. t.  − p x x r − p G G ≥ 0
             x r, G ≥ 0 .
          ∗       ∗
    Let x r , G  denote the optimal choices of a recipient with wealth . Under standard
assumptions the recipient's demand for the public good is well-behaved so if the donor were to
give some amount of cash c to the recipient the resulting public good production would simply
      ∗
be G   c.
    Now consider the donor's problem. We assume he faces the same prices as the recipient, but

                                                                                                 1
allow that his marginal utility from the two goods and his endowment  may be different. By
assumption, he cannot procure the public good directly. Therefore, the donor solves
                               
            maxU  xd   V G    c 
              xd , c
                                           
                              c
        s.t.   p x xd          0
                             1 r
            xd , c  0 ,
where c is the cash gift to the recipient and, anticipating our experiments, r is a relative price
of giving r. When r is higher, giving is cheaper.
                                                                                ∗ ∗
    Under standard assumptions, an interior solution to the donor's problem x d , c  satisfies
                                                 ∗
         U ′ x ∗d   p x 1  rV ′ G ∗  ∂G∗
                                             ∂c
                                               ∂G ∗
where, with some abuse of notation, ∂c ∗ denotes the marginal change in public good provision
associated with an increase in the gift at the optimum. The donor's solution equates the marginal
utility from another unit of his private consumption with the price-adjusted marginal utility of
another unit of the public good, which can be produced only via cash gift to the recipient.

Providing commitment ability
    How would the level of public good consumption and the market value of the gift change if,
as in our experiment, the donor could commit the recipient to consume a minimum amount of the
public good? Suppose that the donor can contribute directly to the public good, and assume (as
usual) that this contribution can be sold by the recipient for cash only at a discount equal to
1      . Let g denote the donor's public good contribution and let k denote its market value
p G g  k . In this case, the recipient solves
             max u  xr   vG  g 
             xr , G , s

        s.t.   p x xr  pG (G  sg )  0
                                                      (P)
            xr , G , s  0
            s  [0,1]
   If the solution to (P) involves no sale of the donor’s purchase of the public good, and
                                                                               u ′ x̃ r        px
                                                                                                pG   ,
otherwise is interior, then the recipient's optimal choices x̃ r , G satisfy  v ′ Gg

x̃ r  x ∗r   k  and G  g  G ∗   k . In other words, the donor's demand that the recipient
consume at least g of the public good is not binding in this case; and the recipient's
consumption does not depend on whether the gift with a market value of k meticais was cash or
an in-kind contribution to the public good.
     In the more interesting case, the size of the donor's contribution, g, exceeds the amount of
public good that the recipient would have chosen if the donation were made in cash. In this case:
     Result 1. The donor strictly prefers an in-kind gift g with market value k to a cash gift of
k. The donor prefers to give in-kind because it generates more consumption of the public good
than would occur if he just gave cash. That is true because, in this simple model, the donor is not

                                                                                                          2
altruistic, and he values public good consumption monotonically.
    Indeed, setting aside indifferences, in this model a donor would never offer a gift consisting
of both cash and in-kind. A richer model of donor preferences that, instead of ignoring the
recipient's utility only gave it a weight less than one, would predict that some gifts would
combine both cash and in-kind. In these cases, the donor would equate the marginal utility from
giving in-kind with the marginal altruistic utility from giving cash. We study this model in the
next section below.
    Result 2. The level of public good consumption is weakly higher when the donor has the
ability to give in-kind and thus commit the recipient to a minimum level of public good
consumption.
                         ∗
    Proof: Let G i, g denote the total level of public good consumption when a gift
consisting of cash i and public good g is donated to the recipient. Let ĉ denote the optimal
                                                ′ ′
gift when only cash can be given, and i , g  the optimal gift when both forms of giving are
possible. If ĉ  0, the claim is trivially true. Suppose instead ĉ  0 and, contrary to the claim,
G ∗ i ′ , g ′   G ∗ ĉ. The alternative allocation 0, g ′′  where g ′′  G ∗ ĉ generates strictly
                                                           ′ ′
higher utility from public good consumption than i , g . The positive costs of selling any part
of the public good gift imply

     p G g ′′ ≤ ĉ .
                        (1)
because giving some the public weakly increases the relative price of the private good
consumption for the recipient; every meticais-worth of the gift she liquidates to purchase the
private good costs her 1   meticais. It follows that if the gift ĉ was feasible then so is
0, g ′′ , and this alternative gift leaves the donor with at least as much own consumption as the
strictly cash gift ĉ. By construction, marginal utility to the donor from public good
                                          ′′
consumption is the same at gift 0, g  as at ĉ, 0, and we have just argued that marginal
                                                           ′′                    ′′
utility from own consumption is weakly lower at 0, g  . Thus, either 0, g  is optimal, or an
even larger in-kind gift is preferred. 
     Inequality (1) isolates the key effect on the donor of providing him with the ability to provide
public good consumption directly. The possibility of such in-kind giving lowers the effective
price, in terms of own consumption x d , of producing the public good. This effective price
change generates income and substitution effects which point in the same direction. The
substitution effect gives incentive to buy more public good and less own consumption, and the
income effect creates incentive to buy more of both.
     If we understand the introduction of the commitment ability as reducing the price to the
donor of generating public good consumption, it is straightforward to see that the net effect on
the total market value of the gift, or its complement p x x d , is ambiguous. The lower effective
price of producing the public good creates incentive for the donor to substitute out of own
consumption and into giving (the substitution effect). But the lower effective price makes every
level of public good production cheaper, in terms of x d , to obtain, and thus creates incentive to
purchase more own consumption (income effect). Whether the market value of the gift increases
when the in-kind option becomes available depends, therefore, on the relative magnitude of these
income and substitution effects.

                                                                                                       3
    Result 3. The introduction of the in-kind option has an ambiguous effect on the total market
value of the gift.

Extension to public goods model
    The basic model made the assumption that the donor's gifts were motivated only by his desire
for public good production. Here we study a richer model with both public good production and
altruism, though for simplicity we will abstract from the possibility of costly resale. In this model
the donor places a positive weight on the utility of his recipient. The donor's problem is now

               max1 − Ux d   WG ∗   c, g  ux ∗r   c, g
               x d ,c,g
                                 c  pG g
         s. t.  − p x x d −                ≥0
                                   1r
              x d , c, g ≥ 0 ,
                                                                     ∗
where  ∈ 0, 1 is the donor's weight on recipient's utility, and x r   c, g is optimal
private consumption choice of a recipient with wealth  if she receives a gift consisting of cash
c and public good g, and

         WG ∗   c, g  VG ∗   c, g      vG ∗   c, g.
                                                   1−
    Under standard assumptions, an interior solution to the donor's problem satisfies
                                                   G             x  
        U x d   p x 1  r  1   W G     u x r  r    (1)
                                                   c              c 
           1  r                              x r 
                                                      

                    1   W G   u x r   
                                             
                                      
                                                                           (2)
             pG                                    g 
    The donor's solution equates the marginal utility from another unit of his private
consumption both with the marginal utility of another meticais spent on a cash gift to the
recipient (1), and with the marginal utility of another meticais spent on an in-kind gift to the
recipient (2). In this case, the donor will optimally make both cash and in-kind gifts.




                                                                                                   4
Appendix B: Description of Experimental Rounds

The order of sections was randomized across respondents. Within each section containing more
than one round, the order of the rounds was also randomized.

Section A (rounds 1-4)
Cash rounds: Giving must be in cash

                        Rate of     Value per
                        return         chip              Total chips Maximum
     Round Amount         to       Bin 1 Bin                 in      possible
               (MZN)
                        giving     Self     2-           endowment    payoff
                           (r)            other
        1       300       0%        30      30              10           300
        2      1,200      0%        30      30              40           1200
        3       300      200%       30      90              10           900
        4      1,200     200%       30      90              40           3600

Section B (rounds 5-8)
In-kind rounds with respondent purchase: Giving can be in cash or in kind; respondent specifies
in-kind allocation if round chosen for implementation

                                   Value per chip
                         Rate of
                         return    Bin 1   Bin 2           Total chips   Maximum
     Round    Amount       to      Self    Other               in        possible
               (MZN)                      (divided:
                         giving                            endowment      payoff
                           (r)              cash / in-
                                              kind)
       5        300       0%         30        30                10        300
       6       1,200      0%         30        30                40        1200
       7        300      200%        30        90                10        900
       8       1,200     200%        30        90                40        3600

Section C (rounds 9-12)
In kind rounds with counterpart purchase: Giving can be in cash or in kind; counterpart
specifies in-kind allocation if round chosen for implementation
                                   Value per chip
                        Rate of
                        return     Bin 1   Bin 2           Total chips   Maximum
    Round Amount          to       Self    Other               in        possible
              (MZN)                       (divided:
                        giving                             endowment      payoff
                          (r)              cash / in-
                                             kind)
      9         300      0%         30        30               10           300
      10       1,200     0%         30        30               40          1200
      11        300     200%        30        90               10           900

                                                                                               5
       12      1,200     200%           30       90              40         3600

Section D (round 13)
Respondent preferences over counterpart consumption categories, without cash.

                                  Value per chip
                                                          Total chips   Maximum
                  Amount              Bin 2- Other            in        possible
      Round        (MZN)              All in-kind         endowment      payoff
       13           1,200                  30                 40         1,200

Section E (round 14)
In-kind round with respondent purchase; entire endowment goes to counterpart. Respondent
splits counterpart’s chips into cash or in kind. Respondent specifies in-kind allocation if round
chosen for implementation

                            Rate of     Value per chip
                            return      Bin 1   Bin 2        Total chips Maximum
     Round     Amount         to                                 in      possible
                (MZN)                   Other   Other
                            giving       (in    (in-kind)    endowment    payoff
                              (r)       cash)
       14       1200         0%          30          30           40        1200

Section F (round 15)
In-kind round with counterpart purchase; entire endowment goes to counterpart. Respondent
splits counterpart’s chips into cash or in kind. Counterpart specifies in-kind allocation if round
chosen for implementation

                            Rate of     Value per chip
                            return      Bin 1   Bin 2        Total chips Maximum
     Round     Amount         to                                 in      possible
                (MZN)                   Other   Other
                            giving       (in    (in-kind)    endowment    payoff
                              (r)       cash)
       15       1200         0%          30          30           40        1200

    In addition to the 15 rounds described above, respondents were also asked to make decisions
in another 14 rounds that are not the subject of this paper but will be analyzed elsewhere. We
briefly describe these other rounds here.
    Section G, rounds 16-19: Four allocations analogous to rounds 1-4 (the cash rounds), but all
payments were delayed by 60 days.
    Section H, rounds 20-24: Five allocations where respondents were given endowments of 600
meticais, and had to decide how to allocate amounts for themselves between tomorrow at face
value and 30 days away with a return. In each round, participants were presented with different
rates of return on waiting for 30 days. These rates varied from 10 to 100%.
    Section I, rounds 25-29: Five allocations analogous to rounds 20-24 above, but where the
allocations were between 60 and 90 days from the present.


                                                                                                     6
Appendix C: Are respondents and counterparts playing a favor exchange game?

    In Section 5 of the main text, we addressed the possibility that a modified favor exchange
model might explain the in-kind effect. In this Appendix we provide two pieces of empirical
evidence that help rule out the relevance of a favor exchange model in this context. First, we find
no evidence of favor exchanges related to our experimental transfers. Second, we find no
evidence that the in-kind effect is motivated by respondents seeking to provide tangible
reminders of their transfers to counterparts.

    No evidence of favor exchanges

     To test for favor exchanges in response to the experimental transfers, we use data from a
follow-up survey we administered to respondents 30 days after the experiment. For cost and
timing reasons we were only able to survey the first wave of respondents. We attempted to
survey 125 respondents and had a success rate of 75.2% (94 respondents).1
     The dependent variable of interest is net transfers from respondent to counterpart, which is
transfers sent by the respondent to the counterpart minus transfers the counterpart sent to the
respondent (in meticais) in 30 days following the experiment, as reported by the respondent in
follow-up survey.
     The independent variable of interest is the randomized component of payments to
counterparts. The randomness arises because: 1) respondents chose to allocate different amounts
(in meticais) to counterparts across experimental rounds, and 2) we randomly selected which
round would actually lead to payouts to counterparts. To isolate this random variation, we must
first control for average generosity of the respondent across rounds. We do so by controlling for
expected transfer to counterpart in the regression, which is average value in meticais of transfer
to counterpart across experimental rounds. Then, the variable of interest is the actual transfer to
counterpart: the value (in meticais) of the transfer to the counterpart that was randomly selected
to be paid.
     When controlling for the expected transfer, the actual transfer is exogenous and therefore the
coefficient on actual transfers can be taken as the causal impact of the exogenous part of the
payment to counterparts on the dependent variable. (If we had failed to control for the expected
transfer, the coefficient estimate on the actual transfer would not be exogenous, and we could not
be confident that we had isolated a causal effect.)
     If respondents and counterparts were engaged in favor exchange, we should see a negative
coefficient on the actual transfer. Exogenously higher experimental transfers to counterparts
should lead to lower subsequent net transfers from respondents to counterparts (higher
subsequent transfers from counterparts to respondents, or lower subsequent transfers from
respondents to counterparts, or both).
     Regression results are in Appendix Table 2. In the first column, all variables in the regression
are in levels (meticais). The coefficient on the actual transfer is not statistically significantly
different from zero, and is in fact positive (the opposite of the prediction of a favor exchange
model). In column 2 we check to see whether this result is sensitive to outliers by taking the

1
  Because this is a subset of our full sample, we first confirm that our main results persist in this subsample.
Appendix Table 1 displays coefficient estimates analogous to those of columns 1 and 2 of Table 5, and confirms that
coefficients on the in-kind indicator (and also those on the high rate of return and high endowment indicators)
remain statistically significantly different from zero and are very similar in magnitude to those in the full sample.

                                                                                                                   7
inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of both the dependent and independent variables (under
which a variable y becomes log(y+(y2+1)1/2)) , which can be interpreted in the same way as a
logarithmic dependent variable, but does not suffer the same problem of being undefined at
zero.2 The coefficient on the actual transfer is again not statistically significantly different from
zero, and again positive (instead of negative) in sign.
    We conclude from this analysis that respondents and counterparts do not appear to be
engaged in a favor exchange game.

    No evidence of tangible reminder motivation for in kind gifts

    Another possible interpretation of the in-kind effect in this experiment is that in-kind
transfers are tangible and durable reminders of the generosity or beneficence of the donor.
Respondents may gain some benefit from such reminders to counterparts, since the tangibility of
in-kind gifts may make them better than cash gifts at ensuring that the gift is reciprocated. This
might make sense in the context of a favor exchange model (e.g., Abdulkadiroglu and Bagwell
(forthcoming) or Hauser and Hopenhayn (2008)), modified so that in-kind gifts are more likely
to be reciprocated than cash gifts.
    If this hypothesis were true, we would expect the in-kind effect to be larger in magnitude for
respondents who were inclined to make in-kind gifts of more durable items (rather than
consumables), since the “tangible reminder” benefit would be more long-lasting for gifts of
durable items. While the structure of the experiment is such that we did not ask (since it would
have been too time-consuming for respondents) for a detailed itemization of all allocations to in-
kind, we did implement a different round intended to elicit more specific information on what
kinds of in-kind items respondents would like to transfer to counterparts.
    This quantitative information was collected from respondents in round 13 of the experiment.
In this round, respondents allocated an endowment of 1200 meticais but were told that the entire
amount had to be given to the counterpart in kind. Respondents were asked to specify the in-kind
allocation in more detail across seven expenditure categories: housing, education, health,
clothing, agricultural inputs, groceries, and other.3 Appendix Figures 1 and 2 show how this was
implemented in practice.
    Appendix Table 3 presents summary statistics of these choices. By far, housing is the
category with the highest allocations, at a mean of 499 out of 1200 meticais. Education and
groceries come in 2nd and 3rd place, with mean allocations of 197 and 170 meticais respectively.
    To investigate the “tangible reminder” hypothesis, we created two definitions of consumables
and durables out of these responses. In Definition 1, “consumables” are clothing, agricultural
inputs, groceries, and other, while “durables” are housing, education, and health. In Definition 2,
“consumables” are education, health, clothing, agricultural inputs, groceries, and other, while
“durables” is housing alone.
    We estimate a version of the regression equation that adds two interaction terms:
    (4)         yir =  + Kr + Rr + Er +Kr * Consr+Kr * Durr+ i+ir,


2
  Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A Leslie Robb (1988). “Alternative Transformations to Handle Extreme
Values of the Dependent Variable,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83(401), 123-27.
3
  If this round was chosen for implementation, the respondent then would be asked for the specific items to be
purchased within the categories to which funds were allocated. Choice of “other” required the respondent to specify
in more detail. In all cases these were for small business expenses.

                                                                                                                  8
where Consr is the share of consumables in the respondent’s allocation, and Durr is the share of
durables in the allocation in round 13. (Main effects of Consr and Durr do not need to be
included since they would be absorbed by respondent fixed effects.)
    If the “tangible reminder” hypothesis were true, it should be the case that the in-kind effect is
more positive for respondents for whom durables make up a higher share of in-kind sharing,
compared to respondents for whom consumables make up a higher share of in-kind sharing. This
would be a test that > in equation (4).
    Results are in Appendix Table 4, where we estimate equation (4) using the two different
definitions of durables and consumables. In both regressions the conclusion is the same: we
cannot reject equality of the coefficients on and on the interaction terms of interest (the p-
values of the F-tests of the difference in these two coefficients are far from conventional
significance levels in both regressions).
    Another way of viewing this result is to use the regression estimates to predict the in-kind
effect for individuals who allocate all their in-kind giving to consumables, and to do the same for
those allocating all their in-kind giving to durables. The “tangible reminder” hypothesis would
predict that the in-kind effect should only appear, or be larger in magnitude, for the latter type of
individual. The coefficient estimates are presented at the bottom of the table. The in-kind effect
is very similar for both types of individuals (ranging from 0.047 to 0.062 across the columns).
The coefficients for “all-consumables” and “all-durables” individuals cannot be statistically
significantly distinguished from one another at conventional significance levels in either column
of the table. In other words, the in-kind effect is just as large for individuals who allocate all their
in-kind giving to consumables as it is for individuals who allocate their in-kind giving to
durables.
    We conclude from these analyses that there is little evidence that a version of a favor
exchange model helps explain the in-kind effect.




                                                                                                      9
Appendix D: Evidence against the “two box” hypothesis

    To test the “two box” hypothesis (described in Section 5 of the main text), we first create a
variable (at the individual respondent level) that represents the respondent's propensity to split
his or her sharing in the in-kind rounds into both cash and in-kind allocations. This variable,
“propensity to split sharing in in-kind rounds,” is the number of in-kind rounds where the
respondent splits sharing between cash and in-kind, divided by the number of in-kind rounds that
the respondent does any sharing at all. This variable will be interacted with the in-kind dummy in
regressions analogous to those in Tables 6-8.
    In such a regression it is also important to include another interaction term of “in-kind” with
a variable representing the respondent's propensity to share at all in the in-kind rounds, because
the action of splitting one’s sharing is a subset of the action of sharing at all. We therefore create
another variable, “propensity to share in in-kind rounds,” which is the fraction of in-kind rounds
(out of 4) with non-zero sharing. The interaction term with this variable will reveal the extent to
which the “in-kind effect” is driven by individuals who have a propensity to share in the in-kind
rounds. (This is not a particularly interesting question, but the interaction term must be included
in the regression so we can correctly interpret the coefficient on “In-kind * Propensity to split
sharing in in-kind rounds”.)
    Appendix Table 5 presents regression results from estimation of the in-kind effect with these
interaction terms. In the first column, we first show a regression with just the interaction term
with “propensity to share in in-kind rounds.” The coefficient on the interaction term is positive
and statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level, indicating that the in-kind effect
is driven by individuals who tend to share in the in-kind rounds.
    In the second column, we add the interaction term with “propensity to split sharing in in-kind
rounds.” This coefficient is small in magnitude and very far from achieving statistical
significance at conventional levels. In this column the coefficient on the interaction term with
“propensity to share in in-kind rounds” remains positive and significantly different from zero at
the 10% level, indicating that the in-kind effect exists even for individuals who do not split their
allocations at all in the in-kind rounds. These results indicate that the “in-kind effect” is in fact
not being driven by individuals who tend to split their sharing in in-kind rounds between cash
and in-kind, and so provides no evidence in support of the “two box” hypothesis.




                                                                                                    10
Appendix Figure 1: Placement of bins during experiment
                  (a) Cash rounds (1-4)                                  (b) In-kind rounds (5-12)




Respondents place chips in bins representing allocation to self and to counterpart. Placement of bins on left or right
side randomized at the individual level. For in-kind rounds, an additional smaller box is included within
counterpart’s box, in which in-kind chips are to be placed.




Appendix Figure 2: Choices presented for allocation of in-kind gifts




                                             Education

                          Housing
                                                               Grocery




                     Other                                                 Clothes


                                      Ag.                Health
                                    Inputs



Visual presentation of in-kind categories across which to allocate 1200 meticais for counterpart in round 13 of
experiment.




                                                                                                                    11
Appendix Figure 3: Placing tokens for allocation of in-kind gifts




Respondent placing chips on different in-kind categories in round 13 of experiment.




Appendix Figure 4: Final draw of transfer to be implemented




After conclusion of experimental rounds, respondent randomly selects a number from a closed box which
determines which experimental round will be implemented in practice.




                                                                                                        12
Appendix Table 1: In-kind effect in follow-up survey sample

Dependent variable: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart
Rounds: 1 through 8
                                                                (1)                (2)

    In-kind ( )                                                  0.063          0.063
                                                               (0.015)***     (0.016)***
    High rate of return to giving ( )                           0.043           0.043
                                                                (0.023)*        (0.025)*
    High endowment ( )                                          -0.034          -0.034
                                                               (0.013)***      (0.014)**
    Constant                                                      0.379          0.379
                                                               (0.019)***     (0.015)***


    Respondent fixed effects                                        -              Y

    Number of observations                                         752            752
    R-squared                                                      0.02           0.43

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by respondent.
Notes: Unit of observation is an allocation chosen by a respondent. Sample restricted to 94
respondents completing the 30-day follow-up survey. Each regression includes respondent
fixed effects. See Appendix for exact round definitions. See Tables 3 and 5 for variable
definitions.
Appendix Table 2: Impact of random payment to counterpart on net transfers in next 30 days

    Dependent variable: Net transfers from respondent to counterpart

                                                                    (1)                 (2)

      Specification of dependent and independent variables:       Levels        Inverse hyperbolic
                                                                 (meticais)     sine transformation

    Actual transfer to counterpart                                 1.012               0.212
                                                                  (1.088)             (0.298)
    Expected transfer to counterpart                               1.665               -0.745
                                                                  (2.368)             (1.789)

    Number of observations                                          94                   94
    R-squared                                                      0.07                 0.01

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notes: Unit of observation is a respondent. Sample restricted to 94 respondents completing the 30-day
follow-up survey. "Net transfers from respondent to counterpart" are transfers sent by respondent to
counterpart minus transfers counterpart sent to respondent (in meticais) in 30 days following the
experiment, reported by respondent in follow-up survey. "Expected transfer to counterpart" is average
value in meticais of transfer to counterpart across experimental rounds. "Actual transfer to
counterpart" is the value in meticais of the transfer to counterpart that was randomly selected to be
paid the day following the experiment. Inverse hyperbolic sine transformation is log(y+(y2+1)0.5).
Appendix Table 3: Specific in-kind categories chosen by respondents (round 13)

Category               Share of total        Mean     Std. Dev.         Min.      10th pct.     Median      90th pct.        Max. Num. Obs.

Housing                      41.60%        499.22        444.60             0            0          450        1,200         1,200         224
Education                    16.45%        197.34        301.27             0            0            0          600         1,200         224
Groceries                    14.17%        170.02        289.50             0            0            0          600         1,200         224
Health                       11.24%        134.93        221.06             0            0            0          390         1,200         224
Clothing                     10.87%        130.45        270.34             0            0            0          495         1,200         224
Agricultural inputs           5.33%         63.95        160.31             0            0            0          300         1,200         224
Other                         0.34%          4.08         39.37             0            0            0            0           495         224
Total                       100.00%      1,200.00

Notes: Table reports respondent allocations to different in-kind expenditure categories in round 13 of experiment. Respondents are told that
full endowment (1200 meticais) must be given to counterpart, and respondents must decide on how in-kind expenditures will be split across
seven categories listed. If "other" chosen, respondents must specify in more detail (in all cases where "other" was chosen, respondents
specified "small business expenses"). Prior to making choices in in-kind rounds, respondent is shown catalog with range of goods that can be
purchased with amounts allocated to in-kind. Allocation of to different categories is in money terms (e.g., x meticais to housing, y meticais to
education, etc.). If this round is chosen for implementation at end of experiment, respondent asked to specify exactly how amounts are to be
spent within each chosen category (e.g., choosing specific construction materials for allocations within housing category). Some observations
with data problems (allocations that do not add up to 1200 across categories) are dropped in this table.
Appendix Table 4: Heterogeneity in impact of in-kind option, by respondent preference for durables

    Dependent variable: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart
    Rounds: 1 through 8

                                                                                    (1)           (2)

In-kind ( )                                                                       0.212         0.209
                                                                                  (0.198)       (0.195)
High rate of return to giving ( )                                                  0.024        0.024
                                                                                  (0.013)*     (0.013)*
High endowment ( )                                                                -0.027       -0.027
                                                                                 (0.009)***   (0.009)***
In-kind * Respondent in-kind allocation to consumables                             -0.157
     (definition 1)                                                               (0.199)
In-kind * Respondent in-kind allocation to durables                                -0.159
     (definition 1)                                                               (0.200)
In-kind * Respondent in-kind allocation to consumables                                           -0.163
     (definition 2)                                                                             (0.198)
In-kind * Respondent in-kind allocation to durables                                              -0.147
     (definition 2)                                                                             (0.196)


Number of observations                                                             1912          1912
R-squared                                                                          0.51          0.51

F-tests (p-values):
     Joint significance of interaction term coefficients                           0.728         0.624
     Interaction term coefficients are different from one another                  0.940         0.539

Predicted in-kind effect (std. err.) if respondent fully allocates in-kind to…
    Consumables                                                                     0.055        0.047
                                                                                  (0.026)**   (0.014)***
    Durables                                                                        0.052        0.062
                                                                                 (0.013)***   (0.018)***

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by respondent.
Notes: Unit of observation is an allocation chosen by a respondent. 239 respondents included in each
regression. Each regression includes respondent fixed effects. Rounds 1-8 included in sample. See
Appendix for exact round definitions. See Table 3 for other variable definitions. Interaction terms with
"in-kind" are calculated from respondent choices in round 13, where respondent required to allocate full
endowment (1200 meticais) to in-kind for counterpart, and is asked to specify in-kind allocation in more
detail across 7 expenditure categories: housing, education, health, clothing, agricultural inputs,
groceries, and other. Choice of "other" required respondent to specify, and in all cases these were for
small business expenses. We created two definitions of consumables and durables out of these
responses. Definition 1: "consumables" are clothing, agricultural inputs, groceries, and other; "durables"
are housing, education, and health. Definition 2: "consumables" are education, health, clothing,
agricultural inputs, groceries, and other; "durables" is housing alone. Interaction terms with "in-kind"
are respondent allocations to these categories in round 13 as fraction of total endowment in that round
(1200 meticais).
Appendix Table 5: Heterogeneity in impact of in-kind option, by tendency to split sharing into cash and in-kind

    Dependent variable: Fraction of endowment shared with counterpart
    Rounds: 1 through 8


                                                                                  (1)             (2)

In-kind ( )                                                                     -0.071          -0.088
                                                                                (0.061)         (0.081)
High rate of return to giving ( )                                               0.024          0.025
                                                                                (0.013)*       (0.013)*
High endowment ( )                                                              -0.027         -0.027
                                                                               (0.009)***     (0.009)***
In-kind * Propensity to share in in-kind rounds ( )                             0.138          0.151
                                                                               (0.063)**       (0.078)*
In-kind * Propensity to split sharing in in-kind rounds ( )                                     0.007
                                                                                                (0.028)


Number of observations                                                           1912            1896
R-squared                                                                        0.51            0.50

    Linear hypothesis tests (p-value):
                                                                        0.000          0.009
                                                                                   0.000

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by respondent.
Notes: Unit of observation is an allocation chosen by a respondent. 218 respondents included in each regression. Each
regression includes respondent fixed effects. Rounds 1-8 included in sample. See Appendix for specific round
definitions. "Propensity to share in in-kind rounds" is fraction of in-kind rounds (out of 4) with non-zero sharing,
calculated at individual level. "Propensity to split sharing in in-kind rounds" is rounds where sharing is split between
cash and in-kind, as share of total in-kind rounds with sharing, calculated at individual level. See Appendix for exact
round definitions. See Table 3 for other variable definitions.
