                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RESERVE REQUIREMENT POLICY OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                           Pablo Federico
                                           Carlos A. Vegh
                                          Guillermo Vuletin

                                        Working Paper 20612
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20612


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




The first draft of this paper was written while the authors were visiting the World Bank's Office
ofthe Chief Economist for Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and Vegh was also visiting
theMacroeconomics and Growth Division (DEC) at the World Bank, and is part of a project on
macroprudentialpolicy carried out at the Office of the Chief Economist for LAC. The authors are
very grateful forthe World Bank's hospitality and stimulating policy and research environment. They
would also liketo thank Enrique Alberola, Stijn Claessens, Tito Cordella, Augusto de la Torre, Eva
Gutierrez, LuisJacome, Alain Ize, Michael Leahy, Samuel Pienknagura, Andy Powell, Alessandro
Rebucci, and seminarparticipants at the Bank of Japan, Bank of Spain, Brookings Institution, CEMLA,
Central Bank ofBolivia, Central Bank of Uruguay, IDB, IMF, and World Bank for many helpful
comments and discussions. Jorge Puig and Pedro Pablo Matinez provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressedin the paper are the authors' own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Office
of the Chief Economistfor LAC, the World Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Pablo Federico, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reserve Requirement Policy over the Business Cycle
Pablo Federico, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 20612
October 2014
JEL No. E52,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

Based on a novel quarterly dataset for 52 countries for the period 1970-2011, we analyze the use and
cyclical properties of reserve requirements (RR) as a macroeconomic stabilization tool and whetherRR
policy substitutes or complements monetary policy. We find that (i) around two thirds of developing
countries have used RR policy as a macroeconomic stabilization tool compared to just one third of
industrial countries (and no industrial country since 2004); (ii) most developing countries that rely
on RR use them countercyclically; and (iii) in many developing countries, monetary policy is procyclical
and hence RR policy has substituted monetary policy as a countercyclical tool. We interpret the
latterfinding as reflecting the need of many emerging markets to raise interest rates in bad times to
defendthe currency and not raise or lower the interest rate in good times to prevent further currency
appreciation. Under these circumstances, RR policy provides a second instrument that substitutes
for monetarypolicy. Evidence from expanded Taylor rules (i.e., Taylor rules that include a nominal
exchange ratetarget) supports these mechanisms.


Pablo Federico                                             Guillermo Vuletin
BlackRock, Inc.                                            Brookings Institution
pablo.federico@blackrock.com                               1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
                                                           Washington, DC 20036
Carlos A. Vegh                                             gvuletin@brookings.edu
School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
Johns Hopkins University
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
cvegh1@jhu.edu
1        Introduction

The recent global …nancial crisis has triggered an intense debate on the pros and cons of

using macroprudential policy, broadly de…ned as the use of prudential tools, such as reserve

or capital requirements, for macroeconomic stabilization purposes. Although the discussion

is certainly not novel –many emerging countries had resorted to macroprudential policy well

before Lehman Brothers’demise on September 15, 2008 –it took an urgent undertone in light

of the sudden realization of the severe contractionary forces that could be unleashed by the

abrupt unwinding of …nancial imbalances and systemic risk.

        Perhaps one of best examples of the renewed debate on macroprudential policy is the

resurgence of the so-called “Tobin tax”–a …nancial tax on short-term capital in‡ows –whose

popularity had arguably reached a low point by the middle 2000’s, after gaining some limited

popularity in previous decades thanks to its use by Chile.1 The mere fact that even the IMF

–presumably a bulwark of macroeconomic orthodoxy –has come out in favor of using Tobin

taxes under some circumstances is a dramatic illustration of the search for new policy tools

in this much-changed post-Lehman world.2

        There are, of course, many prudential tools that can be used for macroeconomic stabiliza-

tion purposes, including reserve requirements, capital requirements, caps on the loan-to-value

ratio, credit ceilings, and dynamic provisioning, among many others. Broadly speaking, the

purpose of using these instruments is to reduce the amplitude of the …nancial cycle and contain

potential …nancial vulnerabilities that could be created as a result. Whether many of these

instruments should be used at all and how e¤ective they may be is the subject of an emerging

literature. For example, based on data from an IMF survey, Claessens and Ghosh (2013) look

at seven di¤erent prudential instruments and conclude that debt-to-income caps, limits on

foreign currency lending, and loan-to-value ratios have been relatively e¤ective in reducing

vulnerabilities in banking systems. In a similar vein, Lim et al. (2011) present some empirical
    1
        See Edwards, De Gregorio, and Valdes (2000).
    2
        See IMF (2012).




                                                       2
evidence to the e¤ect that macroprudential policy may be e¤ective in reducing procyclicality

of …nancial variables and reducing systemic risk.3 By and large, however, the e¤ectiveness of

macroprudential policy is still very much an open question.

       This paper contributes to the empirical discussion on macroprudential policy by focusing

on a particular instrument (reserve requirements).4 Due to data limitations, existing studies

on the e¤ectiveness of reserve requirements (see, for instance, Tovar et al. 2012) focus on the

recent past and a small group of countries. There is simple no readily-available, panel data on

reserve requirements. To remedy this situation, we build from scratch a novel quarterly dataset

on legal reserve requirements for 52 countries, 15 industrial and 37 developing, for the period

1970-2011.5      We focus on legal (as opposed to actual) reserve requirements because legal

reserve requirements are a policy instrument whereas actual reserve requirements constitute

an endogenous outcome that will be a¤ected by the amount of deposits (i.e., the state of the

business cycle)6   7   We believe that gathering such large dataset is a fruitful endeavor because

it will allow us to characterize the use of reserve requirements over the business cycle drawing

on a very heterogenous dataset covering up to four decades and very diverse countries and

macroeconomic circumstances.

       With this dataset in hand, we ask the following questions: (i) what countries have used

reserve requirements as a macroeconomic stabilization tool? (ii) How does the use of reserve

requirement policy as a macroeconomic stabilization tool compare in emerging and industrial

countries?      (iii) In countries that actively use reserve requirements, have they been used
   3
      See also Borio and Shim (2007), Calderon and Serven (2011), Canuto and Ghosh (2013), De la Torre, Ize,
and Schmukler (2012), IMF (2011), Glocker and Towbin (2012), Montoro and Moreno (2011), and Vargas et
al. (2010).
    4
      We choose to focus on reserve requirements because (i) they are arguably the most popular macroprudential
tool, and (ii) by its very nature (a long history and available time series from Central Banks and other domestic
sources), it is feasible to gather a large panel dataset.
    5
      As will become clear from our analysis, the quarterly (as opposed to annual) frequency is critical when it
comes to assessing the cyclical properties of reserve requirements policy.
    6
      Using reserve requirements as a ratio of deposits would not solve the problem because changes in deposits
would change such an e¤ective reserve requirement rate without a change in policy, as would voluntary changes
in reserves on the part of the banks.
    7
      Hence, in what follows (and unless stated otherwise), the expression “reserve requirements” should be
taken to refer to the legal reserve requirement rate and “reserve requirement policy” to changes in such a rate.




                                                       3
countercyclically? (iv) Has reserve requirements policy (henceforth RRP) acted as a substitute

for or complement to monetary policy?

    To answer these questions, we …rst compute the frequency of change in reserve require-

ments. Unlike standard economic time-series (like, say, government spending) which vary

continuously over time, reserve requirements may stay constant for prolonged periods of time

(i.e., they behave more like a tax rate or the price of a single good). In the case of Chile, for

instance, legal reserve requirements have changed only twice in our 31-year sample. We take

the frequency of changes as a potential indicator of whether reserve requirements are used for

macroeconomic stabilization purposes.8             In particular, if reserve requirements are changed

more than once over the business cycle, we conclude that countries make active use of RRP.9

Based on this indicator, we divide our sample of 52 countries into “active” versus “passive”

countries when it comes to RRP. We conclude that 62 percent of the countries in our sample

have pursued an active RRP. This …gure, however, masks a big di¤erence between emerging

markets and industrial countries: 2/3 of developing countries have been active compared to

just 1/3 of industrial countries (and no industrial country since 2004). Indeed, almost half

of industrial countries have zero reserve requirements (i.e., no legal reserve requirements)

    We then compute the cyclical properties of RRP for the active group of countries and …nd

that 70 percent have pursued countercyclical RRP. This …gure increases to 90 percent since

2004. The fact that so many developing countries have used RRP as a countercyclical tool

is nothing short of remarkable in light of the fact that only little more than half of devel-

oping countries have engaged in countercyclical monetary policy (compared to 100 percent

of industrial countries).      We attribute the asymmetric use of RRP and monetary policy in
   8
     Naturally, it could be the case that reserve requirements are changed frequently for, say, microprudential
reasons, but this is unlikely.
   9
     The “obvious” alternative would be to compute the correlation between the cyclical components of the
legal reserve requirement rate and the business cycle (i.e., GDP) and de…ne as active countries those for which
the correlation is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. However, while computing correlations makes sense for
studying the cyclical properties of …scal or interest rate policy (see, for instance, Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin
(2013) and Vegh and Vuletin (2012)), it would make little sense for reserve requirements because while one can
mechanically compute a “cyclical” component for a series that has changed only twice in 31 years, it would be
devoided of economic meaning.




                                                       4
developing countries to what we refer to as the “fear of free falling” (in bad times) and “fear

of capital in‡ows” (in good times). “Fear of free falling” refers to the reluctance of emerging

markets to lower interest rates in bad times to help the economy get out of the recession for

fear of facing rapid currency depreciation.         As a result, policymakers may choose to lower

reserve requirements to help the economy get out of the recession. In a similar vein, “fear

of capital in‡ows”captures the idea that, during good times, the monetary authority may be

reluctant to increase interest rates for fear of attracting more capital in‡ows, in which case

it may choose to increase reserve requirements to cool down the economy.           In such cases,

RRP acts as a substitute for monetary policy in the sense that, in bad (good) times, reserve

requirements do what monetary policy cannot do; that is, spur (cool down) the economy. In

contrast, when both RRP and monetary policy are countercyclical, we say that they act as

complements because they both pursue the same goal (i.e., reactivating the economy in bad

times and cooling it down in good times).

      To capture the complementarity/substitutability between monetary policy and RRP, we

…rst construct a 3x3 “policy mix matrix” that combines the cyclical stance of RRP and

monetary policy (procyclical, acyclical, and countercyclical). The typical industrial country

is acyclical when it comes to RRP and countercyclical in monetary policy. Indeed, as already

mentioned, most industrial countries rarely change reserve requirements. The most common

policy mix for emerging markets is acyclical monetary policy (re‡ecting, in our interpretation

fear of free falling/capital in‡ows) and countercyclical RRP. We also con…rm this stylized fact

and the above suggested mechanisms using expanded Taylor rules, which include an exchange

rate gap, in addition to output and in‡ation gaps (as traditional Taylor rules).10 Analyzing

the behavior of both monetary and reserve requirements policy, we …nd that for countries

that use reserve requirements actively, RRP is countercyclical.         In contrast, interest rate

policy does not respond systematically to output ‡uctuations (i.e., is acyclical) but increases

(decreases) when the currency tends to depreciate (appreciate). On the other hand, countries
 10
      See, for example, Corbo (2000) and Moron and Winkelried (2005).



                                                     5
that make no active use of reserve requirements respond countercyclically with interest rates

and positively to the in‡ation and exchange rate gaps.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the reserve requirements dataset and

discusses three basic features. First, it describes four di¤erent arrangements depending on

whether reserve requirements vary according to maturity and/or currency. Second, it identi-

…es some historical trends on the evolution and dispersion of reserve requirements over time.

Lastly, it analyzes the relationship between the cyclical components of di¤erent reserve re-

quirements in countries which have multiple reserve requirements. The evidence points out

to the presence of a common RRP even in the presence of multiple reserve requirements. Sec-

tion 3 develops the main analysis on macroprudential policy over the business cycle. Section

4 studies the complementarity/substitutability between RRP and monetary policy. Section 5

reinforces the …ndings of Sections 3 and 4 using expanded Taylor rules. It also provides for-

mal evidence regarding the importance of the fear of free falling and capital in‡ows channels

described above. Section 6 concludes.



2    Reserve requirement data

The database originally collected for this paper is part of a World Bank regional study on

macroprudential policy carried out by the O¢ ce of the Chief Economist for Latin America.

The database comprises 52 countries, 15 industrial and 37 developing countries: Argentina,

Australia, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Rep.,

Denmark, Dominican Rep., Ecuador (dollarization), Ecuador (pre-dollarization), El Salvador,

Euro-17, France, Germany, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, India, Israel, Jamaica, Japan,

Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama,

Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzer-

land, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, and




                                             6
Venezuela.11 The data are quarterly and cover the period 1970-2011 (not for every country

of course).12

       This novel dataset on reserve requirements comes from primary sources such as central

banks’ and government agencies’ websites as well as research and policy papers. In many

cases, however, we received invaluable help from sta¤ and researchers at central banks.13 To

set the stage, we begin by brie‡y discussing some broad features of the data.


2.1      Varieties of reserve requirements

We …nd in the data four di¤erent types of arrangements: (i) single reserve requirement; (ii)

reserve requirements that vary according to maturity; (iii) reserve requirements that vary

according to currency of denomination; and (iv) reserve requirements that vary according to

both maturity and currency of denomination.14 Figures 1 to 4 present some examples of those

varieties:


         Figure 1 shows the evolution of the single reserve requirement in China. As the …gure

         clearly illustrates, since 2007 China has made active use of reserve requirements as a

         countercyclical tool.15

         Figure 2 shows the evolution of reserve requirements in Venezuela.                 Until the last

         quarter of 1990, Venezuela had reserve requirements that varied according to maturity

         (demand, savings, and term), with the required reserve requirement decreasing with the

         maturity: 15 percent for demand deposits, 10 percent for saving deposits, and 8 percent
  11
      For convenience, we will use the term “countries,” but notice that our list includes the Euro zone as a
single economic unit and Ecuador as two di¤erent economic units (before and after full dollarization in the
year 2000).
   12
      The World Bank website http://go.worldbank.org/D7JYE3SLS0 provides a detailed list of the sample
period for every country, the type of legal reserve requirements, the speci…c source, and the dataset.
   13
      Our study also uses other macroeconomic variables such as real GDP, in‡ation, and central bank interest
rates, all of them at the quarterly frequency. Real GDP data is seasonally-adjusted. Most of this data were
gathered from Global Financial Data and IFS (IMF). See Appendix 1 for a description of data and its sources.
   14
      Of course, RR may occasionally di¤er according to other factors. China’s Central Bank, for example,
imposes lower RR on rural banks than on major banks. As of April 2014, RR stand at 20 percent for major
banks and as low as 16 percent for smaller, rural banks.
   15
      See Ma et al. (2013) for a detailed analysis of RRP in China.



                                                     7
        for term deposits. This di¤erential reserve requirements structure aimed at discouraging

        short-term capital in‡ows and deposits. Since the uni…cation of reserve requirements in

        the last quarter of 1990, reserve requirements have changed much more frequently and

        have been used as a countercyclical tool.

        Figure 3 shows the evolution of reserve requirements in Peru, which vary by currency

        of denomination. While both series have comoved positively – partly re‡ecting the

        recent counter-cyclical use of reserve requirements – foreign-currency-deposits reserve

        requirements are much higher (about 4 times as high) than those for domestic-currency

        deposits. This di¤erential re‡ects the concerns with sudden reversals in foreign currency

        ‡ows, as discussed in Montono and Moreno (2011), Rossini and Quispe (2010) and

        Rossini et al (2011).

        Figure 4 shows the evolution of reserve requirements in Argentina, which vary according

        to both maturity and currency of denomination. During the early 1990s, the highest

        reserve requirements were for demand deposits, both for local and foreign currency.

        Reserve requirements were uni…ed in mid-1995 and remained fairly stable until the

        end of 2001. Argentina then went back to the pre-1995 regime, with di¤erent reserve

        requirements depending on maturity and currency of denomination. Unlike in the pre-

        1995 regime, however, the highest reserve requirements during the early and mid-2000s

        were for foreign-currency deposits (both demand and term deposits).


      Table 1 illustrates in a more systematic the wide diversity of reserve requirements arrange-

ments in our sample.16          We can see that all industrial countries (including the Euro zone)

fall in the …rst two categories, including Australia, Canada, Denmark, New Zealand, Norway,

Sweden (since 1995), and United Kingdom, which have no legal reserve requirements.             In

contrast, developing countries span the whole spectrum, ranging from Mexico, which has had

zero legal reserve requirements since 1992, to a fairly numerous group that has reserve re-
 16
      Single reserve requirements includes the case of no legal reserve requirement.



                                                        8
quirements that vary according to both maturity and currency of denomination. Developing

countries are fairly evenly distributed across categories: 32 percent have single reserve re-

quirements, 22 percent have reserve requirements that vary according to maturity or currency

of denomination, and about 24 percent of the countries have reserve requirements that vary

according to both maturity and currency of denomination. The existence of reserve require-

ments based on currency of denomination in many developing countries should perhaps come

as no surprise given the widespread phenomenon of “dollarization” or, more broadly, foreign

currency deposits.17


2.2    Long-run trends

To get an idea of how reserve requirements have evolved over time, Figure 5 plots the average

reserve requirement across countries since 1975 to the present and the corresponding linear

trend.18 On average, developing countries (solid line) have reserve requirements that are

about 7 times higher than those of industrial economies (dashed line). The historical average

reserve requirement for industrial countries is around 0.02, compared to 0.14 for developing

economies.

    For developing countries, we can see a clear declining trend re‡ecting …nancial liberaliza-

tion and …nancial deepening. Reserve requirements reached their highest average values in

the late 1970s (around 0.2), while they got to historical lows in the late 1990s with reserve

requirements averaging 0.1.         We can also see an increase in actual average reserve require-

ments in the period 2005-2010 re‡ecting –as discussed in detail below –a more active use of

macroprudential policy in the period surrounding Lehman’s fall on September 15, 2008. We

see a similar declining trend, but much less steeper, for industrial countries.

    Figure 6 depicts the dispersion of reserve requirements over time and the corresponding

linear trend.19 For developing countries – and as was the case in Figure 5 – we see a clear
  17
     For a detailed discussion of dollarization, see Savastano, Reinhart, and Rogo¤ (2003) and the references
therein.
  18
     This is the simple average of existing reserve requirement for a given country averaged over all countries.
  19
     We compute the standard deviation of existing reserve requirements for each country and then average


                                                       9
declining trend with an increase in the actual dispersion over the last 5 years. In other

words, during the last three decades there has been a convergence in terms of di¤erent reserve

requirements, with the value for 2011 not too far from that for industrial countries. On the

other hand, we see essentially no change over time for industrial countries.


2.3    Multiple reserve requirements: Correlation between cyclical compo-
       nents

If countries around the world had a single reserve requirement, the analysis regarding RRP

over the business cycle would be fairly straightforward since we would need to focus only on

the cyclical component of the single reserve requirement. The presence of multiple reserve re-

quirements that vary according to maturity and/or currency presents, in principle, a challenge

for the analysis of RRP. For example, it could be the case that while reserve requirements for

one of type of deposits is increasing, the one on some other type of deposits is decreasing. If

this kind of asymmetric pattern across di¤erent reserve requirements were fairly common, it

would be di¢ cult to assess the overall behavior of RRP over the business cycle. Interestingly,

however, while the levels of reserve requirements may vary across di¤erent categories of de-

posits, their cyclical components appear to be positively related (Table 2). Indeed, in almost

all cases we cannot reject that such correlations are positive and statistically signi…cant.



3     Macroprudential policy over the business cycle

Needless to say, not all countries make use of RR for macroeconomic stabilization purposes.

An obvious example would be countries, such as the industrial countries mentioned above,

that have zero legal RR. In other cases, however, RR may occasionally change but owing to

microprudential reasons (broadly de…ned as including any reason not related to the business

cycle). Since our purpose is to analyze the cyclical properties of RR in those countries that

use them for macroeconomic stabilization purposes, we need an operational de…nition that
across countries.


                                               10
will allow us to divide countries into those that make active use of RR for such purposes and

those that do not. Once we have put countries into these two categories, we can proceed to

compute the cyclicality of RR policy for the active group.


3.1      Active versus passive countries

To distinguish between active and passive countries, we …rst compute the frequency of changes

in RR. Notice that, unlike standard macroeconomic time series, such as government consump-

tion, which evolve in a continuous fashion over time, the legal RR is a “discontinuous series”

in the sense that it may not change for prolonged periods of time.20 For this type of time

series, the frequency of changes is an important statistic. Figure 7 illustrates the quarterly

frequency of changes in RR for all the countries in our sample.21 Yellow bars denote devel-

oping economies while black bars indicate industrial countries. For example, a frequency of

one indicates that, on average, a country changes RR once per quarter or four times a year,

whereas a frequency of 0.25 indicates a change every four quarters. The …rst obvious message

of this picture is that yellow bars tend to be concentrated on the right-side (indicating fre-

quent changes in RR) whereas black bars tend to be bunched towards the left-side (including

many industrial countries with zero frequency and hence no discernible bar). This already

tells us that we should expect to …nd many more developing countries in our group of active

users of RR.

       Clearly, a country with zero frequency of changes will fall in the category of passive (i.e.,

non-active) countries. A country like Chile with a frequency of 0.016 (having changed RR

only twice in our 31 year-sample) will also fall in the passive category.                But where do we

draw the line? Since we are focusing on the use of RR for macro-stabilization purposes, it

makes sense to think that if a country changes RR at a frequency that is lower than that of
  20
     Other macroeconomic time series that share this property are, for example, prices of goods at a grocery
store or tax rates. The frequency of changes of prices at grocery stores is typically taken as an indicator of
how “sticky” are nominal prices; see, for example, Bils and Klenow (2004).
  21
     When a country has multiple RR, we compute the frequency for each one and take the average. Generally
speaking, the frequency of changes does not vary substantially across di¤erent RR for a given country.




                                                     11
its business cycle, it is not actively using RR to smooth out the business cycle. Hence, what

we do is to compute for each country the average duration of the business cycle based on

quarterly GDP. If the frequency of changes in RR is higher (lower) than the average cycle,

then we classify that country as an active (passive) country in terms of RR policy.22

    Figure 8 uses a scatter plot to illustrate the classi…cation of countries into active and

passive. The horizontal axis measures the average duration (in years) of the business cycle in

a given country while the vertical axis measures the time (also in years) between changes in

RR in the same country. Along the 45 degree line, the duration of the business cycle and the

time between changes are the same. Generally speaking, points below the 45 degree line are

countries in which the time between changes in RR is more than the business cycle frequency

(active countries), while the reverse is true for countries above the 45 degree line.23                24


    Based on Figure 7, 62 percent of countries (32 out of 52) are classi…ed as active countries.

As expected, there is a striking di¤erence between developing and industrial countries: 68

percent (or 27 out of 37) of developing countries are classi…ed as active, whereas only 33

percent of industrial countries (5 out of 15) are classi…ed as active.

    In fact, the di¤erence between industrial and developing countries becomes even more

striking if we divide the sample before and after 2004. For the post-2004 sample – and as

Figure 9 illustrates – while the frequency of changes in RR for developing countries looks

roughly similar to the whole sample (Figure 7), there is not a single industrial country that

has changed legal reserve requirements in this period.25 Using our formal criterion, 57 percent

of developing countries (or 21 out of 37) are classi…ed as active in the 2005-2011 period.
   22
      Formally –and to account for the high variability of the business cycle duration within countries –we will
classify a country as pursuing an active RRP if the average duration between changes in RR is lower than the
average duration of the business cycle plus one standard deviation.
   23
      Countries with zero frequency of change would have an “in…nite”amount of time between changes and are
plotted out of scale.
   24
      We say “generally”because, to keep it simple, the scatter plot does not allow for the one standard deviation
of the business cycle duration embedded in our formal de…nition above. In the …gure, a black dot (cross) denotes
an active (passive) country.
   25
      Of the 15 industrial countries in this sub-sample, 8 have in fact no legal reserve requirement.




                                                       12
3.2        Cyclical properties of reserve requirement policy

Having identi…ed a group of countries which, according to our de…nition, has actively used

RR policy, we can now proceed to compute the cyclical properties of RR policy for this

group. Figure 10 depicts the correlation between the cyclical components of RR and GDP

for the 32 countries classi…ed as active.26 We can see that most countries (23 out of 32, or 72

percent) have pursued countercyclical RR policy. In particular, 70 percent (or 19 out of 27)

of developing countries have used RR countercyclically.

         Has the use of RR policy for macroprudential purposes changed/intensi…ed in recent times?

As mentioned when discussing Figure 5, it seems that since 2005 or so, countries have resorted

more frequently to macroprudential policy. Dividing the sample again before and after 2004

(Figure 11, Panels A and B, respectively), we can see that before 2005, the number of active

countries with countercyclical RRP was 60 percent (or 18 out of 30) but after 2004 the

number rises sharply to 90 percent (or 19 out of 21). Particularly striking is the fact that in

the post-2004 period, there is not a single industrial country that has pursued active RRP.

         To sum up, we have found that (i) reserve requirements have been used fairly frequently

as a macroeconomic stabilization tool (i.e., countercyclically); (ii) their use has increased

considerable since 2004, which is consistent with anecdotal evidence to this e¤ect, and (iii) no

industrial country has used RRP actively in the post-2004 period.



4         Complementarity/substitutability with monetary policy

In and of itself, the fact that 53 percent (or 10 out of 19) percent of active developing countries

(and 71 percent after 2004) have, on average, pursued countercyclical RR policy may not

seem that remarkable.27          But it is indeed remarkable when compared to the percentage

of developing countries that have pursued countercyclical monetary policy.28                       Figure 12
    26
     When a country has multiple RR, we compute the correlation between the cyclical component of RR and
GDP for each one and then take the average. It is important to recall that, as discussed in subsection 2.3, the
cyclical components of RR are strongly positively related in countries with multiple RR.
  27
     We are referring here to correlations which are signi…cantly di¤erent from zero.
  28
     See Vegh and Vuletin (2012) for a detailed analysis of the cyclicality of monetary policy.


                                                      13
depicts the correlation between the cyclical components of policy interest rates and GDP on

a quarterly basis.       We can see that 73 percent (11 out of 15) industrial countries (black

bars) exhibit a signi…cant positive correlation indicating countercyclical monetary policy. In

sharp contrast, only 27 percent (of 22 out of 37) show countercyclical monetary policy (i.e., a

signi…cantly positive correlation). In fact, the average correlation for industrial countries is

0.40 (and signi…cantly di¤erent from zero), compared to 0.07 (and not signi…cantly di¤erent

from zero) for emerging countries.          In other words, the average industrial country pursues

countercyclical monetary policy, whereas the average emerging country is acyclical.

       Why do we see such a sharp di¤erence in the conduct of monetary policy between industrial

and developing countries? Vegh and Vuletin (2012) argue that a critical factor is the “fear

of free falling,” de…ned as the need for developing countries to defend their currency in bad

times. While a typical industrial country can lower interest rates in bad times without the

fear of a sharp depreciation of their currency, this is often not true of developing countries.

In bad times, when capital is ‡owing out and credibility is at a low point, many developing

countries see the value of their currency plummet.               In those circumstances, the monetary

authority may have no choice but to either increase the interest rate to defend the currency

(or at least not reduce it for fear of exacerbating the fall).29 As a result, policymakers increase

interest rates to avoid/delay the capital out‡ow at the same time that they decrease RR to

spur the economy (by reducing the lending spread).

       An analogous story is true for good times, in what we could refer to as “fear of capital

in‡ows.” The idea is that in periods of capital in‡ows (and ensuing output boom), the

monetary authority is reluctant to raise interest rates because of the fear of attracting even

more capital in‡ows (or fear of currency appreciation). As a result, policymakers either keep
  29
     In fact, this has been part of the standard IMF policy advice to developing countries, most notably during
the Asian crisis of 1997. To quote Stanley Fischer, at the time the IMF’s First Deputy Managing Director, in
a 1998 lecture delivered at UCLA, “[i]n weighing this question [are the IMF programs in Asia too tough?], it
is important to recall that when they approached the IMF, the reserves of Thailand and Korea were perilously
low, and the Indonesian rupiah was excessively depreciated. Thus, the …rst order of business was, and still
is, to restore con…dence in the currency. To achieve this, countries have to make it more attractive to hold
domestic currency, which, in turn, requires increasing interest rates temporarily, even if higher interest costs
complicate the situation of weak banks and corporations.”



                                                      14
interest rates unchanged or even lower them to attract less capital in‡ows at the same time

that they raise RR to cool o¤ the economy (by increasing the lending spread).30

       This implies that developing countries may be caught in the common policy dilemma of

too few instruments (the policy interest rate) relative to the number of targets (output and

the nominal exchange rate). Viewed in this light, it is perhaps not surprising to see developing

countries resort to the use of reserve requirements in a countercyclical manner, as they provide

the second instrument that may be needed to achieve the two targets just mentioned. In other

words, during bad times a country may not be able to lower interest rates (as it would like,

were it not for the fear of free falling), but may lower reserve requirements instead. Similarly,

during good times a country may not be able to increase interest rates (as it would like, were

it not for the fear of capital in‡ows), but may increase reserve requirements instead. In other

words, RRP is acting as a substitute for monetary policy.

       On the other hand, there are emerging markets that do not su¤er from the fear of free

falling and capital in‡ows and may therefore be able to pursue countercyclical monetary

policy. If, in addition, they also use reserve requirements in a countercyclical way, we say that

RRP is acting as a complement for monetary policy since both instruments are being used

for the same purpose (to increase output in the case of a recession).

       Table 3, which will be referred to as the policy mix matrix, classi…es countries according

to the cyclical properties of both monetary and reserve requirement policies. Since countries

may be procyclical, acyclical, or countercyclical, there are 9 possible cells or combinations.

Notice that most industrial countries are on the second row because most of them are acyclical

when it comes to RRP (i.e., they do not use RRP for macroeconomic stabilization purposes).

In fact, most industrial countries (11 out of 15 or 73 percent) fall in the (2,3) cell, colored

orange, given that their monetary policy is countercyclical.

       In contrast, 10 developing countries (or 27 percent of all developing countries in our
  30
    As an example, this was the position of the Turkish Central Bank as described in a Financial Times article
on Dec 13, 2010. The deputy governor argued that the way to deal with heavy capital in‡ows was to reduce
interest rates (to reduce capital in‡ows and currency appreciation) while using other instruments (i.e., reserve
requirements) to reduce credit growth.


                                                      15
sample) fall in the third row because they exhibit countercyclical RRP. Of these 10 developing

countries, six fall in the cell (3,2) given that they have had acyclical monetary policy, while

the remaining four fall in cell (3,3) because they have had countercyclical monetary policy.

    As a matter of de…nition, we will refer to countries falling in cell (3,3) as using RRP as a

complement to monetary policy in the sense that both policies reinforce each other. These

are cases in which both RRP and monetary policy are countercyclical, so that in good (bad)

times both RR and the policy interest rate are increased (lowered).              In contrast, countries

that fall in cell (3,2) and, potentially, cell (3,1) are cases in which RRP acts a substitute for

interest rate policy because reserve requirements perform the function that the interest rate

cannot due to the need of either defending the currency in bad times or not attracting more

capital in‡ows in good times.

    Further, we interpret cell (2,1) as “bad place”to be because here countries feel compelled

to use monetary policy procyclically but are not taking advantage of reserve requirements as

a second instrument. On the other hand, we can view (2,3) as the “promised land,”in terms

of policymaking.      The reason is that here countries can use monetary policy for counter-

cyclical purposes without fearing the e¤ects of countercyclical interest rates on the exchange

rate and/or capital in‡ows, presumably re‡ecting a high degree of policy and institutional

credibility.31

    As before, we break the sample into before and after 2004 and construct the policy matrices

for each period, as illustrated in Table 4.         Comparing the pre and post-2004 policy mix

matrices in Table 4, Panels A and B, three important changes are worth noting: (i) the

number of developing countries pursuing procyclical interest rate policy falls from seven in

the early period to just one in the more recent period; (ii) the number of developing countries

engaging in countercyclical RRP increases from 7 to 15, and (iii) developing countries using

monetary policy and RRP as substitutes (as captured in cell (2,2)) increases from 5 to 8

whereas developing countries using monetary policy and RRP as complements (as captured
  31
     Of course, countries may still want to use RR for microprudential purposes, so “promised land” refers
exclusively to countries not needing to use RR as a macrostabilization tool.


                                                   16
in cell (3,3)) increases from 2 to 7.32

         In this context, one can imagine di¤erent “routes” that countries may take in the policy

journey from cell (2,1), a “bad place to be”, to cell (2,3), the “promised land”. One route

would be the “direct route” that Chile took. Notice that Chile went from cell (2,1) in the

pre-2005 period to cell (2,3) in the post-2004 period. This is remarkable because, in our view,

it can only happen in the context of a notable improvement in policy/institutional credibility.

In such a case, a country like Chile may not need to resort to countercyclical RRP, which is

presumably the situation of a typical industrial country.33

         A more common route (involving several stages, so to speak) would be to go from cell (2,1)

to cell (3,2), then to cell (3,3), and …nally to cell (2,3). One could even add an additional

stage in which countries would go from cell (2,1) to cell (2,2) and only then to cell (3,2).

Mexico and Uruguay, for instance, have gone from cell (2,1) in the pre-2005 period to cell

(2,2) in the post-2004 period. This is presumably an improvement in the policy mix because

they have graduated from monetary policy procyclicality but the fact that they are in cell

(2,2) implies that they have no countercyclical tool.34 In principle, they would bene…t from

moving to cell (3,2) where they would be using reserve requirements as a countercyclical tool.



5         Taylor rules

Sections 3 and 4 showed suggestive evidence on the use of reserve requirements for macropru-

dential purposes and illustrated the fact that RRP often acts as a substitute for monetary

policy. We also provided a rationalization, based on fear of free falling in bad times and fear
    32
     While clearly suggestive, we should note that the policy mix matrices should be taken with a slight grain
of salt to the extent that they are capturing an “average behavior” of any given country over a very long time
horizon and thus are completely missing the time series dimension. Below we will compute implicit Taylor
rules using panel data which, to the extent that they will indeed capture the time series dimension, should
provide a more accurate picture of the complementary/substitutability of monetary and reserve requirement
policy.
  33
     This would be a “one-step” graduation process, which is the one (implicitly) highlighted by Vegh, and
Vuletin (2012) for the case of monetary policy and Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2011) for the case of …scal
policy. For a more detailed analysis of institutional changes that may have allowed Chile to graduate, see
Frankel (2011).
  34
     Not even …scal policy because, according to Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013), both Mexico and Uruguay
continue to be procyclical even in the more recent period.


                                                     17
of capital in‡ows in good times, for such a policy mix. This section presents a more formal

analysis that provides evidence on these empirical regularities and sheds light on the policy

channels discussed above. For this purpose we estimate “expanded”Taylor rules for develop-

ing countries over the period 2005-2011; which saw the heaviest use of reserve requirements

as a countercyclical tool (Section 3).35         By “expanded” Taylor rules, we mean Taylor rules

which, in addition to the output and in‡ation gaps, include the nominal exchange rate gap (

see, for instance, Corbo, 2000, and Moron and Winkelried, 2005). The nominal exchange rate

gap captures policymakers’concerns about “excessive”depreciation (appreciation) during bad

(good) times, as discussed above.

       Table 5 shows Taylor rules for both monetary and reserve requirements for countries that

have used RRP actively since 2005. We estimate these policy reaction functions using a system

of simultaneous equations.36 Column 1a shows the traditional Taylor rule with output and

in‡ation gap, while column 1b shows the same rule for reserve requirements.                      Columns 2a

and 2b show the results for the case that the rules include the output and nominal exchange

rate gaps. Columns 3a and 3b shows the rules for the case in which all three gaps (output,

in‡ation, and nominal exchange rate) are included.3738 Columns 3a,b include output and

in‡ation gaps, and output and nominal exchange rate gaps, respectively.

       Turning now to the results, columns 1a and 1b illustrate the fact that, as shown in Sections

3 and 4, monetary policy is acyclical whereas RRP is countercyclical. In other words, RRP

acts as a substitute for monetary policy.           Columns 2a and 2b are consistent with columns

1a and 1b regarding the cyclicality of the policy rate and reserve requirements but illustrate

the importance of nominal exchange rate ‡uctuations for monetary policy. In particular –

and as discussed in Section 4 –the policy rate reacts positively to the nominal exchange rate
  35
     Similar results are obtained if the entire period was used.
  36
     In case of multiple RR, we calculate the cyclical component of the average RR by averaging the cyclical
components of each RR.
  37
     The nominal exchange rate is de…ned as units of local currency per dollar. Therefore an increase (decrease)
in the nominal exchange rate represents a depreciation (appreciation) of the local currency.
  38
     We calculate the cyclical component of growth rate of the nominal exchange rate as opposed to the one
for level of nominal exchange rate.




                                                      18
gap, which captures the fear of free falling (higher interest rates in response to a nominal

depreciation ) and fear of capital in‡ows (lower interest rate in response to a nominal appre-

ciation). To sum up, monetary policy responds positively to exchange rate depreciations and

RRP focuses on the output gap in a countercyclical way.39 In other words, RRP substitutes

for monetary policy.

         Table 6 shows Taylor rules for monetary policy for countries that did not use RR policy

actively since 2005.        Columns 1 and 2 show the results when including the output and

in‡ation gaps, and output and nominal exchange rate gaps, respectively. Column 3 includes

output, in‡ation, and nominal exchange rate gaps. In sharp contrast to the active countries

considered in Table 5, passive countries have been able to use monetary policy to respond to

output ‡uctuations in a countercyclical way. In addition, they have also responded positively

to the in‡ation and exchange rate gaps.             It is interesting to note that the coe¢ cient of

variation –de…ned as the ratio between the standard deviation and its mean–of the (cyclical

component) of the nominal exchange rate for countries that use RRP actively is about 7

times that of countries that are categorized under passive users of RR policy.40 This striking

di¤erence in exchange rate volatility since 2005 together with the asymmetric response of

monetary and reserve requirement policies depicted in Tables 5 and 6 provide support for

our arguments regarding the mechanisms involved, the role of fear of free falling and capital

in‡ows, and the underlying reasons for RRP to substitute (if necessary) for monetary policy.



6         Conclusions

Using a unique and novel database, this paper has uncovered several stylized facts regard-

ing the use of reserve requirements as a macroeconomic stabilization tool and its relation

to monetary policy.        In particular, we have seen that around 2/3 of emerging markets use
    39
     The signi…cance of the nominal exchange rate weakens a little bit (column 3a) due to multicolinearity
between in‡ation and exchange rates gaps.
  40
     The coe¢ cient of variation of nominal exchange rate for active users of RR is 112.6, while the one for
passive users is 16.9.




                                                    19
reserve requirements as a macroeconomic stabilization tool and most of them use them coun-

tercyclically. At the same time, many developing countries engage in procyclical monetary

policy, raising interest rates in bad times and lowering them in good times. We argue that

procyclical monetary policy may re‡ect the fear of free falling (the need to defend the cur-

rency in bad times by raising policy rates) and the fear of capital in‡ows (the reluctance to

raise policy rates in good times for fear of attracing even more capital in‡ows and further

appreciate the domestic currency). In such a scenario, by providing a countercyclical tool,

reserve requirements perform the work that monetary policy cannot do (and, in that sense,

reserve requirement policy acts as a substitute for monetary policy).



Appendix 1. De…nition and sources of variables

All data are at quarterly frequency. X-12-ARIMA is used for seasonal adjustment of real

GDP. Cyclical components were obtained using the Hodrick-Prescott …lter.

   Real GDP: Most data are from Global Financial Data and International Financial Sta-

tistics (IFS/IMF). Data are also complemented in some cases with local sources: Argentina

(Central Bank of Argentina), Brazil (Institute for Applied Economic Research - IPEA), Hon-

duras (Central Bank of Honduras), Panama (Central Bank of Panama), Trinidad and Tobago

(Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago), and Uruguay (Central Bank of Uruguay).

   Interest rate policy: We take short-term interest rates as a proxy for the stance of mon-

etary policy. In some cases, we have data for overnight interbank interest rates, such as the

Federal Funds rate in the United States. In most cases, however, we rely on discount rates

due to their longer availability. Source: Global Financial Data.

   Legal reserve requirements: See the World Bank website http://go.worldbank.org/D7JYE3SLS0

for a list of the sample period for every country, the type of legal reserve requirements, the

speci…c source, and the data itself.

   In‡ation: Based on consumer price index. Source: Global Financial Data.

   Nominal exchange rate: Nominal bilateral exchange rate (against USD). Source: IFS/IMF.

                                             20
References

 [1] Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004), “Some evidence on the importance of sticky

    prices,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112, pp. 947-985.

 [2] Borio, C., and I. Shim (2007), “What can (macro-)prudential policy do to support mon-

    etary policy?” BIS Working Paper No. 242.

 [3] Calderon, Cesar, and Luis Serven (2011), “Macro-prudential policies over the cycle in

    Latin America,” unpublished manuscript (World Bank).

 [4] Canuto, Otaviano and Swati R. Ghosh (2013), editors, Dealing with the challenges of

    macro …nancial linkages in emerging markets, World Bank.

 [5] Claessens, Stijn, Swati R. Ghosh, and Roxana Mihet, “Macro prudential policies to

    mitigate …nancial vulnerabilities in emerging markets,” in Otaviano Canuto and Swati

    R. Ghosh, editors, Dealing with the challenges of macro …nancial linkages in emerging

    markets, World Bank (2013), pp. 155-178.

 [6] De Gregorio, Jose, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo Valdes (2000), “Controls on capital

    in‡ows: Do they work?” NBER Working Paper No. 7645.

 [7] De la Torre, Augusto, Alain Ize, and Sergio Schmukler (2012), Financial development in

    Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank: Latin American and Caribbean Studies).

 [8] Fischer, Stanley (1998), “The IMF and the Asian Crisis,” Speech delivered at UCLA

    (available on the IMF website).

 [9] Frankel, Je¤rey, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin (2013), “On graduation from

    …scal policy procyclicality,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 100, pp. 32-47.

[10] Glocker, C., and P. Towbin (2012), "The Macroeconomic e¤ects of reserve requirements,"

    Austrian Institute of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 420/2012.


                                            21
[11] IMF (2011), Shifting winds, new policy challenges (Regional Economic Outlook, Western

    Hemisphere Department).

[12] IMF (2012), The liberalization and management of capital ‡ows: An institutional view.

[13] Lim, C, F. Columba, A. Costa, P. Kongsamut, A. Otani, M. Saiyid, T. Wezel, and X.

    Wu (2011), “Macroprudential policy: What instruments and how to use them?” IMF

    Working Paper 11/238.

[14] Ma, Guonan, Yan Xiandong and Liu Xi (2013), “China’s evolving reserve requirements,”

    Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies, Vol. 11.

[15] Montoro, C., and R. Moreno (2011), “The use of reserve requirements as a policy instru-

    ment in Latin America,” BIS Quarterly Review (March).

[16] Nier, E., J. Osinski, L. Jacome, and P. Madrid (2011), “Towards e¤ective macroprudential

    policy frameworks: An assessment of stylized institution models,” IMF Working Paper

    11/250.

[17] Rossini, Renzo and Zenon Quispe (2010), “Monetary policy during the global …nancial

    crisis of 2007-2009: The case of Peru,” Bank for International Settlements (Vol. 54), pp.

    299-315.

[18] Rossini, Renzo, Zenon Quispe and Donita Rodriguez (2011), “Capital ‡ows, monetary

    policy and FOREX interventions in Peru” Working Paper 2011-008 (Central Reserve

    Bank of Peru).

[19] Reinhart, C., K. Rogo¤ and M. Savastano (2003), “Addicted to dollars,”NBER Working

    Paper No. 10015.

[20] Tovar, Camilo, M. Garcia-Escribano, and M. Vera (2012), “Credit growth and the e¤ec-

    tiveness of reserve requirements and other macroprudential instruments in Latin Amer-

    ica,” IMF Working Paper No. 142.

                                             22
[21] Vargas, H., Betancourt, Y., Rodriguez, N. and Varela, C. (2010): “E¤ects of reserve

    requirements in an in‡ation targeting regime: the case of Colombia,”BIS Working Paper

    No. 54, pp 133–70.

[22] Vegh, Carlos A. and Guillermo Vuletin, “Overcoming the fear of free falling: Monetary

    policy graduation in emerging markets,”NBER Working Paper No. 17753 (2012), forth-

    coming in The role of Central Banks in …nancial stability: How has it changed? (Federal

    Reserve Bank of Chicago).




                                            23
                               Reserve requirement                                                                                              Reserve requirement




                   0
                       0.05
                              0.1
                                    0.15
                                           0.2
                                                 0.25
                                                        0.3
                                                              0.35
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                            0.25



          1970:1                                                                                                            1985:1
          1971:3                                                                                                            1986:1
          1973:1                                                                                                            1987:1
          1974:3                                                                                                            1988:1
          1976:1                                                                                                            1989:1
          1977:3                                                                                                            1990:1
          1979:1                                                                                                            1991:1
          1980:3
                                                                                                                            1992:1
          1982:1
                                                                                                                            1993:1
          1983:3
                                                                                                                            1994:1
          1985:1
                                                                                                                            1995:1
          1986:3
                                                                                                                            1996:1




Demand
          1988:1
                                                                                                                            1997:1
          1989:3
                                                                                                                            1998:1
          1991:1
                                                                                                                            1999:1
          1992:3
                                                                                                                            2000:1
          1994:1




Savings
                                                                                                                            2001:1
          1995:3
                                                                                                                            2002:1
          1997:1
          1998:3                                                                                                            2003:1
                                                                                                                            2004:1




Term
          2000:1
          2001:3                                                                                                            2005:1
                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 1. China's reserve requirement over time.




          2003:1                                                                                                            2006:1
                                                                     Figure 2. Venezuela's reserve requirements over time
          2004:3                                                                                                            2007:1
          2006:1                                                                                                            2008:1
          2007:3                                                                                                            2009:1
          2009:1                                                                                                            2010:1
          2010:3                                                                                                            2011:1
                                                                                                                                                                        Reserve requirement                                                                                                                     Reserve requirement




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                                                        0.15
                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1993:1
                                                                                                                                              1993:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1993:4
                                                                                                                                              1993:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1994:3
                                                                                                                                              1994:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1995:2
                                                                                                                                              1995:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996:1
                                                                                                                                              1996:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996:4
                                                                                                                                              1996:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1997:3
                                                                                                                                              1997:3




                                                                                                                             Local-Demand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1998:2
                                                                                                                                              1998:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1999:1
                                                                                                                                              1999:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1999:4
                                                                                                                                              1999:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2000:3
                                                                                                                                              2000:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2001:2
                                                                                                                                              2001:2




                                                                                                                             Local-Term
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Local
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2002:1
                                                                                                                                              2002:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2002:4
                                                                                                                                              2002:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2003:3
                                                                                                                                              2003:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2004:2
                                                                                                                                              2004:2                                                                                                                               Foreign
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2005:1
                                                                                                                                              2005:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2005:4
                                                                                                                                              2005:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2006:3
                                                                                                                                              2006:3




                                                                                                                             Foreign-Demand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 3. Peru's reserve requirements over time




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2007:2
                                                                                                                                              2007:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 4. Argentina's reserve requirements over time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008:1
                                                                                                                                              2008:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008:4
                                                                                                                                              2008:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2009:3
                                                                                                                                              2009:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2010:2
                                                                                                                                              2010:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011:1




                                                                                                                             Foreign-Term
                                                                                                                                              2011:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011:4




Note: RR associated with savings deposits are the same than those of demand deposits, both for local and foreign currency.
                        Dispersion of reserve requirements
                                                                                                                                                      Average reserve requirement




                    0
                         0.02
                                   0.04
                                            0.06
                                                     0.08
                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25


             1975
                                                                                                                                         1975
             1977
                                                                                                                                         1977
             1979
                                                                                                                                         1979
             1981
                                                                                                                                         1981
             1983
                                                                                                                                         1983
             1985
                                                                                                                                         1985
             1987
                                                                                                                                         1987
             1989
                                                                                                                                         1989
             1991
                                                                                                                                         1991




Developing
             1993




                                                                                                                            Developing
                                                                                                                                         1993
             1995
                                                                                                                                         1995
             1997
                                                                                                                                         1997
             1999




Industrial
                                                                                                                                         1999
             2001
                                                                                                                            Industrial



                                                                                                                                         2001
             2003
                                                                   Figure 6. Dispersion of reserve requirements over time
                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 5. Average reserve requirements over time




                                                                                                                                         2003
             2005
                                                                                                                                         2005
             2007
                                                                                                                                         2007
             2009
                                                                                                                                         2009
             2011
                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                         Figure 7. Frequency of changes in reserve requirements (1970-2011)

                                                         0.75
Quarterly frequency of changes in reserve requirements




                                                                                                                                                                     India
                                                          0.5




                                                                                                                   Ecuador (pre-dollarization)




                                                                                                                                    Honduras
                                                                                                                                  Argentina
                                                                                                                                   Serbia
                                                                                                                                 Jamaica
                                                                                                                   Trinidad and Tobago




                                                                                                                           Costa Rica
                                                                                                                         Nicaragua
                                                                                                            Ecuador (dollarization)




                                                                                                                         Belarus
                                                         0.25




                                                                                                                     Malaysia
                                                                                                                       China
                                                                                                                 Colombia
                                                                                                                  Croatia

                                                                                                                   Latvia
                                                                                                                Romania
                                                                                                              Venezuela




                                                                                                                 Turkey
                                                                                                              Sweden
                                                                                                              Hungary
                                                                                                           Philippines




                                                                                                              Poland
                                                                                                   United Kingdom




                                                                                                                 Peru
                                                                                                      United States



                                                                                                        Macedonia




                                                                                                              Brazil
                                                                                                   Domincan Rep.




                                                                                                       Czech Rep.


                                                                                                         Germany
                                                                                                         Portugal
                                                                                                         Lithuania
                                                                                                   New Zealand




                                                                                                        Uruguay



                                                                                                          Japan
                                                                                                   Switzerland




                                                                                                          Israel
                                                                                                       France
                                                                                                   El Salvador




                                                                                                    Singapore
                                                                                                   Guatemala




                                                                                                      Panama
                                                                                                    Thailand
                                                                                                   Australia
                                                                                                   Denmark




                                                                                                     Mexico

                                                                                                      Spain
                                                                                                   Euro-17
                                                                                                   Canada




                                                                                                   Norway



                                                                                                    Chile




                                                                                     0




                                                                                  Figure 8. Active versus passive reserve requirement policy (1970-2011)

                                                            Infinite
                                                                                                                                                            Passive
                                                          Time between changes in RR (in years)




                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                            Active

                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                  15


                                                                                                  10


                                                                                                   5


                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                       0    2             4              6              8                    10
                                                                                                                Duration of business cycle (in years)


Note: The dashed line is a 45 degree line. Countries located below (above) the 45 degree line are countries for which the
change in reserve requirements takes place, on average, at least (less than) one time per business cycle. Countries are
classified as active if the average duration of business cycle plus one standard deviation of business cycle is larger than the
average time between changes in reserve requirements.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Quarterly frequency of change of reserve requirement
                                                                                                                                                                                      Correlation (RGDP, reserve requirement)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Australia




                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




at five percent level.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Canada
                                                                                                                                                               Jamaica*                                                                                                                                                          Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mexico
                                                                                                                                                     Trinidad and Tobago                                                                                                                                                         New Zealand
                                                                                                                                                     Ecuador (pre-dollarization)                                                                                                                                                 Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                       Colombia                                                                                                                                                  Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                           Uruguay                                                                                                                                               Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                        Costa Rica                                                                                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                             Portugal                                                                                                                                            Chile
                                                                                                                                                                              Poland                                                                                                                                             Czech Rep.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                               Turkey                                                                                                                                            Euro-17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nicaragua                                                                                                   Israel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Japan                                                                                                      Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      India                                                                                                      United States
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Argentina                                                                                                    Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ecuador (dollarization)                                                                                      Panama
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Philippines                                                                                                 Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Israel                                                                                                        Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sweden*                                                                                                     Macedonia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Serbia                                                                                                        Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Romania                                                                                                      Argentina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jamaica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belarus*




                                                                                                                                                                                        Av. industrial = 0.30*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                        Av. developing = 0.18*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Honduras                                                                                                   Nicaragua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                France                                                                                                      Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Brazil*                                                                                                    Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hungary*                                                                                                    Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Venezuela*                                                                                                   Latvia




                                                                                                                                               67% of industrial countries excluded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Peru*                                                                                                           Croatia




                                                                                                                                               27% of developing countries excluded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Venezuela
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    China*                                                                                                           Belarus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lithuania*                                                                                                              Serbia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Germany*                                                                                                         Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 9. Frequency of changes in reserve requirements (2005-2011)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 10. Cyclicality of reserve requirement policy (1970-2011)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Latvia*                                                                                                                           China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Croatia*                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Malaysia*




Note: Average reserve requirement is used for calculations. Sample only includes active reserve requirement policy countries
(5 of 15 industrial countries and 19 of 37 developing economies are active). * indicates that the correlation is statistically positive
      Figure 11. Panel A. Cyclicality of reserve requirement policy (1970-2004)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Malaysia*
                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Germany*
                                                                                                                          Av. industrial = 0.25*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Venezuela*
                                                                                                                          Av. developing = 0.10*

                                                 Correlation (RGDP, reserve requirement)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hungary*
                                                                                                                          67% of industrial countries excluded




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Peru*
                                                                                                                          32% of developing countries excluded




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      France*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sweden*



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Croatia
                                                                                              0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Brazil*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     China*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Latvia*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Czech Rep.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Serbia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Israel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Argentina


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Belarus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Japan
                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jamaica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                         Ecuador (pre-dollarization)
                                                                                                                                                               Romania
                                                                                                                                                 Colombia*
                                                                                                                            Nicaragua
                                                                                                                  India




                                                                                             -0.5




                                                                                                  -1

Note: Average reserve requirement is used for calculations. Sample only includes active reserve requirement policy countries
(5 of 15 industrial countries and 25 of 37 developing economies are active). * indicates that the correlation is statistically
positive at five percent level.




         Figure 11. Panel B. Cyclicality of reserve requirement policy (2005-2011)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Argentina*



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Latvia*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lithuania*
                                                                                             1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   China*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Romania*



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Belarus*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Croatia*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Colombia*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      India*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Malaysia*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Venezuela*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Turkey*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Brazil*
       Correlation (RGDP, reserve requirement)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Peru*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Poland*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Honduras




                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Philippines
                                                                                                                                                        Nicaragua

                                                                                                                                                                            Serbia




                                                                                             0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av. developing = 0.47*

                                                                                           -0.5                                                                                                                                                                                  100% of industrial countries excluded
                                                                                                                          Trinidad and Tobago*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 43% of developing countries excluded
                                                                                                       Jamaica*




                                                                                            -1

  Note: Average reserve requirement is used for calculations. Sample only includes active reserve requirement policy
  countries (21 of 37 developing economies are active). * indicates that the correlation is statistically positive at five percent
  level.
          Correlation (RGDP, central bank interest rate)




  -1.25
          -1
                                   -0.75
                                                                                                  1.25




                                           -0.5
                                                  -0.25
                                                          0
                                                                  0.25
                                                                          0.5
                                                                                  0.75
                                                                                          1



           Uruguay*
Ecuador (pre-dollarization)*
            Domincan Rep.*
                   Argentina*
                         India*
                          Mexico*
                              Chile*
                          Costa Rica
                          Macedonia
                             Romania
                                 Israel
                              Venezuela
                                Thailand
                                   Turkey
                                 Hungary
                                                              Belarus
                                                              Sweden
                                                              Latvia
                                                              Portugal
                                                               Croatia
                                                               Brazil
                                                                Jamaica
                                                                Nicaragua
                                                                Japan
                                                                 Norway
                                                                 Philippines
                                                                  Serbia
                                                                   Malaysia
                                                                    Denmark*
                                                                    Panama
                                                                      Ecuador (dollarization)
                                                                      Colombia*
                                                                      Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                      Lithuania*
                                                                       New Zealand*
                                                                         Czech Rep.*
                                                                          United States*
                                                                          United Kingdom*
                                                                           Singapore*
                                                                           Guatemala*
                                                                            Poland*
          Av. industrial = 0.40*
          Av. developing = 0.07




                                                                            Peru*
                                                                            Spain*
                                                                             China*
                                                                                                         Figure 12. Cyclicality of interest rate policy (1970-2011)




                                                                             Germany*
                                                                              Australia*
                                                                               Canada*
                                                                                El Salvador*
                                                                                 France*
                                                                                   Honduras*
                                                                                      Switzerland*
                                                                                           Euro-17*
                                             Table 1. Varieties of reserve requirements
                                     Single RR (19)                   Maturity RR (16)               Currency RR (8)     Maturity and currency RR (9)

                              China                              Brazil                        Croatia                  Argentina
                              Colombia                           Chile                         Guatemala                Belarus
        Developing (37)       Ecuador (after dollarization)      Czech Rep.                    Honduras                 Costa Rica
                              India                              El Salvador                   Lithuania                Dominican Republic
                              Jamaica                            Hungary                       Macedonia                Ecuador (before dollarization)
                              Malaysia                           Israel                        Nicaragua                Poland
                              Mexico                             Latvia                        Peru                     Romania
                              Panama                             Venezuela                     Serbia                   Turkey
                              Philippines                                                                               Uruguay
                              Singapore
                              Thailand
                              Trinidad and Tobago

                              Australia                          Euro
                              Canada                             France
                              Denmark                            Germany
        Industrial (15)       New Zealand                        Japan
                              Norway                             Portugal
                              Sweden                             Spain
                              United Kingdom                     Switzerland
                                                                 United States




    Table 2. Correlations between the cyclical components of multiple reserve requirements

                           Panel A. Reserve requirements that vary according to maturity
                                                                     RR demand RR savings            RR term
                                                    RR demand             1
                                                    RR savings         0.56***     1
                                                    RR term            0.61***  0.75***                   1


          Panel B. Reserve requirements that vary according to currency of denomination
                                                                               RR local     RR foreign
                                                              RR local              1
                                                              RR foreign         0.31***         1



                           Panel C. Reserve requirements that vary according to maturity
                                          and currency of denomination
                          RR demand-local        RR savings-local              RR term-local    RR demand-foreign RR savings-foreign       RR term-foreign
RR demand-local                  1
RR savings-local              0.61***                     1
RR term-local                 0.32***                  0.27***                       1
RR demand-foreign             0.31***                  0.26***                     0.06                     1
RR savings-foreign            0.22***                  0.34***                     0.01                  0.98***           1
RR term-foreign               0.26***                  0.10**                     0.28***                0.57***        0.49***                    1
                                  Table 3. Policy mix matrix (1970-2011)

                                                                             Central bank interest rate policy

                                                     Pro-cyclical                         A-cyclical                          Counter-cyclical



                     Pro-cyclical                                            Jamaica



                                                                                                                   Australia, Canada, Colombia,
                                                                                                                   Czech Rep., Denmark, Ecuador
     Reserve                                                                   Israel, Japan, Macedonia,           (dollarization), El Salvador, Euro-17,
                                        Argentina,Chile, Costa Rica,
requirement policy                                                             Nicaragua, Panama, Philippines,     France, Guatemala, Honduras, New
                     A-cyclical         Domincan Rep., Ecuador (pre-
                                                                               Portugal, Romania, Serbia,          Zealand, Norway, Poland,
                                        dollarization), India, Mexico, Uruguay
                                                                               Thailand, Turkey                    Singapore, Spain, Switzerland,
                                                                                                                   Trinidad and Tobago, United
                                                                                                                   Kingdom, United States

                                                                             Belarus, Brazil, Croatia, Hungary,    China, Germany, Lithuania,
                     Counter-cyclical
                                                                             Latvia, Sweden, Venezuela             Malaysia, Peru


                                                               Substitutes                                                    Complements




                        Table 4. Panel A. Policy mix matrix (1970-2004)

                                                                             Central bank interest rate policy

                                                     Pro-cyclical                         A-cyclical                          Counter-cyclical



                     Pro-cyclical                                                                                  Colombia



                                                                             Belarus, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech
                                                                             Rep., Denmark, El Salvador,
     Reserve                                                                                                       Australia, Canada, Euro-17,
                                                                             Guatemala, Israel, Jamaica, Japan,
requirement policy                      Argentina, Chile, Domincan Rep.,                                           Lithuania, New Zealand, Poland,
                     A-cyclical                                              Macedonia, Nicaragua, Norway,
                                        Ecuador, India, Mexico, Uruguay                                            Singapore, Spain, Switzerland,
                                                                             Panama, Philippines, Portugal,
                                                                                                                   United Kingdom, United States,
                                                                             Romania, Serbia, Thailand, Trinidad
                                                                             and Tobago, Turkey


                                                                             Brazil, Hungary, Latvia, Malaysia,
                     Counter-cyclical                                                                              China, France, Germany, Peru,
                                                                             Sweden, Venezuela


                                                               Substitutes                                                    Complements




                        Table 4. Panel B. Policy mix matrix (2005-2011)

                                                                             Central bank interest rate policy

                                                     Pro-cyclical                         A-cyclical                          Counter-cyclical



                     Pro-cyclical                                            Jamaica                               Trinidad and Tobago



                                                                                                                   Australia, Canada, Chile, Czech
                                                                             Ecuador (dollarization), Hungary,     Rep., Denmark, El Salvador, Euro-
     Reserve
                                                                             Macedonia, Mexico, Nicaragua,         17, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel,
requirement policy   A-cyclical         Costa Rica
                                                                             Panama, Philippines, Serbia,          Japan, New Zealand, Norway,
                                                                             Thailand, Uruguay,                    Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland,
                                                                                                                   United Kingdom, United States

                                                                             Argentina, Belarus, Brazil, China,  Colombia, India, Latvia, Malaysia,
                     Counter-cyclical
                                                                             Croatia, Lithuania, Romania, Turkey Peru, Poland, Venezuela


                                                               Substitutes                                                    Complements
                 Table 5. Taylor rules for monetary and reserve requirement policies
                  for countries with active reserve requirement policy (2005-2011)

                                  i gap         rr gap                   i gap           rr gap         i gap     rr gap
                                  (1a)           (1b)                    (2a)             (2b)           (3a)      (3b)


  RGDP gap                       0.016         0.054***                  0.005          0.055***        0.015    0.056***
                                  [1.4]          [2.9]                    [0.4]           [3.1]          [1.3]      [3]

  π gap                          0.001          -0.001                                                  0.001    -0.001
                                 [1.4]           [-1.4]                                                  [1.2]    [-1.3]

  NER gap                                                            0.055***           -0.037          0.034*   -0.037
                                                                       [2.8]             [-1.3]          [1.8]    [-1.2]

  Observations                     345            345                    349              349            345       345
  Number of countries              14             14                      14              14             14        14

Note: NER stands for nominal exchange rate.




                           Table 6. Taylor rules monetary policy for countries
                           with passive reserve requirement policy (2005-2011)

                                                              (1)                 (2)             (3)


                             RGDP gap                      0.115***         0.119***         0.091**
                                                             [2.8]            [2.8]            [2]

                             π gap                          0.152*                             0.175*
                                                             [1.8]                              [1.8]

                             NER gap                                         0.038**         0.043**
                                                                              [2.1]           [2.2]

                             Observations                     934                 834            777
                             Number of countries              36                  36              36

                           Note: NER stands for nominal exchange rate.
