                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INVESTMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY WITH FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS

                                         Patrick Bolton
                                          Neng Wang
                                         Jinqiang Yang

                                      Working Paper 20610
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20610


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 2014, Revised July 2019

We are deeply grateful to Pierre-Olivier Weill for his insightful and detailed comments. This
paper was previously circulated under the title “Investment under Uncertainty and the Value of
Real and Financial Flexibility” (2014, NBER wp 20601.) We thank Andrew Abel, Ilona Babenka,
Martin Cherkes, Min Dai, Sudipto Dasgupta, Peter DeMarzo, Janice Eberly, Mark Gertler, Simon
Gilchrist, Steve Grenadier, Lars Peter Hansen, Vicky Henderson, Robert Hodrick, Harrison
Hong, Wei Jiang, Bart Lambrecht, Erica Xuenan Li, Xiaoji Lin, Robert McDonald, Stewart
Myers, Alessandro Pavan (Editor), Robert Pindyck, Tom Sargent, Suresh Sundaresan, Vladimir
Vladimirov, and seminar participants at American Finance Association (AFA) 2014 meetings in
Philadelphia, Boston University, China International Conference in Finance (CICF), Columbia
University, HKUST 2013 Finance Symposium, the Paul Woolley Centre Conference at UTS
Sydney, Rutgers University, University of Cambridge, University of Minnesota Carlson School,
Zhejiang University, and the workshops hosted by the China Young Finance Scholars Society for
helpful comments. Jinqiang Yang acknowledges support from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (71772112, 71472117, 71573033, 71532009, and 71532012) and Innovative
Research Team of Shanghai University of Finance and Economics (#2016110241) The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Patrick Bolton, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investment under Uncertainty with Financial Constraints
Patrick Bolton, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20610
October 2014, Revised July 2019
JEL No. E22,G31,G32

                                            ABSTRACT

We develop an integrated theory of investment, seasoned equity offerings (SEOs), liquidation,
and corporate savings under uncertainty for a financially constrained firm, which features
endogenous growth options, abandonment options, and payout policies. Facing costly external
financing, the firm prefers to fund its investment internally, so that its optimal policies and value
depend on both its earnings fundamentals and liquidity holdings. The firm values not only real
flexibility but also financial flexibility. The interaction of real and financial flexibility generates
novel real options results: (1) Limited financial slack significantly erodes the value of growth &
abandonment options; (2) Firms prefer projects with front-loaded cash-flows; (3) The firm's
incentive to forgo costly external financing and to accumulate internal funds may cause
substantial delay in investment; (4) A financially constrained firm over-invests in early stages of
its life-cycle in an effort to quickly build up its cash-flow generating capacity; (5) SEOs are
driven by both firm survival and growth motives. A firm in the mature phase may find itself in
three mutually exclusive regions: payout, inaction, and liquidation. A firm in its growth phase
may find itself in two additional regions: a region where investment is partly financed with an
SEO and a region where investment is solely financed with internal funds. These regions depend
on both firm savings and earnings fundamentals.

Patrick Bolton                                     Jinqiang Yang
Columbia Business School                           Shanghai University of Finance
804 Uris Hall                                      and Economics
New York, NY 10027                                 Guoding Rd. 777
and NBER                                           Shanghai, 200433
pb2208@columbia.edu                                China
                                                   yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn
Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
    Real-options theory following McDonald and Siegel (1986) and Dixit and Pindyck
(1994) assumes that firms operate in a Modigliani-Miller (MM) environment. This
is for a good reason. The firm’s investment decision can then be formulated as an
American option-exercise and valuation problem that can be solved by using the
classical option pricing tools of Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973).
   But, in reality firms operate under imperfect capital markets and face signifi-
cant external financing costs that arise from informational asymmetry, moral hazard,
transaction costs, and other frictions. In order to avoid incurring these costs too fre-
quently firms optimally retain earnings and attempt to mostly internally finance their
investments and cover their operating costs. Indeed, according to Chen, Karabarbou-
nis, and Neiman (2017), “nowadays nearly two-thirds of global investment is funded
by corporate saving.” Also the surveys of chief financial officers (CFOs) by Graham
and Harvey (2001, 2002) have revealed the great importance CFOs attach to main-
taining financial flexibility by holding internal funds.
    In practice, the value of real flexibility derived from the optimal timing of real
options is intertwined with the value of financial flexibility derived from the optimal
management of retained earnings and the optimal external financing timing and
issuance decisions. Both the effective discount rate used to determine the value of a
growth opportunity and the cost of investment depend on the firm’s marginal value of
cash, which varies with both the size of the firm’s cash holdings and the firm’s earnings
fundamentals. The reason is that the firm takes account not only of its current stock of
internal funds but also the information about its future cash flow prospects contained
in persistent earnings shocks. Through the firm’s evolving marginal value of cash, the
real option problem becomes a fundamentally two-dimensional problem, which entails
a significant generalization of the classical one-dimensional problems of McDonald and
Siegel (1986) and Dixit and Pindyck (1994).
   We embark on such a generalization in this paper and derive how optimal investment-
timing and abandonment-timing decisions are made, as well as how assets in place
and growth options are valued, when firms face external financing costs. By intro-
ducing external financing costs, we are, in effect, integrating two strands of literature,
the classical real options literature following McDonald and Siegel (1985, 1986) and
Dixit and Pindyck (1994) with the corporate finance literature following Miller and


                                            2
Orr (1966). Our continuous-time model allows us to not only derive optimal invest-
ment, abandonment, and equity issue size and timing policies but also to carry out a
systematic valuation analysis.
   We model the firm’s life-cycle and its evolving collection of assets in place and
growth opportunities in the spirit of Myers (1977). Although we do not explicitly
model adverse selection, one interpretation of costly external financing in our model
is equity dilution cost (due to mis-pricing a la arguments in Myers and Majluf (1984).
    In our model, the firm’s investment, financing, payout and abandonment policies
depend on both earnings fundamentals and the firm’s financial slack. Therefore, our
model can explain why following a recession low investment persists even though
earnings fundamentals have recovered. The reason is that following a recession firms
are generally in repair mode, seeking to rebuild their financial slack. Similarly, in our
model firms have a preference for investments with front-loaded earnings. We show
that, as a result, a start-up firm may choose to invest in a project sooner than pre-
dicted by the classical real-option theory in an effort to build future internal funding
capacity. We also show that the firm’s payout policy is fundamentally different de-
pending on whether it is in the growth phase or in the mature phase. In the mature
phase a more profitable firm pays out more, while in the growth phase it pays out
less.
    Our model also predicts that the value of growth and abandonment options effec-
tively vanishes for firms with low internal financing ability. Firms with scarce internal
funds are forced into inefficiently liquidating their valuable operating assets. We also
find that the hurdle for investment in the growth phase is a non-monotonic function
of the firm’s internal funds. When the firm’s savings are sufficient to entirely cover
the investment cost, the firm’s investment hurdle decreases with its internal funds.
But when its internal funds cannot entirely cover the cost of investment, the hur-
dle is increasing with the firm’s internal funds. The reason is that when the firm
is approaching the point where it may be able to entirely fund its investment with
retained earnings it has a stronger and stronger incentive to delay investment until it
has sufficient funds to be able to avoid tapping costly external funds. An important
implication of this result is that investment is not necessarily more likely when the
firm has more cash. Investment could well be delayed further, as the firm’s priority
becomes avoiding costly external financing.
   We also show that financially constrained firms prefer growth opportunities with


                                           3
front-loaded cash-flows. In the MM-based real options framework there is an equiv-
alence between an option that pays cash flows over time and an option that pays
immediately upon exercising a lump sum with the same present value. This is not
true in our model for a financially constrained firm. Not only is the value of real
options with more front-loaded cash-flows higher but also the firm may be induced to
over-invest. More generally, a financially constrained firm cares not only about the
present value of an investment project but also the project’s payback period.
   Another subtle prediction is that the amount of external equity financing is also
non-monotonic in the profitability of the firm’s operating assets. The intuition is as
follows. For a firm whose investment option is sufficiently out of the money, financial
flexibility has little value. On the other hand, a firm that is so profitable that its
investment option is deep in the money can easily generate cash from operations.
Therefore, funds obtained through an equity issue are most valuable for a firm whose
profitability is in the medium range. In sum, for firms facing external financing costs
the value of real options is not just tied to the timing of the real option but also to
financial flexibility. Hugonnier, Malamud, and Morellec (2015) consider a model of
costly and uncertain external financing in which the amount of external financing
may also be non-monotonic in profitability. Décamps, Gryglewicz, Morellec, and
Villeneuve (2017) obtain a similar prediction in a model with both permanent and
transitory shocks.
       A real options theory that includes external financing costs is obviously on a sub-
stantially stronger empirical footing than the classical theory that assumes perfect
capital markets. This is evident with respect to the empirical evidence in Kim and
Weisbach (2008) on global seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) and DeAngelo, DeAn-
gelo and Stulz (2010) on SEOs of U.S. industrial corporations. The former paper
finds that a large fraction of the SEO proceeds is saved inside the firm and savings
are larger for growth firms. The latter finds that SEOs are first and foremost last-
resort financing decisions for firms running out of cash, or in need of funds towards
anticipated investment outlays. Although they find evidence in support of the mar-
ket timing hypothesis of Loughran and Ritter (1995, 1997) and Baker and Wurgler
(2002) on the one hand, and the life-cycle hypothesis on the other,1 these hypothe-
   1
    By the life-cycle hypothesis, they mean that equity issuers are primarily young firms with high
market-to-book (M/B) ratios and low operating cash flows, and mature firms with low M/B ratios
pay dividends and fund investments out of internal funds.



                                                4
ses do not explain most of the SEOs that are observed. The main conclusion that
DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Stulz (2010) draw is that “paraphrasing Sherlock Holmes,
‘many dogs don’t bark’ at times when according to theory they should be barking;...
[and] the life-cycle explanation is problematic because too many ‘old dogs’ do in fact
bark...41.4% of issuances and 52.5% of SEO proceeds come from current and former
dividend payers, firms that are clearly beyond the growth phase of their life-cycles.”
Our theory of SEOs is consistent with findings in both papers. In particular, it can
explain why so many “old and young dogs” bark, as it accounts for both offerings for
survival and offerings for growth.2
      A striking new prediction of our theory (from our simulation analysis) is that
the equity stake given up to outside investors via an SEO is substantially smaller on
average for firms that use the SEO proceeds to invest than for those that do not in-
vest. Such a prediction cannot be obtained in models without persistent productivity
shocks.
   From a macro perspective, our model sheds light on a major challenge for the real-
options based models that seek to explain the persistently low post-crisis investment
despite the substantial increase in corporate cash holdings and the quick recovery
of earnings and macroeconomic fundamentals. Several studies, in particular, Baker,
Bloom and Davis (2016), and Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and
Terry (2016), have pointed out that, although investment timing optionality as in
Bloom (2009) is highly relevant for understanding investment dynamics, the standard
real options models predict only a short-lived pause in investment caused by higher
uncertainty following the crisis.
   By construction, the standard real options model also cannot explain the increase
in corporate savings.    Our model with external financing costs, however, produces
both more persistent investment dynamics and cash build-ups following a crisis, con-
sistent with the findings in Alfaro, Bloom, and Lin (2016) and Chen (2017). Our
model is also consistent with Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2010) and Campello,
Giambona, Graham, and Harvey (2011) who find that the more financially con-
strained firms planned deeper cuts in investment, spending, burned more cash, drew
more credit from banks, and also engaged in more asset sales and forced liquidations
  2
    Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2006, 2010) offer a related dynamic theory of SEOs and
investment. They assume that investment is always financed through an SEO, and therefore they
cannot explain the empirical findings of DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Stulz (2010).



                                             5
in the crisis.3 In sum, our real options model with financial constraints that ties real
optionality with financial flexibility predicts significantly more plausible investment
and cash dynamics.

Related literature. Following McDonald and Siegel (1986) the basic formulation
of the classical real-options problem has been extended in many different directions.
Dixit (1989) uses the real option approach to examine entry and exit from a productive
activity. Titman (1985) and Williams (1991) analyze real estate development in a
real options framework. Abel and Eberly (1994) analyze a unified framework of
investment under uncertainty that integrates the q theory of investment with the real
options approach.
   Mauer and Triantis (1994) considers a real options problem for a levered firm,
which otherwise does not face any external financing costs. Hackbarth and Mauer
(2012) and Sundaresan, Wang, and Yang (2015) study the joint investment and fi-
nancing decisions by building on the capital structure model of Leland (1994) and
integrating it into the real options framework with institutional features. Grenadier
(1996), Lambrecht and Perraudin (2003) and others extend the real options deci-
sion problem to a game-theoretic environment. Grenadier and Wang (2005) incorpo-
rate informational asymmetries and agency problems into a real options framework.
Morellec (2004) and Lambrecht and Myers (2007, 2008) consider managerial agency
problems in the context of a real options framework. Kyle, Ou-Yang, and Xiong
(2006) introduce prospect theory and Grenadier and Wang (2007) introduce hyper-
bolic discounting into the classical real options framework.
   In strategic dynamic contexts, Grenadier and Malenko (2011) study games in
which the decision to exercise an option is a signal of private information to outsiders.
Grenadier, Malenko, and Malenko (2016) consider a problem where an uninformed
principal makes a timing decision interacting with an informed but biased agent.
Orlov, Skrzypacz, and Zryumov (2019) study a Bayesian persuasion game in the
context of real options. Miao and Wang (2007) analyze an incomplete-markets real-
options problem.4 Grenadier and Malenko (2010) develop a model of real options
   3
     Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) also document the aggressive credit-line drawdown by firms in
the crisis.
   4
     Chen, Miao, and Wang (2010) and Wang, Wang, and Yang (2012) use the incomplete-markets-
based real-options model to study entrepreneurial firms’ capital structure, investment, and aban-
donment decisions. Miao and Wang (2011) analyze the impact of ambiguity and ambiguity aversion



                                                6
with learning about the permanence of shocks.
   None of these models discussed above allow for financial flexibility through the
accumulation of corporate savings. More recently, two related articles have intro-
duced financial flexibility into a real options problem, but they only consider one-
dimensional problems by removing earnings fundamentals as a state variable. The
first is by Décamps and Villeneuve (2007) and the second is by Hugonnier, Malamud,
and Morellec (2015). Both articles consider a financially constrained firm with an
asset in place that generates cash-flows with (transitory) i.i.d shocks and that faces
a growth option that can increase the drift of the cash-flow process. Put differently,
in the MM version of these models there is no value of waiting and hence there is no
real flexibility: the firm would exercise its growth option as soon as it is available.
    Thus, our main contribution is to consider a two-dimensional problem that lends
itself to a general analysis of the value of real and financial flexibility. Our paper
is not the first to consider a two-dimensional real-options problem, but it is the
first to offer a complete and rigorous analysis of this problem. The first article to
consider a two-dimensional real options problem for a financially constrained firm
is by Boyle and Guthrie (2003). They assume that the firm cannot invest at all
unless it meets an exogenous borrowing constraint. Once the investment is made
the firm is immediately liquidated at the market value of the asset. The main point
of their analysis is to highlight an over-investment incentive, which is driven by the
risk of (locally) unbounded large losses from the operating assets in place, and the
firm’s concern that it might be short of cash before it can invest. This concern is
contrived as it arises from the ad hoc assumption that the firm is not allowed to
voluntarily downsize its operating asset.5 That is, they do not account for the firm’s
abandonment option, which is an important part of our analysis. Unlike their setup,
our model fully captures both real and financial flexibility by separating financing and
investment option decisions. The firm’s financing needs reflect the joint considerations
for investment, continued operations, and survival. Moreover, the firm continues to
face operating risk after investment and therefore also faces an abandonment option.
   Anderson and Carverhill (2012) study a liquidity management problem for a firm
on (real options) investment decisions.
   5
     A related ad hoc assumption which drives the overinvestment result in their paper is that the
growth option payoff value is assumed to follow a geometric Brownian motion, while cumulative
operating cash-flows from the operating asset are assumed to follow an arithmetic Brownian motion
causing unbounded large operating losses.



                                                7
operating over an exogenously fixed time horizon and that is subject to mean-reverting
productivity shocks. Besides these different model specifications the other funda-
mental difference with our analysis is that their model has a one-time investment
opportunity at an exogenously fixed time implying no investment-timing flexibility.
    Three independent studies analyze a similar problem to ours: First, Copeland and
Lyasoff (2013) consider a somewhat narrower framework to ours and do not allow for
either abandonment or sequential growth options. Second, Boot and Vladimirov
(2014) consider a financially constrained entrepreneurial firm with an asset in place
that generates random cash flows following a geometric Brownian motion and a new
investment opportunity. Third, Babenko and Tserlukevich (2013) consider the op-
timal hedging policy for a financially constrained firm with a decreasing returns to
scale technology and growth opportunities.
    Our paper is also related to Décamps, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve (2011),
who consider a financially constrained firm’s optimal dynamic payout and SEO poli-
cies, and Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011, 2013), who develop a q-theory of investment
for financially constrained firms facing i.i.d. shocks. One important difference with
the generalized q-theory of investment (with convex adjustment costs) is that the fi-
nancially constrained firm issues equity only for survival and never for investment as
it uses its internal savings to smooth investment, and hence cannot explain the above
mentioned empirical evidence on SEOs. Bolton, Wang, and Yang (2019) use the
recursive optimal contracting method to develop a dynamic liquidity and risk man-
agement model also with real investment options for a firm run by an entrepreneur
with inalienable human capital.


2     Model
Operating Revenues and Profits. We consider a young firm that has assets
in place and an investment opportunity. At any point in time t ≥ 0 the firm can
exercise this investment opportunity by paying a fixed investment cost I > 0 as
in McDonald and Siegel (1986). Upon exercising this investment option the young
(growth) firm becomes a mature firm. The investment opportunity is more or less
attractive depending on the earnings fundamentals Y for its product, which follows
the geometric Brownian motion (GBM) process

                               dYt = µYt dt + σYt dBt ,                            (1)

                                          8
where Bt is the standard Brownian motion defined on the filtered probability space
(Ω, F, {Ft }t∈R+ , P) which satisfies the usual conditions.
   The firm generates revenues at the rate of mn Y , where mn denotes the firm’s
production capacity, with n ∈ {1, 2}. When n = 1 the firm is in the growth phase,
and when n = 2 the firm has expanded into its mature phase, so that m1 < m2 . We
denote the firm’s deterministic operating cost (per unit time) by Zn > 0, so that the
operating profit per unit of time is (mn Yt − Zn ). Obviously, our model specification
allows both the revenue and cost to be stochastic and only requires that the operating
profit (mn Y − Zn ) is an affine function in Y . In sum, upon exercising the growth
option the firm’s operating revenue increases by ∆m Yt , where ∆m = m2 − m1 , and
its operating cost increases by ∆Z = Z2 − Z1 , so that (∆m Yt − ∆Z ) is the firm’s
incremental profit from the second asset.
       When profits (mn Yt − Zn ) are sufficiently negative it may be optimal for the
firm to abandon operations as the option value of continuing the firm is no longer
positive. As in the standard real-options literature (e.g., McDonald and Siegel, 1986),
by exercising the abandonment option, the firm shuts itself down and without loss of
generality obtains a liquidation value of zero. The firm, thus, has an American-style
perpetual liquidation option, where the timing of the option is endogenously chosen
in both the growth and mature phases. In sum, our model describes a simple life-cycle
of a firm with three phases: a growth phase, a mature phase, and a liquidation (or
scale-down) phase. We assume that investors are risk neutral, so that all cash flows
are discounted at the risk-free rate r. Equivalently, we may interpret the process (1)
as representing the risk-neutral measure.

External Financing Costs. In reality firms often face significant external financ-
ing costs due to asymmetric information and managerial incentive issues. A large
empirical literature has sought to measure these costs, in particular the costs arising
from the negative stock price reaction in response to the announcement of a new
equity issue.6
   6
    An early study by Asquith and Mullins (1986) found that the average stock price reaction to
the announcement of a common stock issue was −3% and the loss in equity value as a percentage of
the size of the new equity issue was as high as −31%. Similar results have been obtained in several
subsequent studies (see Eckbo, Masulis and Norli, 2007 for a survey). Calomiris and Himmelberg
(1997) estimate the direct transactions costs firms face when they issue equity and find that mean
transactions costs (underwriting, management, legal, auditing and registration fees) are as high as
9% of an issue for seasoned public offerings and 15.1% for initial public offerings.


                                                9
       To capture these costs, we use a standard specification for external financing
costs.7 If the firm needs to raise external funds F net of fees, it incurs an external
financing cost:
                                   Φ(F ) = φ0 IF >0 + φ1 F ,                                  (2)
where φ0 ≥ 0 is the fixed cost parameter and φ1 ≥ 0 is the marginal cost of external
financing, and IF >0 is an indicator function which takes the value of one when F > 0
and zero otherwise.8 When the fixed cost φ0 is high the firm may prefer liquidation
over equity issuance.
       While we could allow for different equity issuance costs in the growth and mature
phases to capture different types of financing frictions (agency costs and informa-
tional asymmetry), we keep the external financing costs the same in both phases for
simplicity. An important simplification, however, is that we do not explicitly model
informational asymmetries between the firm and outside investors. As a result our
model cannot capture how investment and abandonment policies differ across differ-
ent types of issuers and how asymmetric information about option values maps into
external financing costs.

Corporate Liquidity Management. To avoid incurring external financing costs
too often the firm will seek to accumulate funds internally, so that a key aspect of
the firm’s financial management is liquidity, or cash, management, to which we next
turn.
       The growth phase. At the beginning of the growth phase (t = 0) the firm is
endowed with a stock of cash W0 ≥ 0. Over time the firm’s cash accumulates as
follows
                       dWt = (rWt + m1 Yt − Z1 )dt + dCt − dUt ,                              (3)
subject to the constraint that its cash holding is non-negative:

                                            Wt ≥ 0 .                                          (4)

The first term in (3) is the sum of the firm’s interest income rW and operating
profits m1 Yt − Z1 . The second term in (3), Ct , denotes the firm’s non-decreasing
   7
     Explicitly modeling informational asymmetry would result in a substantially more involved
analysis. Lucas and McDonald (1990) provides a tractable analysis by making the simplifying
assumption that the informational asymmetry is short lived, i.e. it lasts one period.
   8
     In other words, to raise the net amount F the firm must raise the gross amount F + Φ(F ) from
investors.

                                               10
cumulative external equity financing, and the third term Ut denotes its non-decreasing
cumulative payout, in that dCt ≥ 0 and dUt ≥ 0. Should the firm choose to abandon
its operations, it then pays out any remaining cash Wt to its shareholders. We begin by
considering this simpler situation, and later extend the analysis to situations where
the firm incurs a cash-carrying cost and therefore must also determine its payout
policy.
   When the firm’s liquidity W is insufficient to cover the investment cost, W < I,
the firm will obviously have to raise external funds to finance the investment cost I
or alternatively the firm can wait and continue to accumulate internal funds. This
is one way in which external financing costs will modify the firm’s exercise decision
of its growth option. Also, when the firm chooses to raise external funds to finance
its investment it may decide to raise more funds than needed to cover the investment
cost because it also needs funds (working capital) to finance potential operating losses
after it has exercised its growth option.
       The mature phase. In the mature phase cash accumulates as follows:

                   dWt = (rWt + m2 Yt − Z2 )dt + dCt − dUt ,    Wt ≥ 0 .              (5)

In other words, the dynamics of liquidity are almost the same as in the growth phase,
the only difference being that production capacity is now m2 and operating costs are
Z2 .

The Optimization Problem. For expositional purposes, we denote by {At }t∈R+
the control process which takes the liquidity process into the positive closed region
{Wt ≥ 0}t∈R+ .
       Let τ nL denote the abandonment (liquidation) time in the growth phase (n = 1)
and in the mature phase (n = 2). Also let τ i denote the stochastic investment time
in the growth phase. Next, we turn to the stochastic equity issuance timing and
amount. Let τ nF (t) denote the first external financing time after time t in phase n,
where n = 1 for the growth phase and n = 2 for the mature phase, and let Fn ≥ 0
denote the corresponding external financing amount at time τ nF (t).
    As the firm’s discount rate is equal to the risk-free rate, there is no cost for the
firm to carry cash in the firm, which means that it is weakly efficient for shareholders
to save the firm’s profits inside the firm. It is possible that the firm’s savings at time
t, Wt , is so high that the firm becomes permanently financially unconstrained at all

                                            11
its future time s ≥ t. That is, it is optimal for the firm to choose the first-best policies
at all s ≥ t with probability one. We use τ 1U to denote the (first) time t when the
firm becomes permanently financially unconstrained in the growth phase. Similarly,
we use τ 2U to denote the (first) time when the firm becomes permanently financially
unconstrained in the mature phase.
       The control process is then given by At ≡ (τ 2U , τ 2L , τ 2F (t), F2 ) in the mature phase
and by At ≡ (τ i , τ 1U , τ 1L , τ 1F (t), F1 ) in the growth phase.9 The extra control in the
growth phase is due to the investment option.
       Before defining the value function and providing its solution, we state the following
assumptions.

Assumption 1 There exists a nonempty compact metric space K such that At ∈ K
for all t ∈ R+ .

   A control process is said to be admissible if: 1) it is adapted to the filtration
{Ft }t∈R+ ; 2) it satisfies Assumption 1; and, 3) Wt following the process, defined by
equation (3) for the growth phase and the process defined by equation (5) for the
mature phase, has a unique strong solution. The set of admissible control processes
is denoted by A.
    Next, we state a sufficient condition that ensures that the value function is well
defined.

Assumption 2 The risk-free interest rate is positive, r > 0, and the growth rate of
the earnings fundamentals is strictly smaller than the risk-free interest rate, r > µ.

       Finally, to ensure that the investment option is valuable in the growth phase, we
impose the following assumption.

Assumption 3 The firm’s production capacity in the mature phase is strictly greater
than that in growth phase: m2 > m1 .

       In sum, the firm’s optimization problem involves several dynamic policies: i) an
investment timing decision; ii) an abandonment timing decisions; and iii) dynamic
SEO decisions. Importantly, the firm uses liquidity management to integrate these
interdependent decisions.
   9
    For notational simplicity, sometimes we skip time subscripts of the control process. For example,
A refers to At and τ nF (t) refers to τ nF .

                                                 12
3      The First-Best Solution
     Under perfect capital markets (when the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds), the
firm only faces investment and abandonment timing decisions. We solve for the firm’s
value in both mature and growth phases together with its optimal abandonment and
investment policies.
     First, we calculate the firm’s value (i.e. from its asset in place) in the mature
phase. We use Q∗ (Y ) to denote its value in the mature phase. The only decision in
the mature phase for the fist-best (FB) setting is the abandonment timing decision.
The firm’s value is given by
                                                     "Z                                    #
                                                             τ 2L
                         Q∗ (Yt ) = max
                                     2
                                        Et                          e−r(s−t) (m2 Ys − Z2 )ds .                (6)
                                        τL               t


This equation incorporates the value of abandonment as the integral is truncated at
the liquidation time τ 2L .
     Next, we calculate the firm’s value in the growth phase where it has one asset in
place and a growth option. We use H ∗ (Y ) to denote its value in the growth phase.
The decisions in the growth phase for the FB setting then involve both abandonment
and investment timing decisions. Therefore, the firm’s value is then given by
                     "Z      1
                                                                              #
                                  min{τ L ,τ i }
    H ∗ (Yt ) = max
                  1
                    Et                             e−r(s−t) (m1 Ys − Z1 )ds + e−r(τ i −t) (Q∗ (Yτ i ) − I) .
              τ i ,τ L        t
                                                                                                              (7)
   As the optimal timing decisions are characterized by optimal threshold policies
                                                                     ∗
in our model, we next introduce various threshold policies. We use Ya,2 to denote
                                                                        ∗
the optimal abandonment hurdle in the mature phase: τ 2L = inf{s|Ys ≤ Ya,2 , s ≥ t},
      ∗
use Ya,1 to denote the optimal abandonment threshold in the growth phase: τ 1L =
               ∗
inf{s|Ys ≤ Ya,1  , s ≥ t}, and use Yi∗ to denote the optimal investment threshold:
τ i = inf{s|Ys ≥ Yi∗ , s ≥ t}.
     The following theorem states the first-best solution under perfect capital markets.

Theorem 1 Under Assumptions 1-2, the value of the operating asset Q∗ (Y ) in the
mature phase is given by:
                                      ∗               γ
                                 m2 Ya,2
                                           
        ∗          m2 Y   Z2               Z2     Y                                                    ∗
      Q (Y ) =          −     −          −         ∗
                                                                                         for     Y ≥ Ya,2 ,   (8)
                  r−µ     r      r−µ       r     Ya,2


                                                               13
                               ∗
where the abandonment hurdle Ya,2 is given by (A.1) and the constant γ is given by
(A.2) in Appendix A.
      Under Assumptions 1-3, the firm’s value in the growth phase, H ∗ (Y ), is given by:
                                 ∗ γ β        ∗ β γ
                             (Ya,1 ) Y − (Ya,1  ) Y                          m1 Yi∗ Z1
                                                                                     
  ∗      m1 Y     Z1                                         ∗   ∗
H (Y ) =       −       + ∗ γ ∗ β              ∗ β
                                                            Q (Yi ) − I −          −
         r−µ       r      (Ya,1 ) (Yi ) − (Ya,1 ) (Yi∗ )γ                    r−µ     r
                                                   ∗
              (Yi∗ )β Y γ − (Yi∗ )γ Y β       m1 Ya,1
                                                           
                                                         Z1              ∗
         − ∗ γ ∗ β               ∗ β
                                                      −        , for Ya,1   ≤ Y ≤ Yi∗ (9)
          (Ya,1 ) (Yi ) − (Ya,1    ) (Yi∗ )γ r − µ        r

where the constant γ and β are given by (A.2) and (A.5) respectively, and the invest-
                                               ∗
ment threshold Yi∗ and abandonment threshold Ya,1 jointly solve the equations (A.3)
and (A.4) in Appendix A.
      Moreover, H ∗ (Y ) = Q∗ (Y ) − I for Y > Yi∗ , and H ∗ (Y ) = 0 for Y < Ya,1
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                   .

      For the mature phase, the value of the firm’s assets in place is equal to Q∗ (Y ). The
first term in (8) for Q∗ (Y ) is the present discounted value of operating profits if the
firm were to remain in operation forever (which would be suboptimal for sufficiently
low Y ). The second term in (8) for Q∗ (Y ) is the abandonment option value. The
                                             ∗               ∗
firm operates its asset if and only if Y ≥ Ya,2 . When Y < Ya,2 the asset is abandoned
and Q∗ (Y ) = 0 . As is well known, Q∗ (Y ) is convex in Y due to the abandonment
option.
    For the growth case, the enterprise value is equal to H ∗ (Y ). The first term in
(9) for H ∗ (Y ) is the present discounted value of operating profits if the firm were
to remain in operation forever generating profits at the rate of m1 Y − Z1 without
exercising either abandonment or growth option. The second term in (9) for H ∗ (Y )
is the investment option value (taking into account that the growth option is exercised
before the abandonment is exercised in the growth phase.) The third term givens the
value of the abandonment in the growth phase (taking into account that the firm is
optimally abandoned before it exercises its growth option.)
                                                                           ∗
   The optimal threshold for the abandonment option in the mature phase, Ya,2 ,
has the standard well-known formula given by (A.1). The optimal threshold for
the abandonment option in the growth phase and that for the growth option are
determined jointly by (A.3) and (A.4).
   The proof for Theorem 1 is standard and omitted. Dayanik and Karatzas (2003)
provide a general characterization of one-dimensional optimal-stopping problems.


                                             14
      Finally, we note that under MM, in the mature phase, the value of a firm, denoted
by P ∗ (W, Y ), is simply equal to the sum of its cash holdings W and the value of its
asset in place, Q∗ (Y ), i.e.,

                                    P ∗ (W, Y ) = Q∗ (Y ) + W .                                                         (10)

Similarly, in the growth phase the firm’s value, denoted by G∗ (W, Y ), is given by

                                    G∗ (W, Y ) = H ∗ (Y ) + W .                                                         (11)

The functions, G∗ (W, Y ) and P ∗ (W, Y ), are the upper bounds for the firm’s value in
the growth and mature phase, respectively.


4       Solution: General Case with External Financing
        Costs
   When the firm faces external financing costs it will optimally hoard liquidity W in
order to reduce the frequency with which it returns to capital markets to raise external
funds. The interaction between earnings fundamentals and corporate liquidity gives
rise to highly nonlinear dynamics for firm value, investment, and financing.

4.1      The Mature Phase
    We begin by defining the liquidity threshold Λ2 in the mature phase such that the
firm is permanently financially unconstrained for any liquidity beyond that threshold.

Definition 1 Let Λ2 denote the liquidity threshold for W such that:
                                                    r − γµ
                                        Λ2 =                Z2 ,                                                        (12)
                                                  r2 (1− γ)
and τ 2U denote the first time Wt hits Λ2 in mature phase: τ 2U = inf{s|Ws ≥ Λ2 , s ≥ t}.
Furthermore, let τ 2 = min{τ 2F , τ 2L , τ 2U }.

      Given an admissible control A, the value function in the mature phase is given
by:
                          h
      P (Wt , Yt ; A) = Et e−r(τ 2 −t) [P (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F2 − Φ(F2 )] Iτ 2 =τ 2F
                                                                                                                    i
                                    −r(τ 2 −t)                         −r(τ 2 −t)     ∗
                                 +e              Wτ 2 I   τ 2 =τ 2L   +e            P (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )I   τ 2 =τ 2U       .(13)

                                                     15
Equation (13) takes into account the three mutually exclusive scenarios. First, the
firm issues costly external equity at τ 2F , captured by the first term when τ 2 = τ 2F .
Second, the firm liquidates, captured by the second term when τ 2 = τ 2L . Third, the
firm becomes permanently financially unconstrained, captured by the last term when
τ 2 = τ 2U . As the firm is permanently financially unconstrained at τ 2U , the firm attains
the first-best mature value P ∗ (Wt , Yt ) at t = τ 2U .
   Assumption 2 guarantees that the value function P (Wt , Yt ; A) is well defined for
any admissible control. The value function in the mature phase, denoted P (Wt , Yt ),
is then given by
                               P (Wt , Yt ) = sup P (Wt , Yt ; A) .                    (14)
                                             A∈A

An admissible control is said to be optimal if P (Wt , Yt ) = P (Wt , Yt ; A).
   As a first step in the characterization of P (W, Y ), we state the following lemmas
that summarize the main properties of P (W, Y ).

Lemma 1 The value function P (W, Y ) must be greater than or equal to the firm’s
liquidation value at any time, that is:

                                        P (W, Y ) ≥ W .                                (15)

   Lemma 1 follows from the fact that the firm can always liquidate itself and collect
W . The (net) value of the perpetual American liquidation option, measured by
P (W, Y ) − W is weakly positive.

Lemma 2 The firm always has an option to issue equity, so that P (W, Y ) satisfies

                                    P (W, Y ) ≥ P F (W, Y )                            (16)

where P F (W, Y ) would be the firm’s value if the firm were to immediately issue equity:

                     P F (W, Y ) = sup P (W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) .                 (17)
                                    F2 ≥0


   Similar to our argument for Lemma 1, Lemma 2 follows from the fact that the
firm can always issue equity at a cost. By revealed preferences, the fact that the firm
chooses not to issue equity must imply that the timing is not optimal and hence the
inequality given in (16) has to hold.



                                               16
Lemma 3 The firm’s value P (W, Y ) attains the first-best value when W ≥ Λ2 :

                   P (W, Y ) = P ∗ (W, Y ) = W + Q∗ (Y ) ,       for   W ≥ Λ2 .                 (18)

       Lemma 3 establishes that the firm is permanently financially unconstrained when
its liquidity W exceeds Λ2 , which is given by (12).
   The reasoning for this result is as follows. As long as the firm’s savings rate,
(rW + m2 Y − Z2 ), is non-negative, when evaluated at the firm’s first-best aban-
                    ∗
donment threshold Ya,2 , i.e., (rW + m2 Y − Z2 ) ≥ 0, the firm is never involuntarily
liquidated, can always achieve the first-best policies, and hence is permanently finan-
cially unconstrained. The preceding inequality is equivalent to

                                             W ≥ Λ2 ,                                           (19)

where Λ2 is obtained by substituting the explicit formula for the first-best abandon-
              ∗
ment hurdle Ya,2 , given in (A.1), into (rW + m2 Y − Z2 ) ≥ 0:
               Z ∞                                          ∗
                                                  Z2 − m2 Ya,2   r − γµ
         Λ2 =        e−r(s−t) (Z2 − m2 Ya,2
                                         ∗
                                            )ds =              = 2        Z2 .                  (20)
                 t                                     r        r (1 − γ)
       In sum, the firm is financially unconstrained only when it faces no financial con-
straint with probability one at the current and all future times. This is the case when
W ≥ Λ2 , where Λ2 denotes the lowest level of liquidity needed for a mature firm to
be permanently financially unconstrained.10
       The firm’s value P (W, Y ) is then equal to the first-best value:

                    P (W, Y ) = P ∗ (W, Y ) = W + Q∗ (Y ) for W ≥ Λ2 ,                          (21)

where the first-best value Q∗ (Y ) is given by (8). For a firm to be financially un-
constrained, it cannot issue external equity with strictly positive probability at any
moment because external funding is costly and distorts corporate decisions. That is,
the condition for a firm to be financially unconstrained in a dynamic setting is much
tighter than in a static setting.
  10
     Our notion of minimum liquidity holding W for a financially unconstrained firm is analogous
to the notion of natural borrowing limit in the macroeconomics savings literature following Aiyagari
(1994). This borrowing limit is defined as the maximum amount of risk-free debt a consumer can
accumulate without ever defaulting. A consumer can borrow at the risk-free rate up to that natural
borrowing limit, but any additional amount of borrowing will give rise to default risk. For a firm,
Λ2 is the minimum W that it needs in order to implement its first-best abandonment policy. Any
liquidity holding lower than Λ2 may induce under-investment via inefficient liquidation with positive
probability.

                                                 17
Lemma 4 In the limit as Y → ∞, the firm’s value P (W, Y ) attains the first-best
value, that is

                  P (W, Y ) = P ∗ (W, Y ) = W + Q∗ (Y ) ,   for   Y → ∞.         (22)

   The reason is that, as its operating revenue Y → ∞, the firm is permanently
financially unconstrained. Therefore, the firm can support all its first-best policy
with probability one and hence attains the maximal value under the first-best.
   Next, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 4 The function, P (W, Y ), is smooth in the inaction region.

   The function, P (W, Y ), then satisfies L2 P = 0, where L2 is the infinitesimal
generator given by

                                                            σ2Y 2
                 L2 P = (rW + m2 Y − Z2 )PW + µY PY +             PY Y − rP .    (23)
                                                              2
   The condition L2 P = 0 follows from the standard principle of dynamic optimality.
The first term on the right side of (23), which is given by the product of the firm’s
marginal value of cash PW (W, Y ) and its saving rate (rW + m2 Y − Z2 ), captures
the value of the firm’s savings. The second term, µY PY , represents the marginal
effect of an expected revenue change µY on firm value, and the third term in PY Y
encapsulates the effects of the volatility of changes in earnings fundamentals Y on
firm value. Intuitively, in the region where the firm operates normally the sum of the
first three terms, which amount to the total expected change in firm value P (W, Y ),
must equal rP (W, Y ) the normalized value of the firm.
    When the firm issues equity or liquidates itself, in other words when either (15)
or (16) binds, P (W, Y ) satisfies
                                         L2 P ≤ 0 .                              (24)

   We summarize the model solution for the mature phase in the following theorem.

Theorem 2 Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 4, the value function in the mature phase,
P (W, Y ), can be solved via the variational-inequality formulation for (W, Y ) ∈ Σ2 ,
where Σ2 = {(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ Λ2 , 0 < Y < ∞} denotes the solution region:

                    max{L2 P, max{P F (W, Y ) , W } − P (W, Y )} = 0 ,           (25)


                                             18
where P F (W, Y ) is defined by (17). Additionally, the following boundary condition
holds

        P (W, Y ) = P ∗ (W, Y ) = W + Q∗ (Y ) ,   for   W = Λ2   or   Y → ∞.        (26)

   The intuition for (25) is as follows. If the firm is in the inaction region, L2 P = 0,
which characterizes the solution, has to hold. Otherwise, the firm must take one of
the following two actions: (1) issuing equity to replenish liquidity or (2) liquidating
itself and returning all cash to its shareholders, as one of the two inequalities, (16
or (15), must be satisfied with equality at the boundary, which implies P (W, Y ) =
max{P F (W, Y ) , W } at the boundary. Taking the boundary behaviors together with
the inaction option, we conclude that (25) has to hold.
   Next, we establish several fundamental properties of the value function P (W, Y ).

Proposition 1 Under Assumptions 1-2 and 4, the following properties for (W, Y ) ∈
Σ2 hold:
   i) the solution for P (W, Y ) exists and is bounded as W ≤ P (W, Y ) ≤ P ∗ (W, Y );
   ii) the solution for P (W, Y ) is strictly increasing in W and strictly increasing in
Y before liquidation. Additionally, Q(W, Y ) = P (W, Y ) − W is increasing in W ;
   iii) the solution for P (W, Y ) is unique.

   Finally, we establish the following properties for the liquidation and external fi-
nancing decisions.

Proposition 2 Under Assumptions 1-2, i) the optimal liquidation boundary, denoted
by Y 2 (W ), is decreasing in W ; ii) the firm will delay costly equity issuance until it
has entirely exhausted its cash.

   The proofs for the results in this subsection are provided in Appendix B.
   We next turn to the analysis for the growth phase. Anticipating its potential
financial constraints in the mature phase, a rational forward-looking firm takes these
future constraints into account for its decisions in the growth phase.

4.2      The Growth Phase
   In the growth phase the firm faces an optimal investment timing problem along
with abandonment timing and external equity financing decisions.

                                             19
Definition 2 Let Λ1 denote the liquidity threshold given by
                                                    ∗
                                         Z1 − m1 Ya,1
                                            Λ1 =      ,                              (27)
                                              r
         ∗
where Ya,1  is the first-best abandonment hurdle in the growth phase. Let τ 1U denote the
first time liquidity reaches Λ in the growth phase, i.e., τ 1U = inf{s|Ws ≥ Λ}, where Λ
is given by
                                          Λ = max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I} .                                      (28)
Finally, let τ 1 = min{τ i , τ 1F , τ 1L , τ 1U }.

   Note that τ 1U is the first time when the firm has accumulated sufficient liquidity to
be permanently unconstrained and hence it attains the first-best firm value G∗ (Wt , Yt )
with probability one under all circumstances. Because the firm is forward looking, the
amount of liquidity it is required for the firm to never compromise its investment and
liquidation decisions is to have at least the level of liquidity exceeding max{Λ1 , Λ2 +I}.
    Given an admissible control A, the value function in the growth phase is given by

     G(Wt , Yt ; A) = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ i
                           

                                 +e−r(τ 1 −t) [G(Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ 1F
                                                                                                     i
                                   −r(τ 1 −t)                    −r(τ 1 −t) ∗
                                 +e           Wτ 1 Iτ 1 =τ 1L + e          G (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1U . (29)

Equation (29) takes into account the four mutually exclusive scenarios in the mature
phase. First, the firm invests when τ 1 = τ i . Second, the firm issues equity and
exercises the growth option when τ 1 = τ 1F . Third, the firm liquidates when τ 1 = τ 1L .
Finally, the firm becomes permanently financially unconstrained when τ 1 = τ 1U . As
the firm is permanently financially unconstrained at τ 1U , the firm attains the first-
best value G∗ (Wt , Yt ) at t = τ 1U in the growth phase, which means that the firm can
support its growth-option exercising and liquidation decisions at its first-best levels
in the future.
    Assumptions 2-3 guarantee that the value function is well defined for any admis-
sible control. Similarly, the value function in the growth phase, denoted G(Wt , Yt ), is
defined by
                                    G(Wt , Yt ) = sup G(Wt , Yt ; A) .                                (30)
                                                     A∈A

An admissible control is said to be optimal if G(Wt , Yt ) = G(Wt , Yt ; A).
   As for the mature phase, we spell out a number of lemmas that summarize the
main properties of G(W, Y ).

                                                      20
Lemma 5 The value function in the growth phase G(W, Y ) must be greater than or
equal to the firm’s liquidation value at any time, that is:

                                       G(W, Y ) ≥ W .                              (31)

   The reasoning for Lemma 5 for the growth phase is the same as that for Lemma
1 for the mature phase: The firm can always liquidate itself and collect W and the
(net) value of the perpetual American liquidation option, measured by G(W, Y ) − W
is always weakly positive.

Lemma 6 The firm always has an option to issue equity in the growth phase, so that
G(W, Y ) must satisfy
                                G(W, Y ) ≥ GF (W, Y ) ,                            (32)

where GF (W, Y ) would be the firm’s value if the firm were to immediately issue equity:

                   GF (W, Y ) = sup G(W + F1 , Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) .                 (33)
                                 F1 ≥0


   Similarly, the reasoning for Lemma 6 for the growth phase is the same as that for
Lemma 2 for the mature phase: The timing flexibility in issuing equity is valuable in
the growth phase and G(W, Y ) ≥ GF (W, Y ).

Lemma 7 The firm always has an option to invest in the growth phase, G(W, Y )
must satisfy
                                G(W, Y ) ≥ GI (W, Y ) ,                            (34)

where GI (W, Y ) would be the firm’s value if the firm were to immediately issue equity
to partially finance its growth option exercising:

                  GI (W, Y ) = sup P (W + F1 − I, Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) .              (35)
                               F1 ≥0


   Similarly, Lemma 7 implies the firm’s flexibility in choosing the timing of its
investment option is always valuable in the growth phase.

Lemma 8 The firm’s value in the growth phase G(W, Y ) attains the first-best value
when W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}:

      G(W, Y ) = G∗ (W, Y ) = W + H ∗ (Y ) ,     for    W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I} .     (36)

                                            21
   Lemma 8 establishes that for the firm to be permanently financially unconstrained
in the growth phase it must be able to pursue all its real decisions including investment
timing and liquidation (which could occur in either phase) with probability one. This
occurs when W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}. The intuition is as follows. First, to avoid
inefficient liquidation in the growth phase, the firm requires at least Λ1 in its savings
account. To avoid inefficient investment and suboptimal liquidation in the mature
phase, the firm at least has to have Λ2 + I, out of which the amount of Λ2 ensures
that the firm is willing to choose its liquidation policy at the first-best level and the
amount of I ensures that the firm has plenty liquidity to exercise its growth option
at the first-best level.

Lemma 9 As Y → ∞, the firm’s value G(W, Y ) attains the first-best value, that is

                 G(W, Y ) = G∗ (W, Y ) = W + H ∗ (Y ) ,   for   Y → ∞.              (37)

   The reasoning for this result is the same as that for Lemma 4. As its operating
revenue Y → ∞, the firm is permanently financially unconstrained. Therefore, the
firm can support its first-best investment and liquidation policies with probability
one and hence its value attains the first-best level.
   Next, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 5 The function, G(W, Y ), is smooth in the inaction region.

   The function, G(W, Y ), then satisfies L1 G = 0, where L1 is the infinitesimal
generator in the growth phase:
                                                          σ 2 Y 2 GY Y
              L1 G = (rW + m1 Y − Z1 )GW + µY GY +                     − rG .       (38)
                                                                2
When the firm issues equity or liquidates itself, i.e., when either (31), (32), or (34)
binds, G(W, Y ) satisfies
                                       L1 G ≤ 0 .                                   (39)
   The following theorem summarizes the model solution for the growth phase.

Theorem 3 Under Assumptions 1-5, the value function in the growth phase, G(W, Y ),
can be solved via the variational-inequality formulation for (W, Y ) ∈ Σ1 , where Σ1 =
{(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, 0 < Y < ∞} denotes the solution region:

           0 = max L1 G , max { GF (W, Y ), GI (W, Y ) , W } − G(W, Y ) ,
                  
                                                                                    (40)

                                           22
where GF (W, Y ) and GI (W, Y ) are defined by (33) and (35), respectively. Addition-
ally, the following boundary condition holds:

G(W, Y ) = G∗ (W, Y ) = W + H ∗ (Y ) ,     for   W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}     or   Y → ∞.
                                                                                     (41)

   The intuition for (40) is as follows. If the firm is in the inaction region, L1 G = 0,
which characterizes the solution, has to hold. Otherwise, the firm must take one of
the following three actions: (1) issuing equity to replenish liquidity, (2) issuing equity
to partially finance the cost of exercising the growth option, or (3) liquidating itself
and returning all cash to its shareholders, as one of the three inequalities (32), (34),
or (31) must be satisfied with equality at the boundary, which implies G(W, Y ) =
max { GF (W, Y ), GI (W, Y ) , W } at the boundary. Taking the boundary behaviors
together with the inaction option, we conclude that (40) has to hold.
   Depending on its liquidity holding W , the firm finds itself in the following three
different regions: .

1. Financially Unconstrained Region: W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}. If W ≥ Λ1 the
firm’s liquidity can cover operating costs in the growth phase with probability one,
and if W ≥ Λ2 + I the firm’s liquidity can cover the investment cost and operat-
ing costs in the mature phase with probability one. Naturally, for the firm to be
permanently unconstrained in the growth phase it must be able to pursue both first-
best investment and liquidation strategies with probability one, so that the firm is
financially unconstrained and attains the first-best value when W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 +I}.

2. Medium Cash-holding Region: I ≤ W < max{Λ1 , Λ2 +I}. Consider next the
situation where the firm has moderate financial slack. That is, when it has sufficient
internal funds W to cover the investment cost I if it chooses to invest immediately, but
not quite enough cash to ensure that it will never involuntarily liquidate its operating
asset. The firm may not choose to exercise the growth option even when Y reaches
the first-best threshold Yi∗ , and even if it has sufficient internal funds W to cover
the investment cost I. The reason is that exercising the investment option would
drain the firm of its cash to such an extent that the firm may be pushed to raise
external funds prematurely to cover operating losses in the mature phase. The firm
is therefore still financially constrained, even if it can entirely pay for the investment

                                           23
I using internal funds, as liquidity concerns distort its investment and abandonment
decisions.
  At the endogenously chosen investment threshold, denoted by Y (W ), firm value
G(W, Y ) is continuous, so that Y (W ) is an implicit function defined by the following
value-matching condition:

                         G(W, Y (W )) = P (W − I, Y (W )) .                       (42)

In the medium cash-holding region the investment cost I is entirely financed out of
internal funds, so that post-investment liquidity W decreases by I, as seen on the
right side of (42).

3. Low Cash-holding Region: 0 ≤ W < I. The firm is even more severely
constrained in this region as internal funds are insufficient to cover the investment
cost I. The firm then has to raise external funds should it decide to invest. No
matter how large the realization of its current Y is, the firm has to access costly
external capital markets if it chooses to invest immediately, as the investment cost I
is lumpy, W < I, while Y is a flow variable. The post-financing/investment liquidity
is then given by W + F1 − I. Again, at the moment of investing, the firm’s value
is continuous, so that the investment boundary Y (W ) is implicitly defined by the
following value-matching condition:

                G(W, Y (W )) = P (W + F1 − I, Y (W )) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) .             (43)

The right-hand side of condition (43) gives the firm’s value in the mature phase after
it has incurred investment cost I and issued gross external funds F1 + Φ(F1 ). The
left-hand side of (43) is the firm’s value before investing.
    A firm without any cash (W = 0) can be in one of four possible situations:

   a. When Y ≥ Y (0), the firm raises external financing and exercises its growth
      option.

  b. When Z1 /m1 ≤ Y < Y (0), the firm is able to generate enough cash from
     operations to cover its operating cost, so that it needs no external financing.

   c. When Y 1 (0) < Y < Z1 /m1 , the firm’s internally generated cash-flow cannot
      fully cover its operating cost, and it is optimal to raise external funds so as

                                          24
        to continue operations. We will characterize the liquidation threshold for a
        cash-less firm, Y 1 (0), later on.

     d. When Y ≤ Y 1 (0) it is best for the firm to liquidate its operating asset.

     When the firm is indifferent between abandoning or continuing, the abandonment
hurdle denoted by Y 1 (W ) is given by:

                                     G(W, Y 1 (W )) = W .                              (44)

     Next, we establish several key properties of the value function G(W, Y ).

Proposition 3 Under Assumptions 1-3 and 5, the following properties for (W, Y ) ∈
Σ1 hold:
     i) The solution for G(W, Y ) exists and is bounded as W ≤ G(W, Y ) ≤ G∗ (W, Y ).
   ii) The solution for G(W, Y ) is strictly increasing in W and strictly increasing in
Y before liquidation. Additionally, H(W, Y ) = G(W, Y ) − W is strictly increasing in
W.
     iii) The solution for G(W, Y ) is unique.

     Finally, we establish the following properties for the liquidation, external financ-
ing, and investment decisions.

Proposition 4 Under Assumptions 1-3, the following properties hold:
     i) the optimal liquidation boundary is decreasing in W ;
     ii) the firm delays costly equity issuance until it has entirely exhausted its cash;
     iii) if PW (0, Y (I)) ≥ φ1 the investment threshold approaches infinity, i.e., Y (W ) →
∞, as W → I from the left.

     The proofs for the technical results in this subsection are provided in Appendix
C.


5       Main Results
     We begin by motivating our choice of parameter values. We then proceed to
numerically solve the model and provide economic intuition for the firm’s optimal
liquidation, external financing, and investment policies. Our numerical solution is

                                             25
based on the variational inequality method in the preceding section. To ease our
exposition, we also use the more familiar real-options formulation that relies on value-
matching and smooth-pasting conditions to characterize liquidation and investment
decisions, but note that the equity-issuance decision for the survival purpose does not
satisfy the smooth-pasting condition.11

5.1       Parameter Values
    Investors are risk neutral as is standard in the real options and dynamic corporate
finance literatures. However, for calibration purposes, we recognize that investors
are risk averse. Using the standard asset pricing methodology, we can interpret our
preceding analysis on the risk-adjusted basis by treating all our analysis as being
done under the risk-neutral measure. Next, we explicitly incorporate the firm’s risk
premium and beta.12
       Let µP denote the drift of the process Y under the physical measure, ρ the corre-
lation coefficient between the shocks to the firm’s fundamentals Y and the economy-
wide systematic shock, and η the price of risk for the aggregate stock market. The
drift of Y under the risk-neutral measure is then given by µ = µP − ρησ. The model
described thus far can then be understood as one in which the firm’s risk premium is
fully incorporated through the change from the physical measure to the risk-neutral
measure.
  Following Leland (1994) and others papers in the literature, we set the annual
risk-free interest rate at r = 0.05 and the annual revenue growth volatility at σ = 0.1.
Hence, if we take an expected growth rate of µP = 0.014 under the physical measure,
a correlation coefficient of ρ = 0.8, and a market price of risk of η = 0.3, we obtain
an expected growth rate of µ = µP − ρησ = 0.014 − 0.8 × 0.3 × 0.1 = −0.01 under
the risk-neutral measure.
       For the growth phase, we normalize the annual operating cost and the revenue
multiple to Z1 = 1 and m1 = 1, respectively. Furthermore, to simplify the interpre-
tation of our results we assume that the firm’s growth option delivers an identical
additional operating asset, so that earnings are doubled from m1 Y − Z1 = Y − 1 to
  11
     In our model, these two approaches yield the same solution. Appendix D provides a sketch of
the solution algorithm.
  12
     See Duffie (2001) for details on the equivalent martingale measure (risk-neutral) measure and
how to connect the physical measure and the risk-neutral measure via Girsanov’s Theorem.



                                               26
m2 Y − Z2 = 2(Y − 1) when the firm exercises its growth option. We also normalize
the investment cost to I = 1.
   For the external financing costs, we choose a low and a high level for the fixed
cost φ0 for illustrative purposes: φ1 = 0.01 and φ0 = 0.5. For brevity, we focus on
the case with φ1 . Finally, we take the marginal financing cost to be φ1 = 0.01.

                                                                       ∗
First-Best. The first-best liquidation hurdle in the growth phase is Ya,1 = 0.767.
This implies that an unconstrained firm will continue as a going concern even when
                                      ∗
it incurs a loss as high as Z1 − m1 Ya,1 = 0.333, or 33.3% of the operating cost Z1 = 1.
                                                                            ∗
The first-best liquidation hurdle in the mature phase is slightly higher, Ya,2 = 0.8.
This means that the firm is less willing to absorb losses in the mature phase, as it is
                                                                              ∗
ready to abandon operations as soon as it incurs a loss larger than Z2 − m2 Ya,2 = 0.4,
or 20% of operating costs Z2 = 2.
   The firm exercises its growth option when Y reaches the investment hurdle Yi∗ =
1.3. At that level, the project value (including the value of the abandonment option)
is Q∗ (Yi∗ ) = 8.39, and the NPV is H ∗ (Yi∗ ) = Q∗ (Yi∗ ) − I = 7.39. The minimum W
needed for a firm to be permanently financially unconstrained in the mature phase is
                                        r − γµ
                                Λ2 =            Z2 = 8 ,                           (45)
                                       r2 (1
                                           − γ)

which is four times the operating cost Z2 = 2. In the growth phase this lower
bound is Λ1 = 4.66, so that the firm is permanently financially unconstrained if
W ≥ max{Λ1 , I + Λ2 } = 9.

5.2     Inefficient Liquidation or External Financing for Sur-
        vival?
   Financial constraints both distort investment and impose external financing costs
on the firm. As a result, a firm is prone to abandon operations sooner than the
first-best timing.

5.2.1   Liquidation Policy

   Liquidation in the growth phase involves the additional opportunity cost of losing
any future growth options. Therefore, the firm is less willing to liquidate operations
in the growth phase than in the mature phase, ceteris paribus.


                                               27
                                                  A. growth phase                                                                         B. mature phase




                                                                                          abandonment threshold W 2 (Y )
  abandonment threshold W 1 (Y )    2                                                                                       2
                                                                       FB
                                                                       φ0=0.01
                                   1.5                                                                                     1.5
                                                                       φ0=0.5


                                    1                                                                                       1


                                   0.5                                                                                     0.5


                                    0                            o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                                                                            0                           o
                                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                        o


                                    0.7    0.75    0.8   0.85   0.89   0.95      1                                          0.7    0.75    0.8   0.85   0.898 0.95   1


                                                  C. growth phase                                                                         D. mature phase
                                   1.2                                                                                     1.2                         o
                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                       oo




                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
    equity issue for survival




                                                                                            equity issue for survival
                                                                 o
                                                                 o




                                   0.8                                                                                     0.8



                                   0.4                                                                                     0.4




                                     0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.89   0.95      1                                           0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.898 0.95   1
                                           earnings fundamentals Y                                                                 earnings fundamentals Y




Figure 1: Abandonment hurdle, W 1 (Y ) and W 2 (Y ), and equity issuance for
survival, F1 (Y ) and F2 (Y ). Panels A and B plot the abandonment hurdles in the
growth and mature phases, respectively. Panels C and D plot the equity issuance in
the growth and mature phases, respectively.


The Growth Phase. Panel A of Figure 1 plots the optimal liquidation hurdle
                                                                     ∗
W 1 (Y ) in the growth phase. The first-best abandonment threshold Ya,1 = 0.767 is
indicated by the dotted line labeled MM. When the firm faces an external financing
cost of φ0 = 0.5, it abandons operations sooner than the first-best, i.e., whenever
Y ≤ 0.89. Note also that the firm may abandon operations even before it runs
out of cash. That is, W 1 (Y ) > 0 for Y < 0.89. For example, when Y = 0.8, the
                                                                                     1
abandonment threshold for cash holdings is W 1 (0.8) = 0.12. Finally, the lower the
earnings, the higher the firm’s W when it abandons operations.
   Moreover, as Panel A shows, W 1 (Y ) is a strictly decreasing function, indicating
                                                                  ∗
that the firm is increasingly eager to abandon as Y approaches Ya,1 . In other words,
the higher are the firm’s cash holdings W the less inefficient is the firm’s liquidation


                                                                                     28
decision. The impact of external financing costs on the firm’s liquidation policy
essentially disappears when the firm’s liquidity holding W reaches 1.2. Note finally
that when the firm faces almost no fixed external financing cost, φ0 = 0.01, its
abandonment policy closely approximates the first-best policy.

The Mature Phase. Panel B of Figure 1 plots the liquidation hurdle W 2 (Y ) for
the mature phase. The shape of W 2 (Y ) is similar to the liquidation frontier in the
growth phase. The main difference with the liquidation policy in the growth phase is
that the firm is strictly more conservative in its continuation decisions in the mature
                                                          ∗
phase. Compared with the first-best liquidation hurdle, Ya,2 = 0.8, a firm facing
external financing costs φ0 = 0.5, liquidates sooner, i.e., when Y reaches the level of
0.898. The reason is that the firm has no growth option in the mature phase and
therefore has a lower continuation value than in the growth phase, other things equal
(by construction we have constant returns to scale, m1 /Z1 = m2 /Z2 = 1).

5.2.2      Equity Issuance: F1 (Y ) and F2 (Y )

       In an environment with time-invariant external financing costs, as in our model,
the firm is always better off delaying costly equity issuance as long as it can, as it is
then able to save the time value of money on these financing costs. With a strictly
positive liquidity buffer W the firm can always cover any flow operating losses, so
that it never issues equity before it entirely exhausts its cash.
       In sum, the firm will only decide to raise costly external equity if it runs out of
cash, or if it wants to invest and has insufficient internal funds to cover the fixed
investment cost I. In the growth phase the firm chooses to issue equity at W = 0,
therefore,
                                    G(0, Y ) = GF (0, Y ) ,                                 (46)
in the region where Y 1 (0) < Y < Z1 /m1 . Otherwise, when Y ≤ Y 1 (0) , the firm is
liquidated and hence G(0, Y ) = 0.
    By revealed preferences, the dividing boundary Y 1 (0) is higher than the first-
                            ∗
best abandonment hurdle Ya,1  . Should the firm seek to raise new funds, its optimal
external financing amount F1 is given by the FOC:13

                GW (F1 , Y ) = 1 + Φ0 (F1 ) = 1 + φ1 ,   Y 1 (0) < Y < Z1 /m1 .             (47)
  13
    We verify the second-order condition (SOC) to ensure that the FOC solution yields the maximal
value.

                                               29
That is, the marginal value of cash GW (F1 , Y ) must equal the marginal cost of external
financing 1 + Φ0 (F1 ). Note that the firm’s marginal value of cash GW (W, Y ) depends
on its earnings fundamentals Y , and GW (W, Y ) is greater than 1 at the moment of
financing.
       Similarly, in the mature phase, the firm only considers issuing equity at W = 0.
Conditional on issuing equity, the firm’s value is

                                      P (0, Y ) = P F (0, Y ) ,                                 (48)

in the region where Y 2 (0) < Y < Z2 /m2 . Otherwise, when Y ≤ Y 2 (0) , the firm is
liquidated and hence P (0, Y ) = 0. Should the firm issue equity, the optimal external
financing amount F2 satisfies the following FOC:

                              PW (F2 , Y ) = 1 + Φ0 (F2 ) = 1 + φ1 .                            (49)

       Panels C and D of Figure 1 plot the amount raised in the growth and mature
phases, F1 (Y ) and F2 (Y ), when the firm has exhausted all internal funds and prefers
to continue rather than abandon operations. When external financing is costly (φ0 =
0.5) the firm prefers to continue if Y ≥ 0.89 in the growth phase and Y ≥ 0.898 in
the mature phase. When funding is cheap (φ0 = 0.01) the firm prefers to continue as
long as Y ≥ 0.78 in the growth phase and Y ≥ 0.81 in the mature phase.
   The two plots for Fn (Y ) can be understood as follows: the lower is Y , the more
funds are needed to cover operating losses Zn −mn Y ; at the same time, when Y is lower
the value of continuation is also lower. The tension between these two considerations
generally translates into a non-monotonic function Fn (Y ). For low values of Y , Fn (Y )
is increasing in Y , and for higher values of Y , Fn (Y ) is decreasing in Y . This can
clearly be seen for the (dotted) plots of Fn (Y ) when φ0 = 0.01.14 Finally, note that
when mn Y > Zn the firm is able to accumulate cash from retained earnings and does
not need any external funds.
   In sum, the firm’s expectation about its future profitability influences its current
financing policy. This is an important difference with Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011),
where the firm’s expected profitability is constant over time.
   In addition, the firm raises more if the fixed costs of external funding φ0 are higher.
This can be seen for example, at Y = 0.9: when the fixed issuance cost φ0 increases
  14
    It is not apparent for the plot of Fn (Y ) when φ0 = 0.5, as the fixed cost is then so large that
the firm prefers to abandon rather than continue with unprofitable operations and limited funds.

                                                 30
from 0.01 to 0.5, the firm’s external financing, F1 (0.89), then increases from 0.534 to
0.99. A firm that faces a larger fixed issuance cost wants to raise more funds to avoid
going back to the capital markets. This prediction differs from those based on static
models such as Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993) and Kaplan and Zingales (1997),
where the higher the fixed financing cost is the more financially constrained the firm
is, and consequently the lower is the amount of equity financing it demands (the firm
has no future financing considerations by assumption).
   Next, we turn to the firm’s investment decisions.

5.3    The Growth Option: Internal versus External Financing
   Static models, Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993) and Kaplan and Zingales
(1997), also predict that firms with more internal funds invest more, as their overall
funding costs are lower. Again, this prediction does not extend to a dynamic model
in which firms can optimally time their investment. The main result of this section is
that firms can become increasingly conservative in exercising their growth option as
they accumulate internal funds. The reason is that by delaying investment they may
be able to avoid having to turn to costly external funds altogether. The closer firms
are to entirely funding their investment outlays I with internal funds W , the higher
the marginal expected return to delaying investment until they have entirely closed
the funding gap I − W .

The Investment Timing Decision. Panels A and B of Figure 2 plot the invest-
ment hurdle Y (W ) for two values of the fixed external financing cost, φ0 = 0.01
and φ0 = 0.5 in the regions 0 ≤ W < I = 1 and W ≥ 1 respectively. Recall that
a firm is financially unconstrained in the growth phase if its liquidity W is greater
than I + Λ2 = 9. We plot Y (W ) for W only up to W = 2.4 in Panel B because
the investment threshold effectively converges to the first-best hurdle Yi∗ = 1.30 as
W → 2.4. Consider first the region where the firm’s internal funds W are sufficient
to cover its investment cost I = 1 (Panel B). In this region the firm finances its
investment outlays entirely out of internal funds. As the plot of Y (W ) shows, the
higher is W the less distorted is the firm’s investment timing decision. With a higher
W , the firm’s mature value is higher, as it is less likely to run out of cash. As a result,
the firm is eager to invest sooner.
   Consider next the low cash-holding region W ∈ [0, I). Panel A of Figure 2 plots

                                            31
             A. Low Cash-holding Region: 0 < W < I
                   investment threshold Y (W )                                                                                          B. Medium Cash-holding Region: I ≤ W




                                                                                         investment threshold Y (W )
                6                                                                                                                      1.31
                        FB
                5       φ =0.01                                                                                            1.308
                         0
                                                           φ0=0.5
                                                                                                                           1.306
                                                 4

                                                                                                                           1.304
                                                 3
                                                                                                                           1.302
                                                 2
                                                                                                                                               1.3
                                                 1
                                                     0   0.2     0.4     0.6   0.8   1                                                               1   1.5         2       2.5   3


               C. Low Cash-holding Region: 0 < W < I                                                                                           D. Medium Cash-holding Region: I ≤ W

                                                                                                                                                2
 post-investment liquidity




                                                                                                                   post-investment liquidity
                                   0.4

                                   0.3                                                                                                         1.5

                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                1

                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                0
                                                     0   0.2      0.4    0.6   0.8   1                                                               1   1.5           2     2.5   3
                                                               liquidity W                                                                                     liquidity W




Figure 2: Investment hurdle Y (W ) and the post-investment liquidity level
W + F1 (Y (W )) − I. Panels A and B plot the investment hurdle Y (W ) in the growth
phase. Panels C and D plot the post-investment liquidity W + F1 (Y (W )) − I at the
transition into the mature phase.


the investment hurdle Y (W ) as a function of W in the region [0, 1). When φ0 = 0.5,
Y (W ) is strictly increasing and convex in W , going from 1.409 at W = 0 to +∞ as
W tends I = 1. When φ0 = 0.01, Y (W ) is weakly increasing and convex in W .
   This remarkable result is exactly the opposite from the prediction of a static model.
                                           2 as W → I, it behaves like a much more
Far from behaving like a less constrained firm
constrained firm. What is the logic behind this behavior? In essence, as W → I the
firm increasingly wants to avoid the fixed external financing cost by waiting until it has
accumulated sufficient internal funds rather than taps costly external funds to finance
its investment as the firm is very close to accumulate enough funds to cover investment
costs. Therefore, it therefore takes a larger and larger expected earnings fundamentals
Y to motivate the firm to invest immediately via costly external financing.


                                                                                         32
       Another way of understanding this result is that the firm’s investment-timing
decision trades off the value of the option to delay against the present cost of financing
the investment. When the firm is financially constrained both the valuations of the
timing option and the cost of investment vary with the marginal value of cash. In
other words, for a firm the valuation of the timing option and the investment cost
are fundamentally interconnected through the marginal value of cash, unlike in the
standard textbook real options analysis.

The financing decision upon investment. Panels C and D of Figure 2 plot the
firm’s post-investment liquidity at time τ i+ , Wτ i + = Wτ i +F1 (Wτ i )−I, where F1 (Wτ i )
denotes the net amount of external funds raised when the firm decides to invest at
time τ i . The following conditions hold under optimal external financing: either

              PW (W + F1 (W ) − I, Y (W )) = 1 + φ1 , and F1 (W ) ≥ I − W ,                      (50)

or
              PW (W + F1 (W ) − I, Y (W )) ≤ 1 + φ1 , and F1 (W ) = I − W .                      (51)

Condition (50) states that the marginal value of cash at investment equals the marginal
cost of financing. In this case, the firm issues at least I − W . Condition (51) is when
the optimum is at the corner. In this case, the firm’s net equity issue is I − W and
together with internal funds W , the firm’s total funds is just sufficient to cover its
investment cost I.15
   When W < I, the firm is less willing to invest as W increases. In other words, the
firm’s investment hurdle Y (W ) increases with W , so that post investment the firm is
better able to generate internal cash flows from operations when pre-investment liq-
uidity W is higher. Therefore, the amount of post-investment liquidity Wτ i + needed
decreases with the firm’s current liquidity W , as shown in Panel C. When the firm
faces low external financing costs (φ0 = 0.01) the post-investment liquidity is essen-
tially zero at all levels of W , since the firm only needs to obtain liquidity to cover
the financing gap I − W . Panel D also illustrates that F1 (Wτ i ), the optimal amount
of external funds raised when the firm decides to invest, is equal to 0 when W ≥ I,
  15
     In this case, the firm’s marginal value of liquidity at investment must be weakly lower than the
marginal cost of issuance. If this were not true, the firm would have chosen to issue equity in excess
of I − W , which in turn equates the marginal value of cash with the marginal cost of equity issue.
But this is the first case that we have already discussed.



                                                 33
so that Wτ i + = Wτ i − I. This result is simply a consequence of the dynamic pecking
order of financing principle.

5.4    Value Loss due to Costly External Financing
    Our next set of results establishes how large the loss in firm value due to external
financing costs can be. This loss stems directly from the financing costs per se and
indirectly from the distortions in investment and abandonment policies. A key con-
clusion from our quantitative analysis is that low operating earnings fundamentals Y
and low cash buffers W compound in making the loss particularly large, as Figure 3
illustrates.
   This result at the individual firm’s level for a stand-alone firm contributes to
the downward-spiral adverse-feedback mechanism in the financial intermediation and
crisis literature. For example, Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) show how an ad-
verse shock to the fundamentals (capital shock in their model) weakens a financially
constrained productive sector’s balance sheet, which further causes underinvestment
generating an adverse feedback loop from the fundamentals shock to the equilibrium
price of capital.
    Panels A and C plot the firm’s enterprise value H(W, Y ) = G(W, Y ) − W in the
growth phase for two values of Y , a low value Y = 0.82 for which the firm incurs
operating losses, and a high value, Y = 1.18, for which the firm makes a profit.
   Enterprise value H(W, Y ) is, of course, lower the higher are external financing
costs φ0 . As the plots for H(W, Y ) illustrate, the loss is particularly large when
φ0 = 0.5, Y = 0.82, and the firm runs out of cash. When W approaches 0 the entire
first-best enterprise value is then essentially wiped out. In contrast, when φ0 = 0.01
the firm loses only around 10% of the first best value when W approaches 0. And
when Y = 1.18 the loss in value is small even when financing costs are high.
   A simple yet robust insight from these results is that the significance of external
financing costs varies considerably with the firm’s operating revenues. One should
therefore not expect to see a stable relation between firm value and external financing
costs in the data.
   Panels B and D of Figure 3 plot the firm’s enterprise value in the mature phase:

                                Q(W, Y ) = P (W, Y ) − W .                         (52)

The same qualitative results on value loss obtain in the mature phase as in the growth

                                           34
                                             A. growth phase: Y = 0.82                                                                     B. mature phase: Y = 0.82
                                                                                                                        0.025
                                   0.1




                                                                                     enterprise value Q(W, 0.82)
    enterprise value H(W, 0.82)
                                                                                                                                0.02
                                  0.08
                                                                                                                        0.015
                                  0.06

                                                                                                                                0.01
                                  0.04
                                                                      FB
                                                                      φ0=0.01
                                  0.02                                                                                  0.005
                                                                      φ0=0.5
                                    0                                                                                             0
                                         0      0.5         1       1.5         2                                                      0      0.5         1       1.5   2


                                             C. growth phase: Y = 1.18                                                                     D. mature phase: Y = 1.18
                                  4.65
                                                                                                                                5.46




                                                                                                  enterprise value Q(W, 1.18)
    enterprise value H(W, 1.18)




                                   4.6
                                                                                                                                5.45
                                  4.55
                                                                                                                                5.44
                                   4.5
                                                                                                                                5.43
                                  4.45
                                                                                                                                5.42
                                         0      0.5           1     1.5         2                                                      0      0.5           1     1.5   2
                                                      liquidity W                                                                                   liquidity W




Figure 3: Enterprise values in the growth and mature phases, H(W, Y ) and
Q(W, Y ). Panels A and B plot H(W, Y ) and Q(W, Y ) for Y = 0.82. Panels C and D
plot H(W, Y ) and Q(W, Y ) for Y = 1.18.


phase, although the size of the losses is somewhat smaller.
   In sum, these results illustrate how operating earnings fundamentals Y and inter-
nal funds W are substitutes in terms of mitigating financial constraints. Moreover,
abstracting from financial flexibility considerations when determining the firm’s real
option decisions–as most of the real options literature has done–could generate highly
                                             3
misleading predictions and vastly overstate the value of real options. Equally, an ex-
clusive focus on financial frictions that ignores the firm’s real flexibility–as is the case
for most of the corporate financial constraints literature–risks understating the value
of precautionary savings.




                                                                                35
 time      firm’s     net equity      gross equity     % of equity issue   original investors’
   t     earning Yt    issue Ft    issue Ft + Φ(Ft )         ω t+          ownership αt+ (%)

                                          Panel A: W0 = 0.1
   0         1            0               0                   0                   100%
 1.16      0.913        0.98             1.49               30.1%                 69.9%
 2.04      1.314          0                0                  0                   69.9%
 10.4      0.931        1.17             1.68               82.6%                 12.2%
 23.8      0.890          0                0                  0                liquidation
                                          Panel B: W0 = 0.2
   0         1            0               0                   0                   100%
 2.23      1.443        1.11             1.62               12.8%                87.2%
 12.9      0.921        1.18             1.69               88.3%                10.2%
 24.4      0.926        1.17             1.68               85.1%                 1.5%
 37.6      0.839          0                0                  0               liquidation

Table 1: Equity ownership dynamics and (investment, equity issue, and
abandonment) timing decisions for a simulated path. The parameter values
are r = 0.05, µ = −0.01, σ = 0.1, I = 1 m1 = Z1 = 1, m2 = Z2 = 2, φ1 = 0.01
and φ0 = 0.5. For the given simulated path with Y0 = 1, we consider two cases with
W0 = 0.1 and W0 = 0.2. Under the first-best case, the investment time is t = 2.03
and the abandonment time is t = 39.5.



6       Simulating the Firm’s Life-Cycle
  To provide further insight into the dynamics of investment, SEOs, cash manage-
ment, and abandonment decisions, we simulate one sample path of earnings funda-
mentals Y with two initial cash holding values, W0 = 0.1 and W0 = 0.2, with baseline
parameter values and φ0 = 0.5. The evolution of corporate decisions are illustrated in
Figures 4 and 5, respectively. Table 1 reports the decisions and calculates the implied
equity ownership dynamics that follow from the firm’s decisions over the simulated
path used in Figures 4 and 5.
    In the MM world, the optimal investment time for this sample path is t = 2.03,
just when the firm’s earnings Yt reach 1.3, and the abandonment time is t = 39.5,
just as the firm’s earnings Yt hit the low level of 0.8. Thus, the firm is willing to fund
losses of up to 20% of operating costs Z2 = 2 under this scenario to maximize the
value of its abandonment option.
    Recall that when the firm incurs an external financing cost Φ(Ft ) as it raises

                                                36
equity Ft at time t, the firm’s post-issuance value is P (Wt+ , Yt+ ). Let ω t+ denote
the equilibrium fraction of the newly issued equity held by outside investors. By
competitive market pricing, we have:

                                Ft + Φ(Ft )         P (Wt , Yt )
                       ω t+ =                  =1−                ,                (53)
                                P (Wt+ , Yt+ )     P (Wt+ , Yt+ )

as the new investors just break even under perfectly competitive capital markets.
Under the simulated sample-path we can highlight the dynamics of equity dilution
by keeping track of the equity ownership of the original investors who have stayed
with the firm since its inception. We denote by αt the ownership share of the original
equity holders at time t, with α0 = 1 by construction. As the firm issues equity to
finance investment and/or replenish liquidity over time, the original equity investors’
ownership then evolves as follows:

                                   αt+ = αt (1 − ω t+ ) .                          (54)

In other words, with no issuance ω t+ = 0 and αt+ = αt , so that α does not change.
But when new equity is issued at time t, with a strictly positive ownership stake for
new investors of ω t+ > 0, the original equity investors’ equity is diluted to αt+ from
αt according to (54).
   Figure 4 plots the scenario where the firm starts with a low cash stock of W0 = 0.1.
Panel A plots the path of earnings fundamentals Yt starting with Y0 = 1. Note first
that when the firm faces external financing costs at t = 1.16 where it exhausts its
liquidity as W1.16 = 0 and Y1.16 = 0.913, and the firm issues net equity of F1 (0.913) =
0.98 to replenish its liquidity from W1.16 = 0 to W1.16+ = 0.98, by selling ω 1.16+ =
30.1% of its equity, and the equity share is α1.16 = 69.9%.
   And then it exercises its investment option at time t = 2.04 when Yt reaches 1.314.
It then pays the investment cost I = 1 solely out of internal funds, thus depleting its
stock of cash W2.04+ down to 0.057, as illustrated in Panel B. In this case, obviously
there is no equity dilution and α2.04 = 69.9%.
   Next, at t = 10.4, when the firm’s fundamentals Y10.4 falls to 0.931 and it has
exhausted its savings, the firm issues net equity of F2 (0.931) = 1.17 to replenish its
liquidity from W10.4 = 0 to W10.4+ = 1.17, by selling ω 10.4+ = 82.6% of its equity. At
that point the firm’s original owners are nearly wiped out and only retain a stake of
α10.4+ = 12.2%.


                                            37
                                A. a sample path Y with Y0 = 1
          1.5


           1


          0.5
                0   5      10          15         20         25         30   35   40
                           B. the dynamics of Wt with W0 = 0.1


           1

          0.5

           0
                0          10                     20                    30
                                  C. external equity issuance Ft


           1

          0.5

           0
                0          10                     20                    30
                            D. initial equity investors’ ownership αt

           1

          0.5

           0
                0          10                     20                    30
                                                  t


Figure 4: Investment, liquidity accumulation, external equity issue, owner-
ship dynamics, and liquidation for a simulated path. The firm’s initial cash
holding is W0 = 0.1.


   Finally, at t = 23.8, when the firm runs out cash for the second time and Yt
reaches 0.890, it simply abandons its asset. At this low point the cost of new external
                                           4
financing simply outweighs the benefit of keeping the firm as a going concern.
    Figure 5 plots the scenario where the firm starts with a higher cash stock of
W0 = 0.2. Panel A again plots the identical simulated path of earnings fundamentals


                                                 38
                                  A. a sample path Y with Y0 = 1
           1.5


            1


           0.5
                 0       5   10          15         20         25        30   35   40
                             B. the dynamics of Wt with W0 = 0.2


            1

           0.5
                     .
            0
                 0           10                     20                   30
                                    C. external equity issuance Ft


            1

           0.5

            0
                 0           10                     20                   30
                             D. initial equity investors’ ownership αt

            1

           0.5

            0
                 0           10                     20                   30
                                                    t


Figure 5: Investment, liquidity accumulation, external equity issue, owner-
ship dynamics, and liquidation for a simulated path. The firm’s initial cash
holding is W0 = 0.2.


Yt starting with Y0 = 1. As the firm’s Yt reaches 1.443 at t = 2.23, the firm finances
its investment cost I = 1 via a combination of external equity (F (1.443) = 1.11) by
                                              5
issuing a fraction of ω 2.23+ = 12.8% firm’s equity and internal funds (0.22), leaving the
firm with a stock of post-investment cash of W2.23+ = 0.33 (as shown in Panel B). As
a result, the original owners are diluted down to an ownership stake of α2.23+ = 87.2%


                                                  39
(as shown in Panel D).
    At t = 12.9, when earning Yt has collapsed to 0.921 and the firm’s liquidity has
been drained, the firm returns to the capital markets and raises a net amount of
F2 (0.921) = 1.18 by selling ω 12.9+ = 88.3% of the firm’s equity, thus further diluting
the firm’s original owners’ down to α12.9+ = 10.2% (see Panel D). Next, at t = 24.4,
as the firm’s liquidity Wt is again drained out, the firm yet again issues equity by
selling ω 18.6+ = 85.1% of the firm’s equity, raising a total net amount of F = 1.17
and diluting the original owners down to a small stake of α24.4+ = 1.5%. Finally, at
t = 37.6 the firm almost runs out of cash again and abandons its asset given that
expected operating earnings hit the low level of Yt = 0.839; it then distributes the
remaining cash 0.08 to its shareholders.
   Comparing the two scenarios, we make the following observations: First, in all
cases where the firm issues equity for purposes of replenishing its liquidity it chooses
different financing levels because each time it faces different expected operating earn-
ings when it exhausts its liquidity. Second, the firm with W0 = 0.1 turns out to
abandon its asset sooner (at t = 23.8) than the firm with W0 = 0.2 (at t = 37.6),
which runs counter to the conventional wisdom that a firm with more initial liquidity
abandons its operations later.


7       Cash-carry Costs and Payout Policy
    A helpful simplification in our analysis so far has been that there is no opportunity
cost for the firm in holding cash. In reality, however, firms do face an opportunity
cost in holding cash and therefore do decide to pay out some of their accumulated
profits when retained earnings are high. Accordingly, in this section we extend the
model by introducing cash-carry costs. We now assume that instead of earning the
market interest rate r on its cash savings the firm only earns (r − λ), where 0 < λ < r
represents the firm’s unit cash-carry cost.
   In this case, it is sometimes optimal for the firm to pay out before it closes op-
erations. Specifically, there is an endogenous upper boundary W (Y ) such that it is
strictly optimal for the firm to pay out any excess cash W −W (Y ) to its shareholders.
With cash-carry cost λ, the cash accumulation process is as follows, in the growth
phase
              dWt = ((r − λ)Wt + m1 Yt − Z1 )dt + dCt − dUt ,      Wt ≥ 0,          (55)


                                           40
and in the mature phase

                dWt = ((r − λ)Wt + m2 Yt − Z2 )dt + dCt − dUt ,        Wt ≥ 0 .            (56)

       When Y < ∞, there exists a payout boundary 0 < W (Y ) < ∞ such that the
value of an additional retained dollar is exactly equal to the value of paying out that
dollar to shareholders. And if the firm starts out with W > W (Y ), it distributes
the difference W − W (Y ) as a lump sum and thereby brings down the cash stock to
W (Y ). Since firm value must be continuous before and after cash distribution, the
value P (W, Y ) for W > W (Y ) is given by

                 P (W, Y ) = P (W (Y ), Y ) + (W − W (Y )),      W > W (Y ) .              (57)

All other optimality conditions remain the same as in the baseline model.
    The firm’s payout decision is jointly determined with its investment and liquidity
management policies. In the growth phase, the firm has no reason to make any payout
if its earnings fundamentals Y are relatively high but still lower than the endogenous
investment boundary, because it then expects to invest and expand its operating
capacity in the future.16
       As Fama and French (2001) have noted, growth firms tend to delay dividend
payments as they expect to spend their retained earnings on investment outlays.
However, when operating earnings fundamentals Y are so low that expansion is un-
likely, the firm may prefer to make a payout to shareholders rather than inefficiently
burn through its cash holdings. Thus, in the growth phase one would expect the firm
to make payouts when Y is low and not when Y is high. In contrast, in the mature
phase, one would expect the firm to be more eager to pay out retained earnings the
higher are its operating revenues.
       The results shown in Figures 6 and 7 confirm these insights. These two figures
display the firm’s optimal decisions–the payout, inaction, investment and liquidation
regions–for any pair (W, Y ). The parameter values are the same as for the baseline
model, with the addition of the cash carry cost λ = 0.02.
       There are three regions in the mature phase, each with a single optimal action.
When (W, Y ) are to the right of the dashed red payout boundary and when Y exceeds
  16
    If its earnings fundamentals Y is even higher than the firm’s optimal investment boundary,
the firm optimally immediately invests, becoming a mature firm. Our analysis for the mature firm
applies accordingly.


                                              41
the dotted black line, the firm optimally pays out some of its earnings, as shown in
the payout region of Figure 6. When (W, Y ) take intermediate values in the “inaction
region” bordered by the (dashed red) payout boundary, the (solid blue) liquidation
boundary, and the y-axis, it is optimal for the firm to continue operations while
retaining all of its earnings. When Y is below the solid blue line, which extends into
the dotted black liquidation-line, the firm is in the “liquidation region”. It is then
best for the firm to abandon operations.
   The dashed, red payout-frontier is downward sloping over most of the region 0.9 <
Y < 1.35, illustrating the basic tradeoff the firm faces: when the internal cash-flow
generating machine is less productive it is worth building a larger retained earnings
buffer.
   Note, however, that there is a small non-monotonic segment of the payout bound-
ary. This segment is explained by the fact that when Y is less than Z2 /m2 = 1, the
firm is making operating losses so that there are two competing forces at play: 1)
building a larger liquidity buffer to be able to absorb these loses and ride them out,
which causes a downward sloping liquidation boundary, and 2) avoiding throwing
good money after bad, which encourages earlier liquidation to minimize operating
losses. The latter force dominates when the firm’s operating performance is close to
the solid, blue liquidation-boundary, and the former dominates when operating losses
are relatively low.
       Optimal policies in the growth phase are more intricate, as Figure 7 illustrates.
The firm faces more decisions in this phase, so that there are five policy regions in
total in this phase.

   1. When (W, Y ) are high, with W ≥ I = 1, the firm invests by entirely funding the
      fixed investment cost out of internal funds, as is indicated by the Investment
         Only region.17

   2. When Y takes intermediate values and W is high the firm does not invest but
         pays out some of its earnings, as indicated by the Payout region. In this region
  17
    Note that when Y ≥ 1.29, the firm immediately exercises its growth option provided that W ≥ 1.
This is in contrast to the investment policy displayed in Panel B of Figure 2, when the firm has
no cash carry costs. In that case the firm somewhat delays its investment as W approaches 1 from
above. The reason is that the firm prefers to continue building up its cash buffer before investing, so
as to continue with a higher cash (working capital) buffer after incurring the investment cost I = 1.
When the firm faces cash carry costs this motive is essentially undone by its desire to save on these
costs.

                                                  42
                                                     liquidation and payout in the mature phase
                                           1.5


                                           1.4
                                                                                   Payout
                                           1.3




                 earnings fundamentals Y
                                           1.2


                                           1.1


                                            1          Inaction

                                           0.9


                                           0.8


                                           0.7              Liquidation

                                           0.6
                                                 0             0.5                    1           1.5
                                                                     liquidity W




Figure 6: Liquidation and payout in the mature phase.
Parameters used: r = 0.05, µ = −0.01, σ = 0.1, m2 = Z2 = 2, φ1 = 0.01, φ0 = 0.5,
λ = 0.02. In the payout region, the firm optimally pays out a lump-sum dividend in
order to reach the payout boundary. For example, a firm with (W, Y ) = (0.78, 1.14)
chooses to pay out a one-time dividend in the amount of 0.18 to reach (0.6, 1.14) on
the boundary.

     the operating asset is not sufficiently profitable to exercise the growth option.
     Given that the firm is not planning to immediately spend its internal funds on
     capital outlays, it prefers to pay out some of its liquidity buffer rather than pay
     the full cash carry cost λW .
     Note that the payout boundary W (Y6) has a somewhat complex shape. This is
     again explained by the fact that when the firm is making losses (Y < 1) the two
     competing forces described above are at play. In addition, when Y approaches
     the investment threshold Y = 1.29 from below and when W ≥ 1 the firm prefers
     to delay payout in anticipation of the future investment outlays and its greater
     need for internal funds.

  3. For low values of Y it is optimal for the firm to abandon operations and disburse
     any accumulated internal funds W , as is indicated by the Liquidation region.

  4. For intermediate values of (Y, W ) the firm is optimally in a business as usual
     mode and does not take any significant decisions, whether it is investment,

                                                                       43
                                                        investment, liquidation and payout in the growth phase
                                             2




                                            1.8




                                            1.6       Investment and           Inaction         Investment Only


                  earnings fundamentals Y
                                                       Equity Issue
                                            1.4




                                            1.2




                                             1                                                     Payout


                                            0.8

                                                                              Liquidation
                                            0.6
                                                  0                    0.5                  1                     1.5
                                                                             liquidity W




Figure 7: Investment, liquidation and payout in the growth phase.
Parameters used: r = 0.05, µ = −0.01, σ = 0.1, m1 = Z1 = 1, m2 = Z2 = 2,
φ1 = 0.01, φ0 = 0.5, I = 1, λ = 0.02.


     abandonment, or external financing, as indicated by the Inaction region.

  5. Finally, for values of (Y, W ) such that Y is high but W < 1, it is optimal for
     the firm to invest even if it requires external financing to cover the investment
     outlays, as is shown by the Investment and Equity Issue region. In this situation
     the firm uses a combination of funds from internal sources and from a (costly)
     external equity issue.
                                                                                  7


The effects of cash-carry costs on investment. Figure 8 illustrates the effects
of cash-carry costs λ on investment. Panel A exhibits the shift in the investment
threshold induced by a change in λ in the low-cash holding region (W < I) where
the firm has to raise some external equity to finance the investment cost I. Panel B
plots the same relation in the medium-cash holding region (W > I) where the firm
has sufficient internal funds to finance its investment cost. In both panels, we find
that the investment threshold is monotonically decreasing with the cash-carry cost λ.
This is intuitive: the higher the cash-carry cost λ, the sooner the firm invests, as the
opportunity cost of holding cash is higher.


                                                                                44
    A. Low Cash-holding Region: 0 < W < I = 1              B. Medium Cash-holding Region: I = 1 ≤ W
     2                                                   1.3
                                     λ=0.01
    1.9                              λ=0.02            1.295
                                     λ=0.04
    1.8
                                                        1.29
    1.7
                                                       1.285
    1.6
                                                        1.28
    1.5

    1.4                                                1.275


    1.3                                                 1.27
          0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8        1                1       1.1            1.2       1.3
                    liquidity W                                         liquidity W




Figure 8: The effects of cash-carry cost λ on the investment hurdle Y (W ).


    With internal financing of the investment (Panel B), the investment threshold also
decreases with W for a given λ, as there is a diminishing marginal value of holding
cash when the cash buffer is larger. However, when external financing is needed (Panel
A), the investment threshold for a given λ is increasing in W , as the firm increasingly
prefers to wait until it has accumulated sufficient internal funds to entirely cover the
investment cost and thereby avoid costly external financing.
    Overall, these results point to a simple and robust payout policy pattern: growth
firms should only pay out retained earnings if their growth opportunities are un-
appealing; in contrast, mature firms should pay out retained earnings when their
operating earnings are high, and should not8 when their earnings are low.


8     Sequential Investment Opportunities
    To capture how future investment opportunities may influence a firm’s current
investment and financing decisions, we next generalize our model to allow for two
rounds of investment options. We refer to stage 0, when the firm has not yet exercised
any investment option, as the start-up phase; stage 1, after the firm has made its first
investment, as the growth phase; and, stage 2, after the firm has completed both
investment rounds, as the mature phase.
    This extension brings out one striking new effect: an acceleration of the first
investment with the objective of building internal cash-flow generation capacity to

                                                  45
relax financial constraints for the second round of investment. That is, we show that
a firm may invest sooner than an otherwise unconstrained firm, in an effort to increase
its capacity to generate cash.
    The main change to the baseline model is the addition of a start-up phase in which
the firm has no operating asset. In this phase the firm has two growth options. We
denote the fixed cost of the nth growth option by In , with n ∈ {1, 2}. As before, the
revenue process generated by the operating assets is given by mn Yt and the operating
cost by Zn . Once the firm has exercised its first growth option the model is identical
to the baseline model. The mature and growth phases therefore inherit the same firm
value, the same dynamics for liquidity, and the same abandonment decisions as in the
baseline model.
   In stage 0, the start-up phase, the firm’s liquidity Wt accumulates as follows:

                                 dWt = rWt dt + dCt ,         Wt ≥ 0,                              (58)

where {Ct ; t ≥ 0} denotes as before the firm’s cumulative equity issues, and dC is the
net equity raised. We denote by S(W, Y ) the value of the firm in this start-up phase.
As in the growth and mature phases, S(W, Y ) satisfies the following conditions:

   1. S(W, Y ) ≥ W ,

   2. S(W, Y ) ≥ S F (W, Y ) = supF0 ≥0 S(W + F0 , Y ) − F0 − Φ(F0 ) ,

   3. S(W, Y ) ≥ S I (W, Y ) = supF0 ≥0 G(W + F0 − I1 , Y ) − F0 − Φ(F0 ) .

       In the interior operating region S(W, Y ) satisfies L0 S = 0, where L0 is the in-
finitesimal generator in the start-up phase:

                                                          σ 2 Y 2 SY Y
                          L0 S = rW SW + µY SY +                       − rS .                      (59)
                                                                2
       Given that the analysis of the start-up phase proceeds along similar lines as the
analysis of the baseline model, we only report the most striking novel result on the
investment threshold policy Y 1 (W ) in the start-up phase (phase 0) when the firm has
no asset in place at all.18
  18
    In this generalized model, we have two rounds of investment decisions. Therefore, we use Y 1 (W )
and Y 2 (W ) to denote the first and second growth-option exercise-thresholds, respectively. Similarly,
         ∗        ∗
we use Yi,1 and Yi,2 to denote the first-best exercise-thresholds for the first and second growth-option.


                                                   46
                             investment threshold in start-up phase Y 1 (W )
                1.35


                1.34


                1.33


                1.32


                1.31


                 1.3


                1.29


                1.28


                1.27


                1.26


                1.25
                       0    0.5          1            1.5          2           2.5
                                        liquidity W




Figure 9: The optimal investment threshold Y 1 (W ) in the startup phase:
The case with sequential growth options. Parameters used: r = 0.05, µ =
−0.01, σ = 0.1, m1 = Z1 = 1, m2 = Z2 = 2, φ0 = 0.5, φ1 = 0.01, I1 = 0.5, I2 = 1.


   We set I1 = 0.5, at half the fixed investment cost for exercising of the second
growth option. All the other parameter values are the same as for the solution in our
baseline model. With these parameter values, the first-best investment threshold in
                                 ∗
the start-up phase is given by Yi,1 = 1.27.
   Figure 9 plots the optimal investment threshold Y 1 (W ) for the first investment
option over the interval W ∈ [0, 2.5]. It shows that Y 1 (W ) is monotonically increasing
in W in the region W < I1 = 0.5, consistent with our earlier findings for the baseline
                                              1
model.
   The striking new result is for W ≥ 0.5, when the firm invests more aggressively
                                        ∗
than under the first best: Y 1 (W ) < Yi,1 = 1.27. The firm accelerates the timing of its
first growth option in order to access the internal funds generated by the operating
asset. By over-investing in the first growth option, the firm gains overall because the
benefit of relaxing the financial constraint for the second growth option outweighs the
cost of accelerating the first growth option.
   This result reflects a more general principle: other things equal, financially con-
strained firms prefer growth opportunities with front-loaded cash-flows. In the classi-
cal MM-based real options framework there is a basic equivalence between an option


                                              47
that pays the present discounted value as a lump sum and an option that pays a cash
flow of equivalent present value over time. This is not the case in our real-options
model for a financially constrained firm as the over-investment result above illustrates.
Our more general model can thus explain why in reality firms tend to prefer projects
with front-loaded cash flows.


9     Conclusion
    Our generalization of the classic real options framework of McDonald and Siegel
(1986) to include financing considerations reveals the risks for corporations of overly
relying on textbook real-options tools (that assume away financing costs) to guide
their investment policies and to determine the value of their real options. Although
the classical real option framework can provide a satisfactory approximation for firms
with adequate internal funds and with highly profitable operating assets, we have
shown that it is highly misleading for moderately profitable firms, with low or even
medium levels of internal funds. For the latter firms the value of growth options is
not only substantially lower than the estimates produced by classical option pricing
tools, but also the lack of internal funds to finance capital expenditures results in
significant deviations in the optimal investment policy from that prescribed by the
classical real options model.
    Our general real options framework with financial constraints is particularly rele-
vant for entrepreneurial firms, for which growth options represent the most significant
part of their value, and for which external financing costs are highest and internal
funds tightest. The reason why these firms face high external financing costs is that
they have little collateral to offer and therefore have to rely mostly on external equity
financing, for which information dilution costs à la Myers and Majluf (1984) are very
high. As our analysis of sequential investment options indicates, a strategy to relax
financial constraints that some start-ups have adopted is to invest in an operating
asset before the long-term viability of that asset could be ascertained, in an attempt
to generate internal cash flows that could be useful towards financing future growth
options.
    Our analysis of payout policy also reveals how dividend and stock repurchase
policies are tied to growth opportunities. In the presence of such opportunities it is
optimal for the firm not to pay out retained earnings, as internal funds are better


                                           48
deployed towards funding the firm’s future capital expenditures. But once these
opportunities have been seized, optimal payout policy flips:     more profitable firms
pay out more, exactly the opposite of the policy in the growth phase. The empirical
literature on dividend policy (e.g. Fama and French, 2001) finds that growth firms
do delay dividend payments and our analysis offers a simple explanation for this
behavior.
    Although the introduction of financial constraints in a real options model is a
significant generalization, our model falls short of accurately representing several as-
pects of financial constraints that firms face in reality. For example, we have assumed
for simplicity that external financing costs are the same whether the firm is in the
start-up, growth, or mature phase. In reality, chances are that external financing
costs are lower for firms with a proven track record or for firms who have assets in
place that can serve as collateral. We have also suppressed any possibility of debt
financing, including allowing the firm access to a line of credit it could draw down
when it faces a liquidity squeeze. Accordingly, extending our model to allow for a
richer and more realistic description of external financing options is an obvious next
step in developing this framework further.




                                          49
Appendices

   Appendix A provides some details for the First-Best solution. Appendix B and
C provide proofs for the results for the general case with financial constraints in the
mature phase and the growth phase, respectively. Finally, Appendix D provides a
sketch of our numerical solution procedure.


A      Technical details for the First-Best solution
   Below we report the explicit solutions for the first-best abandonment hurdle in
                    ∗
the mature phase Ya,2 , the first-best investment threshold Yi∗ , and the first-best aban-
                       ∗
donment threshold Ya,1    in the growth phase. Sundaresan, Wang, and Yang (2015)
provide derivational details for essentially the same first-best real-option problem.
For brevity, we skip the derivations here.
                                  ∗
   The abandonment hurdle Ya,2      in the mature phase is given by :

                                   ∗        γ r − µ Z2
                                 Ya,2 =                ,                                        (A.1)
                                          γ − 1 r m2
where the constant γ is given by:
                                                            
                                   2
                                       s      2
                                                  2
                    1             σ           σ
               γ = 2 − µ −            −   µ−        + 2rσ 2  < 0 .                            (A.2)
                    σ             2           2

    The investment threshold Yi∗ and abandonment threshold Ya,1      ∗
                                                                        in the growth phase
jointly solve the following equations:
                       ∗ γ
     m1 − m2 β(Ya,1      ) (Yi∗ )β−1 − γ(Ya,1  ) (Yi∗ )γ−1
                                             ∗ β
                                                                            m1 Yi∗ Z1
                                                                                      
                                                             ∗   ∗
0=             +         ∗ γ
                                                            Q (Yi ) − I −          −
       r−µ            (Ya,1 ) (Yi∗ )β − (Ya,1
                                           ∗ β
                                              ) (Yi∗ )γ                      r−µ      r

                                            ∗                             γ−1            ∗
         (γ − β)(Y ∗ )β+γ−1            m1 Ya,1                     Yi∗             Z2 m2 Ya,2
                                                                                             
                                                 Z1
  − ∗ γ ∗ β i ∗ β ∗ γ                          −          −γ         ∗
                                                                                     −              ,
   (Ya,1 ) (Yi ) − (Ya,1 ) (Yi )       r−µ       r                 Ya,2            r   r−µ
                                                                                                (A.3)
and
                             ∗ γ+β−1
                   (β − γ)(Ya,1 )                                       m1 Yi∗ Z1
                                                                                
         m1                                             ∗   ∗
    0 =      + ∗ γ ∗ β            ∗ β
                                                      Q (Ya,1 ) − I −         −
        r − µ (Ya,1 ) (Yi ) − (Ya,1 ) (Yi∗ )γ                           r−µ     r

             γ(Yi∗ )β (Ya,1
                         ∗ γ−1
                            )    − β(Yi∗ )γ (Ya,1
                                               ∗ β−1 
                                                  )         ∗
                                                       m1 Ya,1
                                                                    
                                                                 Z1
           −        ∗ γ
                                                               −      ,            (A.4)
                (Ya,1  ) (Yi∗ )β − (Ya,1
                                      ∗ β
                                         ) (Yi∗ )γ     r−µ        r

                                             50
where the constant γ is given by (A.2) and the constant β is given by:
                                                              
                                  2
                                      s         2
                                                    2
                    1            σ              σ
               β = 2 − µ −           +     µ−         + 2rσ 2  > 1 .            (A.5)
                    σ             2              2


B     Proofs for the general case in the mature phase
B.1     Proof for Lemma 1
      For any given time t, we can construct a control policy A
                                                              b ∈ A with A b = {(τ 2 =
                                                                                   L
t, τ 2F > t, F2 )} such that the firm is liquidated immediately at time t. Under this
policy, we have
                                    P (Wt , Yt ; A)
                                                 b = Wt .

Since P (Wt , Yt ) = supA∈A P (Wt , Yt ; A) ≥ P (Wt , Yt ; A),
                                                           b it immediately follows that
P (W, Y ) ≥ W .

B.2     Proof for Lemma 2
      For any given time t, we can construct a control policy Ab ∈ A with A b = {(τ 2 >
                                                                                    L
t, τ 2F = t, F2 ≥ 0)} such that the firm issues equity at time t and for any s ≥ t we
assume that the firm takes the optimal liquidation and financing decisions, including
financing timing and the choice of the optimal amount F2 . Under the above policy,
the (optimal) value function at time t is P (Wt− + F2 , Yt− ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) where t− is
the left limit of t. By the continuity of value function upon the equity issue, we have

                  P (Wt− , Yt− ; A)
                                 b = P (Wt− + F2 , Yt− ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) .

Since the time of the equity issue for τ 2F = t may not be optimal, we have

 sup P (Wt− , Yt− ; A) ≥ sup P (Wt− , Yt− ; A)
                                            b = sup P (Wt− + F2 , Yt− ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) .
A∈A                     F2 ≥0                    F2 ≥0


Recall that P (Wt− , Yt− ) = supA∈A P (Wt− , Yt− ; A), so that

                P (Wt− , Yt− ) ≥ sup P (Wt− + F2 , Yt− ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) .
                                 F2 ≥0


B.3     Proof for Lemma 3
    See details in the main text following Lemma 3.



                                           51
B.4         Proof for Lemma 4
   First, for sufficiently high W , i.e. W ≥ Λ2 , the firm is permanently financially
unconstrained and hence Lemma 4 directly follows from Lemma 3.
   Next, we consider the case when the firm is financially constrained, i.e., when
Wt < Λ2 . By applying Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 to (13), we obtain
                        h     2
                                                        i    h     2
                                                                                        i
       P (Wt , Yt ) ≥ Et e−(τ U −t) P ∗ (Wτ 2U , Yτ 2U ) ≥ Et e−(τ U −t) P (Wt , Yτ 2U ) . (B.1)

Here, the first inequality follows from the fact that the first two terms in (13) are
positive and the second inequality follows from Wτ 2U = Λ2 > Wt and the result that
the value function is monotonic in W , as stated in Proposition 1.
    Consider a small time interval (t, t+∆t) where ∆t > 0. As Yt → ∞, the firm aban-
dons its operations or issues equity with zero probability. This is because Wt+∆t > Λ2 ,
as Yt → ∞. One can check this result by using the dynamics of Wt , given in (5) to
this case. That is, as Yt → ∞, τ 2U → t with probability one. When τ 2U → t, (B.1)
boils down to

                            P (Wt , Yt ) ≥ P ∗ (Wt , Yt ) ≥ P (Wt , Yt ) .                (B.2)

That is, P (Wt , Yt ) = P ∗ (Wt , Yt ) if τ 2U → t. Put differently, the firm achieves the
first-best outcome and hence P (W, Y ) = P ∗ (W, Y ) = W + Q∗ (Y ) when Y → ∞.

B.5         Proof for Theorem 2
Verification. We establish that any piecewise C 2 function which is a solution to
equation (25) associated to problem (13) is a majorant of the value function P .

Proposition 5 (Verification) Suppose we can find a positive function Pe which is
piecewise C 2 on the region Σ2 with bounded first derivatives19 and such that for all
(W, Y ) ∈ Σ2 ,

                             L2 Pe ≤ 0,                                                   (B.3)
                        Pe(W, Y ) ≥ W,                                                    (B.4)
                        Pe(W, Y ) ≥ sup Pe(W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) ,                   (B.5)
                                         F2 ≥0


with boundary conditions Pe(W, Y ) = P ∗ (W, Y ) for W = Λ2 or Y → ∞, then
Pe(W, Y ) = P (W, Y ) for all (W, Y ) ∈ Σ2 .
  19
       In the sense of Definition 4.8, p. 271 in Karatzas and Shreve (1988).



                                                    52
Proof. We first show that Pe(W, Y ) ≥ P (W, Y ). Notice that A is a control policy in
problem (13), where A ∈ A and A is the set of all policies. Then, by definition, we
have (14). If we can show that Pe(W, Y ) ≥ P (W, Y ; A) for any control policy A ∈ A,
then it follows that Pe(W, Y ) ≥ P (W, Y ).
   Using the generalized Ito’s formula (Dellacherie and Meyer (1980), Theorem VIII-
25 and Remark c, p. 349), we can write:
                                                         Z τ 2−
           −r(τ 2 −t) e
         e           P (Wτ − , Yτ 2 − ) = P (Wt , Yt ) +
                                          e                      e−r(s−t) L2 Pe(Ws , Ys )ds
                                                          t
                                               Z τ 2−
                                             +         e−r(s−t) PeY (Ws , Ys )σYs dBs .
                                                      t

Since Pe satisfies (B.3), the second term of the right hand side is non-positive. More-
over, since the first derivative of Pe is bounded, the third term is a square integrable
martingale. Taking expectations, we then get:
                           h                               i
                             −r(τ 2 −t) e
                        Et e           P (Wτ 2 − , Yτ 2 − ) ≤ Pe(Wt , Yt ) .

     Suppose that the firm issues equity N times from time 0 to time τ 2L ∧ τ 2U , and
divide the time interval (0, τ 2L ∧ τ 2U ) into N + 1 subperiods. We define τ 2Fn as the time
of the n-th round of external financing, where 1 ≤ n ≤ N . During the last period
(τ 2FN , τ 2L ∧ τ 2U ) we then have:
                             h                              i
      Pe(Wt , Yt ) ≥ Et e−r(τ 2 −t) Pe(Wτ 2 − , Yτ 2 − )
                             h                                                                                i
                       = Et e−r(τ 2 −t) Pe(Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2L + e−r(τ 2 −t) P ∗ (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2U
                             h                                                                     i
                       ≥ Et e−r(τ 2 −t) Wτ 2 Iτ 2 =τ 2L + e−r(τ 2 −t) P ∗ (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2U
                    = P (Wt , Yt ; A) ,                                                                 (B.6)
where we have used the condition (B.4) for the second inequality.
   During the N -th external financing subperiod (τ 2FN −1 , τ 2 ) we have in turn:
                 h                                i
Pe(Wt , Yt ) ≥ Et e−r(τ 2 −t) Pe(Wτ 2 − , Yτ 2 − )
                 h                                             i
                   −r(τ 2 −t) e
             = Et e           P (Wτ 2 − , Yτ 2 − )Iτ 2 =τ 2F
                                                             N
                                    h                                    i             
                    −r(τ 2 −t)
             ≥ Et e            sup P (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) Iτ 2 =τ 2F
                                       e
                               F2 ≥0                                                  N
                                    h       h                     i                 i        
                    −r(τ 2 −t)
             = Et e            sup Eτ 2F Pe(Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) Iτ 2 =τ 2F
                               F2 ≥0      N                                                 N
                 h             h                                             i            i
             ≥ Et e−r(τ 2 −t) Eτ 2F [P (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − )] − F2 − Φ(F2 ) Iτ 2 =τ 2F
                                         N                                                          N

               = P (Wt , Yt ; A) ,                                                                      (B.7)

                                                     53
where again we have used the condition (B.5) for the second inequality, and the third
inequality is obtained from (B.6).
   Following similar steps for earlier subperiods we obtain that Pe(Wt , Yt ) ≥ P (Wt , Yt ; A).
Since the policy A is arbitrarily chosen, we have

                           Pe(W, Y ) ≥ max P (W, Y ; A) = P (W, Y ) .
                                          A∈ A

Finally, since the optimal strategies are attained, all the inequalities become equali-
ties, so that:
                         Pe(W, Y ) = P (W, Y ; A) = P (W, Y ) ,
when A = A∗ , where

                              A∗ ∈ A∗ = {arg max P (W, Y ; A)} .
                                                    A∈A


B.6      Proof for Proposition 1
Proof for the Existence and Boundedness Property. It is immediate to ob-
serve that the closed-form solution for P ∗ (W, Y ) with (W, Y ) ∈ Σ2 is bounded under
Assumptions 1-2. It follows that P (W, Y ) is also bounded under Assumptions 1-2.
    Lemma 1 shows that W ≤ P (W, Y ). To see why P (W, Y ) ≤ P ∗ (W, Y ), let
P(1) (W, Y ) be the value function if the firm is allowed to issue equity freely without
paying any external financing cost in the first round of financing. We then have:
                 h
P (Wt , Yt ) = Et e−r(τ 2 −t) [P (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F2 − Φ(F2 )] Iτ 2 =τ 2 + e−r(τ 2 −t) Wτ 2 Iτ 2 =τ 2
                                                                                 F                           L
                                                          i
                 +e−r(τ 2 −t) P ∗ (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2
                                                        U
                 h
                   −r(τ 2 −t)
             ≤ Et e           [P (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F2 ] Iτ 2 =τ 2 + e−r(τ 2 −t) Wτ 2 Iτ 2 =τ 2
                                                                        F                            L
                                                          i
                    −r(τ 2 −t) ∗
                 +e           P (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2
                                                         U

             = P(1) (Wt , Yt ) .                                                                        (B.8)

 Now, let P(2) (W, Y ) be the value function if the firm has the opportunity to issue
equity without any cost for the next two rounds. Then:
                     h
P(1) (Wt , Yt ) = Et e−r(τ 2 −t) [P (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F2 ] Iτ 2 =τ 2F + e−r(τ 2 −t) Wτ 2 Iτ 2 =τ 2L
                                                              i
                    +e−r(τ 2 −t) P ∗ (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2U
                     h
                ≤ Et e−r(τ 2 −t) P(1) (Wτ 2 − + F2 , Yτ 2 − ) − F Iτ 2 =τ 2F + e−r(τ 2 −t) Wτ 2 Iτ 2 =τ 2L
                                                                  
                                                              i
                    +e−r(τ 2 −t) P ∗ (Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2U
                = P(2) (Wt , Yt ) .                                                                    (B.9)

                                                    54
Repeating the same argument, we have
                  P (W, Y ) ≤ P(1) (W, Y ) ≤ P(2) (W, Y ) ≤ . . . P(∞) (W, Y ) ,
where P(∞) (W, Y ) represents the value function for an infinite number of costless
issues for given timing τ . In other words, P(∞) (W, Y ) is the firm value when it is
forever financial unconstrained for given timing τ , so that P(∞) (W, Y ) ≤ P ∗ (W, Y ).
It then follows that:
                                P (W, Y ) ≤ P ∗ (W, Y ) .
    Finally, we establish that P (W, Y ) exists under Assumption 2. Note first that
the set of policies A is non-empty. Indeed, one policy A ∈ A is to immediately
liquidate the firm at time t, A = {(τ 2F > t, τ 2L = t, F2 = 0)}. The firm’s payoff
under this policy is P (Wt , Yt ; A) = Wt . Therefore, there exists at least one policy
A∗ ∈ A such that P (Wt , Yt ; A∗ ) = maxA∈A P (Wt , Yt ; A). Note that P (Wt , Yt ) =
maxA∈A P (Wt , Yt ; A), so that it exists and is given by P (Wt , Yt ) = P (Wt , Yt ; A∗ ). 

Proof for the Monotonicity Property. First we show that P (W, Y ) is strictly
increasing in W . For simplicity, define Q(Wt , Yt ; A) = P (Wt , Yt ; A) − W , and notice
(13)we have the
                        h                                                                  i
                           −r(τ 2 −t)                         −r(τ 2 −t) ∗
     Q(Wt , Yt ; A) = Et e            [−Φ(F2 )] Iτ 2 =τ 2F + e          Q (Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2U , (B.10)
and
                              Q(Wt , Yt ) = sup Q(Wt , Yt ; A) .                                (B.11)
                                             A∈A

Obviously, P (W, Y ) is strictly increasing in W if Q(W, Y ) is increasing in W . Next,
we prove Q(W, Y ) is increasing in W .
    Let W (1) > W (2) , and A∗1 , A∗2 be the optimal policies for the firm with initial wealth
W (1) and W (2) . Define A∗2 = {τ 2,∗        2,∗     2,∗             2,∗
                                       L , τ F , F2 }, and define τ U as the time when the
firm has accumulated sufficient liquidity to be permanently financially unconstrained.
    For the firm with initial wealth W (1) , a policy A1 can be constructed with the
same external financing decisions, including the financing time and amount, and the
same liquidation time as policy A∗2 . Observe next that the dynamics of liquidity are
                   (1)       (2)                                    (1)       (2)
then such that Ws ≥ Ws for s > t, path by path, if Wt > Wt , which implies
   (1)     (2)
Wτ 2 ≥ Wτ 2 = Λ2 if τ 2 = τ 2,∗U .
    Under this policy A1 = A∗2 we then have:
                          h                                                                           i
       (1)     ∗            −r(τ 2 −t)
                                                2,∗
                                                               −r(τ 2 −t)     (1)
Q(Wt , Yt ; A2 ) = Et e                  −Φ(F2 ) Iτ 2 =τ 2,∗ + e           Q(Wτ 2 , Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2,∗
                                                         F
                          h                                                                   i U
                  = Et e−r(τ 2 −t) −Φ(F22,∗ ) Iτ 2 =τ 2,∗ + e−r(τ 2 −t) Q∗ (Yτ 2 )Iτ 2 =τ 2,∗
                                                     
                                                            F                               U
                             (2)                     (2)
                    =    Q(Wt , Yt ; A∗2 )   =   Q(Wt , Yt ) .                                  (B.12)

                                                   55
Hence, we have
               (1)                  (1)                   (1)                    (1)
         Q(Wt , Yt ) = Q(Wt , Yt ; A∗1 ) ≥ Q(Wt , Yt ; A1 ) = Q(Wt , Yt ; A∗2 )
                                    (2)                   (2)
                         = Q(Wt , Yt ; A∗2 ) = Q(Wt , Yt ) .

That is Q(W, Y ) is increasing in W and P (W, Y ) = Q(W, Y )+W is strictly increasing
in W .
    Second, we show that P (W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ), where
Y (W ) denotes the liquidation boundary. That is P (W, Y (1) ) > P (W, Y (2) ) if Y (1) >
Y (2) ≥ Y (W ). We can use the same argument as for the monotonicity in W . Again,
defining A∗1 and A∗2 as above, we can take A1 = A∗2 . Furthermore, let W (1) and
W (2) denote the liquidity of the firm with initial earnings fundamentals Y (1) and
Y (2) respectively. Observe next that the dynamics of liquidity are then such that
   (1)      (2)                                 (1)    (2)         (1)    (2)
Ws > Ws for s > t, path by path, if Wt = Wt . Also, Yt > Yt ≥ Y (Wt )
                (1)      (2)
implies that Wτ 2 ≥ Wτ 2 if τ 2 = min{τ 2,∗     2,∗
                                          L , τ U }.
    Since P ∗ (W, Y ) is always strictly increasing in W and Y , the terminal payoff
with initial earnings fundamentals Y (1) is always higher than with initial earnings
fundamentals Y (2) , path by path, under the same policy A∗2 , so that:

           P (W, Y (1) ; A1 ) = P (W, Y (1) ; A∗2 ) > P (W, Y (2) ; A∗2 ) = P (W, Y (2) ) .

Furthermore, P (W, Y (1) ) = P (W, Y (1) ; A∗1 ) ≥ P (W, Y (1) ; A1 ), so that:

                 P (W, Y (1) ) > P (W, Y (2) )     for Y (1) > Y (2) ≥ Y (W ) .



Proof for the Uniqueness Property. Let ΣP denote the interior region where
L2 P = 0:
               ΣP = {(W, Y )|0 < W < Λ2 , Y (W ) < Y < ∞} .         (B.13)
Let Σ0P denote the boundary of ΣP :

Σ0P = {(W, Y )|W = {0, Λ2 }, Y (W ) ≤ Y < ∞} ∪ {(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ Λ2 , Y = Y (W )} .
                                                                             (B.14)
We first show that the solution is unique for a given region ΣP and then show that
ΣP is unique. Finally, we show the the solution is unique on the whole region Σ
                                                                              b2 =
ΣP ∪ Σ0P .




                                                 56
   Suppose by contradiction that for a given region ΣP where L2 P = 0, there are
two solutions P (1) (W, Y ) and P (2) (W, Y ) which satisfy:
                                                                              (1)
                              (1)                      (1)            σ 2 Y 2 PY Y (W, Y )
0 = (rW + m2 Y − Z2 )PW (W, Y ) + µY PY (W, Y ) +                                          − rP (1) (W, Y ) ,
                                                                                2
       and
                                                                              (2)
                              (2)                  (2)               σ 2 Y 2 PY Y (W, Y )
0 = (rW + m2 Y −         Z2 )PW (W, Y    ) + µY   PY (W, Y        )+                      − rP (2) (W, Y ),
                                                                               2

 in the region ΣP . Let Pb(W, Y ) = P (1) (W, Y ) − P (2) (W, Y ). Then Pb(W, Y ) also
satisfies

                                                                       σ 2 Y 2 PbY Y (W, Y )
 0 = (rW + m2 Y − Z2 )PbW (W, Y ) + µY PbY (W, Y ) +                                         − rPb(W, Y ) ,
                                                                                  2
in region ΣP . Let
                             (W
                              c , Yb ) ∈ arg            max        Pb(W, Y ) .
                                                 (W,Y )∈ΣP ∪Σ0P

If (W
    c , Yb ) ∈ ΣP , we have PbW (W
                                 c , Yb ) = 0, PbY (W
                                                    c , Yb ) = 0 and PbY Y (W
                                                                            c , Yb ) ≤ 0.
    Under Assumption 2, we also have:
                                             2 b2 b
                                 c , Yb ) = σ Y PY Y (W , Y ) ≤ 0 .
                                                      c b
                             rPb(W
                                                    2
Therefore, we have
                             Pb(W
                                c , Yb ) ≤ 0 ,         if (W
                                                           c , Yb ) ∈ ΣP .                             (B.15)
    Note that (W, Y (W )) ∈ Σ0P , we have

       max          Pb(W, Y ) ≥       max Pb(W, Y ) ≥ P (1) (W, Y (W )) − P (2) (W, Y (W ))
   (W,Y )∈ΣP ∪Σ0P                   (W,Y )∈Σ0P

                             = W − W = 0.

That is
                         Pb(W
                            c , Yb ) ≥ 0 ,       for          c , Yb ) ∈ ΣP ∪ Σ0 .
                                                             (W                                        (B.16)
                                                                               P

Combining (B.15) and (B.16), we have

                             Pb(W
                                c , Yb ) ≡ 0 ,         if (W
                                                           c , Yb ) ∈ ΣP .                             (B.17)

   Next, we prove that Pb(W                 c , Yb ) ∈ Σ0 . By using closed-form value
                           c , Yb ) ≡ 0 if (W
                                                        P
functions on the boundaries: Y = Y (W ) and W = Λ2 , we have

            Pb(W
               c , Yb ) = 0, if (W
                                 c , Yb ) ∈ {(W, Y )|W = Λ2 , Y (W ) ≤ Y < ∞}
                               ∪{(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ Λ2 , Y = Y (W )} .                                    (B.18)

                                                       57
     Next we show Pb(Wc , Yb ) = 0, if (W  c , Yb ) ∈ {(W, Y )|W = 0, Y (W ) ≤ Y < ∞}.
First, note that PbW (W
                      c , Yb ) ≤ 0, PbY (W
                                         c , Yb ) = 0 and PbY Y (W
                                                                 c , Yb ) ≤ 0 if W c = 0, and
                                                                              2   2
 Z2
     ≤ Yb < ∞. Therefore, we have rPb(0, Yb ) = (m2 Yb −Z2 )PbW (W, Y )+ σ Y PY2 Y (0,Y ) ≤ 0
                                                                                b   b  b
m2
    Z2
if m 2
       ≤ Yb < ∞ . Then using (B.16), we have

                                                           Z2
                                Pb(0, Yb ) = 0 ,      if      ≤ Yb < ∞ .                                     (B.19)
                                                           m2
                      (1)       (2)
   Finally, let F2 and F2 denote the optimal equity issues in that P (1) (0, Yb ) =
supF2 >0 P (1) (F2 , Yb ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) and P (2) (0, Yb ) = supF2 >0 P (2) (F2 , Yb ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ).
We thus have

     Pb(0, Yb ) = P (1) (0, Yb ) − P (2) (0, Yb )
                             (1)           (1)    (1)      (2)        (2)   (2)
                = (P (1) (F , Yb ) − F − Φ(F )) − (P (2) (F , Yb ) − F − Φ(F ))
                             2             2            2                     2               2            2
                       (1)   (1)           (1)          (1)           (2)     (1)             (1)          (1)
                ≤    (P (F2 , Yb )    −   F2     −   Φ(F2 ))   − (P         (F2 , Yb )   −   F2     −   Φ(F2 ))
                         (1)
                =    Pb(F2 , Yb ) .                                                                          (B.20)

 This is obviously a contradiction unless Pb(W, Y ) ≡ 0. That is Pb(0, Yb ) = 0 if
             Z2
Y (0) ≤ Yb < m2
                . Together with (B.19) and (B.18), we conclude that

                                Pb(W
                                   c , Yb ) ≡ 0 ,          c , Yb ) ∈ Σ0P .
                                                       if (W                                                 (B.21)

Further by combining (B.17) and (B.21), we conclude

                             Pb(W
                                c , Yb ) ≡ 0     for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣP ∪ Σ0P .                                    (B.22)

This implies that

                    P (1) (W, Y ) ≤ P (2) (W, Y )          for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣP ∪ Σ0P .                          (B.23)

   Since the entire analysis also holds if we switch P (1) (W, Y ) with P (2) (W, Y ), in
that
                P (2) (W, Y ) ≤ P (1) (W, Y ) for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣP ∪ Σ0P ,            (B.24)
we thus conclude that

                    P (2) (W, Y ) ≡ P (1) (W, Y )          for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣP ∪ Σ0P .

   We next show that the region ΣP is unique, which is equivalent to showing that
the boundary Σ0P is unique. From the definition of Σ0P , we only need to show that
Y (W ) is unique for 0 ≤ W ≤ Λ2 . Suppose that there are two liquidation boundaries


                                                      58
Y (1) (W ) and Y (2) (W ), with Y (1) (W ) ≥ Y (2) (W ) for some W , and let P (1) (W, Y ) and
P (2) (W, Y ) be the corresponding solutions. We then have:

        W = P (1) (W, Y (1) (W )) ≥ P (2) (W, Y (1) (W )) ≥ W = P (2) (W, Y (2) (W )) ,

where the first inequality follows from the optimality of the liquidation decision and
the second inequality is obtained from (15). It follows that P (2) (W, Y (1) (W )) =
P (2) (W, Y (2) (W )). Moreover, the value function is increasing in both W and Y so
that: Y (1) (W ) = Y (2) (W ). Finally, we show that the solution is unique on the
remaining liquidation region Σ02 = Σ2 − (ΣP ∪ Σ0P ). From the definition of the regions
ΣP and Σ0P , and total region Σ2 , we have that

                      Σ02 = {(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ Λ2 , 0 ≤ Y < Y (W )} .

Since Y (W ) is unique it follows that Σ02 is also unique. And in the liquidation region
Σ02 the value function is P (W, Y ) ≡ W . In sum, the solution of P (W, Y ) in the region
Σ2 is unique. 

B.7     Proof for Proposition 2
Proof for Monotonicity Property of Liquidation Boundary. Here, we want
to show that the optimal liquidation boundary, Y (W ), is decreasing in W in the
mature phase. Let Y (W (1) ) and Y (W (2) ) denote the optimal liquidation boundary
with liquidity W (1) and W (2) , where W (1) < W (2) . Recall that Q(W, Y ) = P (W, Y ) −
W is increasing in W as shown in Proposition 1, we have 0 = Q(W (1) , Y (W (1) )) ≤
Q(W (2) , Y (W (1) )). In addition, P (W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y before liquidation,
as shown in Proposition 1, which implies that Q(W, Y ) = P (W, Y )−W is also strictly
increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ). Hence, we have Y (W (1) ) ≥ Y (W (2) ), otherwise
0 = Q(W (1) , Y (W (1) )) ≤ Q(W (2) , Y (W (1) )) < Q(W (2) , Y (W (2) )) = 0, which is a
contradiction. That is, Y (W (1) ) ≥ Y (W (2) ) if W (1) < W (2) , which establishes that
the optimal liquidation boundary is decreasing in W in the mature phase. 

Proof for Delaying Costly Equity Issuance. First, we need to show that the
                                                                       Z2
firm has to issue equity if W = 0, for Y such that Y (0) < Y < m        2
                                                                          , to be able to
                                        ∗
continue operations. We assume that F (0) is the optimal amount of equity issuance,
which implies that P (0, Y ) = P (F ∗ (0), Y ) − F ∗ (0) − Φ(F ∗ (0)). This also implies
that PW (0, Y ) > 1 + Φ∗0 (0)) = 1 + φ1 , otherwise F ∗ (0) = 0 and the firm defaults
                                                           Z2
immediately, which is a contradiction for Y (0) < Y < m     2
                                                              . Denote M = F ∗ (0), we
have that PW (W, Y ) > 1 + φ1 for 0 < W < M and PW (M, Y ) = 1 + φ1 , otherwise
F ∗ (0) is not the optimal amount of equity issuance.

                                              59
    To show that the firm will delay costly equity issuance until entirely exhausting
its cash, we only need to show that P (W, Y ) > supF2 ≥0 P (W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ) for
W > 0. First, since PW (W, Y ) ≤ 1 + φ1 for W ≥ M , the firm has no incentive to issue
equity because P (W, Y ) ≥ P (W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − φ1 F2 > P (W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − Φ(F2 )
for W ≥ M . Next, we show that P (W, Y ) > supF2 ≥0 P (W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − Φ(F2 )
for 0 < W < M . We define F ∗ (W ) as the optimal amount of equity issuance if the
firm chooses equity issuance at W with 0 < W < M for given Y , which implies that
supF2 ≥0 P (W + F2 , Y ) − F − Φ(F2 ) = P (W + F2∗ (W ), Y ) − F2∗ (W ) − Φ(F2∗ (W )) and
M = W + F2∗ (W ). We then have

                 P (W, Y ) − (P (W + F2∗ (W ), Y ) − F2∗ (W ) − Φ(F2∗ (W )))
                    = P (W, Y ) − (P (M, Y ) − F ∗ (W ) − Φ(F2∗ (W )))
                    = P (W, Y ) − W − (P (M, Y ) − M − Φ(F2∗ (W )))
                    = Q(W, Y ) − Q(M, Y ) + Φ(M − W ) .

Recall that P (0, Y ) = P (F2∗ (0), Y )−F2∗ (0)−Φ(F2∗ (0)) and M = F2∗ (0), and Q(0, Y ) =
Q(F2∗ (0), Y ) − Φ(F2∗ (0)) = Q(M, Y ) − Φ(M ), so that

                 P (W, Y ) − (P (W + F2∗ (W ), Y ) − F2∗ (W ) − Φ(F2∗ (W )))
                    = Q(W, Y ) − Q(0, Y ) + Φ(M − W ) − Φ(M )
                    = Q(W, Y ) − Q(0, Y ) − φ1 W
                    > φ1 W − φ1 W = 0 ,

where the above inequality follows from PW (W, Y ) > 1 + φ1 for 0 < W < M , which
implies that QW (W, Y ) > φ1 for 0 < W < M . Finally, P (W, Y )−(P (W +F2∗ (W ), Y )−
F2∗ (W ) − Φ(F2∗ (W ))) > 0 implies that the firm has no incentive to issue equity for
0 < W < M . In sum, we have shown that the firm has no incentive to issue equity
for W > 0, which implies that the firm will delay costly equity issuance until entirely
exhausting its cash. 


C     Proofs for the general case in the growth phase
C.1     Proof for Lemma 5
      For any given time t, we can construct a control policy A   b ∈ A with A b = {(τ i >
t, τ 1L = t, τ 1F > t, F1 )} such that the firm is liquidated immediately at time t in the
growth phase. Under this policy, we have

                                  G(Wt , Yt ; A)
                                              b = Wt .

                                           60
Since G(Wt , Yt ) = supA∈A G(Wt , Yt ; A) ≥ G(Wt , Yt ; A),
                                                        b it immediately follows that
G(W, Y ) ≥ W . 

C.2       Proof for Lemma 6
    For any given time t, we can construct a control policy A     b ∈ A with A   b =
             1        1
{(τ i > t, τ L > t, τ F = t, F1 ≥ 0)} such that the firm issues equity at time t, and
for any s ≥ t we assume that the firm takes the optimal investment, liquidation
and financing decisions, including financing timing and the choice of the optimal
amount F1 . Following the above policy, the (optimal) value function at time t is
G(Wt− + F1 , Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ). By the continuity of value function upon the equity
issue, we have

                 G(Wt− , Yt− ; A)
                               b = G(Wt− + F1 , Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) .

Since the time of equity issue for τ 1F = t may be not optimal, we have

 sup G(Wt− , Yt− ; A) ≥ sup G(Wt− , Yt− ; A)
                                          b = sup G(Wt− + F1 , Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) .
 A∈A                    F1 ≥0                   F1 ≥0


Recall that G(Wt− , Yt− ) = supA∈A G(Wt− , Yt− ; A), so that we have G(Wt− , Yt− ) ≥
supF1 ≥0 G(Wt− + F1 , Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ). 

C.3       Proof for Lemma 7
    For any given time t, we can construct a control policy A   b ∈ A with A b = {(τ i =
t, τ 1L     1
     > t, τ F = t, F1 ≥ 0)} such that the firm exercises its growth option and/or issues
equity at time t, and for any s ≥ t it is in the mature phase. Following the above
policy, the (optimal) value function at time t is P (Wt− + F1 − I, Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ).
By continuity of value function upon the equity issue, we have

               G(Wt− , Yt− ; A)
                             b = P (Wt− + F1 − I, Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) .

Since the time of the equity issue τ i = t may be not optimal, we have

sup G(Wt− , Yt− ; A) ≥ sup G(Wt− , Yt− ; A)
                                         b = sup P (Wt− +F1 −I, Yt− )−F1 −Φ(F1 ) .
A∈A                    F1 ≥0                   F1 ≥0


Recall that G(Wt− , Yt− ) = supA∈A G(Wt− , Yt− ; A), so that we have G(Wt− , Yt− ) ≥
supF1 ≥0 P (Wt− + F1 − I, Yt− ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ). 




                                          61
C.4       Proof for Lemma 8
                                                                           ∗
     We assume that the current time is t, and that Ya,1                      < Yt ≤ Yi∗ , and denote
τ ∗L = inf{s|Ys ≤ Ya,1 ∗
                         } and τ ∗i = inf{s|Ys ≥ Yi∗ }. Obviously, τ ∗L is the optimal
first-best liquidation time and τ ∗i is the first-best optimal investment time. Note
that Λ1 = Z1 −mr 1 Ya,1 and Wt ≥ Λ1 imply that the drift of W in the growth phase
(rWs + m1 Ys − Z1 ) is always positive for t ≤ s < τ , where τ = (τ ∗L τ ∗i ), which means
                                                                                     V

that Ws ≥ Wt > 0 for t ≤ s < τ , and the firm will never use external financing by
issuing equity before liquidation or exercising its growth option. In addition, we have
that Ws ≥ Wt > I + Λ2 since (rWs + m1 Ys − Z1 ) ≥ 0 for t ≤ s < τ . Hence, we can
construct a control policy A b ∈ A such that A     b = {(τ i = τ ∗ , τ 1 = τ ∗ , τ 1 = ∞, F1 = 0)}.
                                                                         i   L     L    F
     From (29) we have
                              ∗                                                  ∗
    G(Wt , Yt ; A) = Et e−r(τ i −t) P (Wτ ∗i − − I, Yτ ∗i − )Iτ ∗L >τ ∗i + e−r(τ L −t) Wτ ∗L Iτ ∗L <τ ∗i .
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                          (C.1)
Note that Wτ ∗i − > I + Λ2 , therefore by Lemma (3) and Theorem 1 we have

 P (Wτ ∗i − − I, Yτ ∗i − ) = Wτ ∗i − − I + Q(Yτ ∗i − ) = Wτ ∗i − + H ∗ (Yτ ∗i − ) = G∗ (Wτ ∗i − , Yτ ∗i − ) .
                         ∗
Note also that Yτ ∗L = Ya,1 , so that by Theorem 1 we have

                      Wτ ∗L = Wτ ∗L + 0 = Wτ ∗L + H ∗ (Yτ ∗L ) = G∗ (Wτ ∗L , Yτ ∗L ) .

Hence, we could rewrite (C.1) as
                          ∗                                                ∗
G(Wt , Yt ; A) = Et e−r(τ i −t) G∗ (Wτ ∗i − , Yτ ∗i − )Iτ ∗L >τ ∗i + e−r(τ L −t) G∗ (Wτ ∗L , Yτ ∗L ) Iτ ∗L <τ ∗i
                                                                                                                

               = Et e−r(τ −t) G∗ (Wτ − , Yτ − )
                                                  

                   = G∗ (Wt , Yt ) .                                                                       (C.2)

Finally, since G(W, Y ) = supA∈A G(W, Y ; A), we have G(W, Y ) ≥ G∗ (W, Y ) for
W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}. And, following the boundedness property of G(W, Y ) as
shown in Proposition 3, we have G(W, Y ) = G∗ (W, Y ) for W ≥ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}. 

C.5       Proof for Lemma 9
    Assume that for any given time t, Wt ≥ 0, Yt → ∞, and that the firm always
takes optimal decisions. Consider a tiny time period (t, t + ∆t) with ∆t > 0. During
this period the firm abandons or issues equity with zero probability, since Yt → ∞.
Hence, we have Wt+∆t > max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I} with probability one when Yt → ∞, which
implies that G(Wt+∆t , Yt+∆t ) = G∗ (Wt+∆t , Yt+∆t ) with probability one, by Lemma 8.
From (29) under optimal decisions we have

     G(Wt , Yt ) = Et e−r(t+∆t−t) G(Wt+∆t , Yt+∆t ) = Et e−r∆t G∗ (Wt+∆t , Yt+∆t ) .
                                                                               


                                                       62
Since Yt → ∞, the above equation holds for any ∆ > 0, and by taking ∆ → 0, we
have

    G(Wt , Yt ) = lim Et e−r∆t G∗ (Wt+∆t , Yt+∆t ) = Et [G∗ (Wt , Yt )] = G∗ (Wt , Yt ) .
                                                 
                  ∆→0


C.6     Proof for Theorem 3
Verification. We establish that any piecewise-C 2 function, which is a solution to
the equation (40), associated to problem (29), is a majorant of the value function G.

Proposition 6 (Verification 2) Suppose that a positive function G e exists which is
piecewise-C 2 on the region Σ1 with bounded first derivatives and such that for all
(W, Y ) ∈ Σ1 ,

                      L1 G
                         e ≤ 0,                                                         (C.3)
                 G(W,
                 e    Y ) ≥ W,                                                          (C.4)
                 G(W,
                 e    Y ) ≥ sup P (W + F1 − I, Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) ,                      (C.5)
                                 F1 ≥0

                 G(W,
                 e    Y ) ≥ sup G(W
                                e   + F1 , Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) ,                          (C.6)
                                 F1 ≥0


with boundary conditions G(W,
                         e     Y ) = G∗ (W, Y ) for W = max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I} or Y → ∞.
Then G(W,
       e   Y ) = G(W, Y ) for all (W, Y ) ∈ Σ1 .

Proof. We first show that G(W,       e    Y ) ≥ G(W, Y ). Notice that A is a control policy
in problem (29), where A ∈ A the set of all policies. Then, by definition, we have
(30). If we can show that G(W,    e     Y ) ≥ G(W, Y ; A) for any control policy A ∈ A, then
it follows that G(W, Y ) ≥ G(W, Y ).
                    e
    Using the generalized Ito’s formula (Dellacherie and Meyer (1980), Theorem VIII-
25 and Remark c, p. 349), we can write:
                                                          Z τ 1−
            −r(τ 1 −t) e
          e           G(Wτ 1 − , Yτ − ) = G(We t , Yt ) +        e−r(s−t) L2 G(W
                                                                              e s , Ys )ds
                                                           t
                                                Z τ 1−
                                              +         e−r(s−t) G
                                                                 eY (Ws , Ys )σYs dBs .
                                             t


Since Ge satisfies (C.3), the second term of the right hand side is non-positive. More-
over, since the first derivative of G  e is bounded, the third term is a square integrable
martingale. Taking expectations, we then get:
                           h                              i
                             −r(τ 1 −t) e
                        Et e           G(Wτ 1 − , Yτ 1 − ) ≤ G(W
                                                             e t , Yt ) .

                                             63
     Suppose that the firm issues equity N times from time 0 to time τ 1L ∧ τ 1U , and
divide the time interval (0, τ 1L ∧ τ 1U ) into N + 1 subperiods. We define τ 1Fn as the time
of the n-th round of external financing, where 1 ≤ n ≤ N . During the last period
(τ 1FN , τ 1L ∧ τ 1U ) we then have:
                             h                               i
                               −r(τ 1 −t) e
      G(Wt , Yt ) ≥ Et e
      e                                  G(Wτ 1 − , Yτ 1 − )
                             h                                                                          i
                       = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) G(W
                                          e τ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ =τ 1 + e−r(τ 1 −t) G∗ (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ =τ 1
                                                            1  L                                    1 U
                             h                                                                    i
                       ≥ Et e−r(τ 1 −t) Wτ 1 Iτ 1 =τ 1L + e−r(τ 1 −t) G∗ (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1U
                  = G(Wt , Yt ; A) ,                                                                       (C.7)

where we have used the condition (C.4) for the second inequality.
  During the N -th external financing subperiod (τ 1FN −1 , τ 1 ) we have in turn:
               h                          i
e t , Yt ) ≥ Et e−r(τ 1 −t) G(W
G(W                         e τ − , Yτ − )
                                 1    1
               h                                       i
           = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) G(W
                            e τ − , Yτ − )I
                                 1    1            1
                                            τ 1 =τ F
                                                     N
               "
                                h                                   i
           ≥ Et e−r(τ 1 −t) sup G(We τ − + F1 , Yτ − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) I
                                                    1          1                      τ 1 =τ 1F <τ i
                                      F1 ≥0                                                  N
                                                                                                           #
                         −r(τ 1 −t)
                    +e                sup [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ 1
                                                                                                 FN =τ i
                                      F1 ≥0
                     "
                                 h     h                    i             i
             = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) sup Eτ 1 G(W
                                         e τ − + F1 , Yτ − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) I
                                                                             τ 1 =τ 1
                                            1  FN       1                                               FN <τ i
                                      F1 ≥0
                                                                                                                   #
                                     h                                                 i
                     −r(τ 1 −t)
                  +e              sup Eτ 1 [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − )] − F1 − Φ(F1 ) Iτ 1 =τ 1
                                              FN                                                         FN =τ i
                                  F1 ≥0
                 h            h                                            i
             ≥ Et e−r(τ 1 −t) Eτ 1 [G(Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − )] − F1 − Φ(F1 ) Iτ 1 =τ 1 <τ i
                                 FN                                                 FN
                            h                                                 i               i
               + e−r(τ 1 −t) Eτ 1 [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − )] − F1 − Φ(F1 ) Iτ 1 =τ 1 =τ i
                                        FN                                                         FN

             = G(Wt , Yt ; A) ,                                                                                (C.8)

 where again we have used the condition (C.5) for the first term of the second in-
equality and the condition (C.6) for the second term of the second inequality, and the
third inequality is obtained from (C.7).
    Following similar steps as for earlier subperiods we obtain that G(W e t , Yt ) ≥
G(Wt , Yt ; A). Since the policy A is arbitrarily chosen, we have

                            G(W,
                            e    Y ) ≥ max G(W, Y ; A) = G(W, Y ) .
                                              A∈ A




                                                        64
Finally, since the optimal strategies are attained, all the inequalities become equali-
ties, so that:
                         G(W,
                         e     Y ) = G(W, Y ; A) = G(W, Y ) ,
when A = A∗ , where

                               A∗ ∈ A∗ = {arg max G(W, Y ; A)} .
                                                        A∈A



C.7      Proof for Proposition 3
Proof for the Existence and Boundedness Property. It is immediate to ob-
serve that the closed-form solution for G∗ (W, Y ) with (W, Y ) ∈ Σ1 is bounded under
Assumptions 1-3. It follows that G(W, Y ) is also bounded under Assumptions 1-3.
    Lemma 5 shows that W ≤ G(W, Y ). To see why G(W, Y ) ≤ G∗ (W, Y ), let
G(1) (W, Y ) be the value function if the firm is allowed to issue equity freely, without
paying any external financing cost in the first round of financing. We then have:
                 h
 G(Wt , Yt ) = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) [G(Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ 1 <τ i
                                                                                         F
                      −r(τ 1 −t)
                  +e          [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ 1 =τ i
                                                                                    i F
                   −r(τ 1 −t)                   −r(τ 1 −t) ∗
                +e            Wτ 1 Iτ 1 =τ 1 + e          G (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1
                                           L                                      U
                  h
              ≤ Et e−r(τ 1 −t) [G(Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − ) − F1 ] Iτ 1 =τ 1 <τ i + e−r(τ 1 −t) Wτ 1 Iτ 1 =τ 1
                                                                              F                                    L
                      −r(τ 1 −t)
                  +e            [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − F1 ] Iτ 1 =τ 1 =τ i
                                                                             F
                                                          i
                      −r(τ 1 −t) ∗
                   +e           G (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1
                                                          U

              = G(1) (Wt , Yt ) .                                                                                (C.9)

 Now, let G(2) (W, Y ) be the value function if the firm has the opportunity to issue
equity without any cost for the next two rounds. Then:
                           h
      G(1) (Wt , Yt ) = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) [G(Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − ) − F1 ] Iτ 1 =τ 1F <τ i
                                   +e−r(τ 1 −t) [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − F1 ] Iτ 1 =τ 1F =τ i
                                                                                                            i
                            +e−r(τ 1 −t) Wτ 1 Iτ 1 =τ 1L + e−r(τ 1 −t) G∗ (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1U
                            h
                        ≤ Et e−r(τ 1 −t) G(1) (Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − ) − F Iτ 1 =τ 1F <τ i
                                                                           

                                   +e−r(τ 1 −t) [P (Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − F ] Iτ 1 =τ 1F =τ i
                                                                                                            i
                                   +e−r(τ 1 −t) Wτ 1 Iτ 1 =τ 1L + e−r(τ 1 −t) G∗ (Wτ 1 , Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1U
                        = G(2) (Wt , Yt ) .                                                                     (C.10)

                                                       65
Repeating the same argument, we have

              G(W, Y ) ≤ G(1) (W, Y ) ≤ G(2) (W, Y ) ≤ · · · ≤ G(∞) (W, Y ) ,

where G(∞) (W, Y ) represents the value function for an infinite number of costless
issues. In other words, G(∞) (W, Y ) is the firm’s value when it is forever financially
unconstrained, so that G(∞) (W, Y ) ≤ G∗ (W, Y ). It then follows that:

                                      G(W, Y ) ≤ G∗ (W, Y ) .

    Finally, we establish that G(W, Y ) exists under Assumption 2 and Assumption
3. Note first that the set of policies A is non-empty. Indeed, one policy A ∈ A is
to immediately liquidate the firm at time t, A = {(τ i > t, τ 1F > t, τ 1L = t, F1 = 0)}.
The firm’s payoff under this policy is G(Wt , Yt ; A) = Wt . Therefore, there exists
at least one policy A∗ ∈ A such that G(Wt , Yt ; A∗ ) = maxA∈A G(Wt , Yt ; A). Note
that G(Wt , Yt ) = maxA∈A G(Wt , Yt ; A), so that it exists and is given by G(Wt , Yt ) =
G(Wt , Yt ; A∗ ). 

Proof for the Monotonicity Property. First we show that G(W, Y ) is strictly
increasing in W . For simplicity, define H(Wt , Yt ; A) = G(Wt , Yt ; A) − W , and from
(29) we have
                          h
       H(Wt , Yt ; A) = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) [Q(Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ i
                                                                                                         i
         +e−r(τ 1 −t) H ∗ (Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 1 + e−r(τ 1 −t) [H(Wτ 1 − + F1 , Yτ 1 − ) − Φ(F1 )] Iτ 1 =τ 1       ,
                                       U                                                             F


and
                                H(Wt , Yt ) = sup H(Wt , Yt ; A) .
                                                 A∈A

Obviously, G(W, Y ) is strictly increasing in W if H(W, Y ) is increasing in W . Next,
we prove that H(W, Y ) is increasing in W .
     For the firm with initial wealth W (1) , a policy A1 can be constructed with the
same investment, the same financing time, and the same liquidation time as policy
                                                                 (2)       (1)
A∗2 , where the financing amount is given by F11 = F12,∗ + Ws− − Ws− at the time of
                                                                                   (1)
financing. Observe next that the dynamics of liquidity are then such that Ws ≥
   (2)                                 (1)        (2)                          (1) (2)
Ws for s > t, path by path, if Wt > Wt , which implies that Wτ 1 ≥ Wτ 1 =
                                                            (1)      (2)
max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I} if τ 1 = τ 2,∗
                              U . In addition, we have Ws       = Ws and F11 = F12,∗ for
s > τ 1 = min{τ 2,∗    1,∗        1
                 i , τ F }, and F1 ≤ F1
                                        2,∗
                                            for t < s ≤ τ 1 = min{τ 2,∗    2,∗
                                                                     i , τ F }.




                                                   66
   Under this policy A1 we then have:
                         h           h                                      i
       (1)                               (1)
    H(Wt , Yt ; A1 ) = Et e−r(τ 1 −t) Q(Wτ 1 − + F11 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − Φ(F11 ) Iτ 1 =τ 2,∗
                                                                                                    i
                                   −r(τ 1 −t)   ∗
                                +e      H (Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 2,∗
                                                         U
                                         h                                    i            i
                              −r(τ 1 −t)        (1)
                           +e              H(Wτ 1 − + F11 , Yτ 1 − ) − Φ(F11 ) Iτ 1 =τ 2,∗
                                                                                       F
                             h             h                                             i
                                −r(τ 1 −t)        (2)        2,∗                    2,∗
                         ≥ Et e             Q(Wτ 1 − + F1 − I, Yτ 1 − ) − Φ(F1 ) Iτ 1 =τ 2,∗
                                                                                                         i
                                   −r(τ 1 −t)   ∗
                                +e           H (Yτ 1 )Iτ 1 =τ 2,∗
                                                              U
                                              h                                        i            i
                                                     (2)
                                +e −r(τ 1 −t)
                                                H(Wτ 1 − + F12,∗ , Yτ 1 − ) − Φ(F12,∗ ) Iτ 1 =τ 2,∗
                                                                                                F
                                   (2)                        (2)
                         =      H(Wt , Yt ; A∗2 )    =     H(Wt , Yt ) .                                      (C.11)

Hence, we have
       (1)                (1)                        (1)                     (2)                        (2)
 H(Wt , Yt ) = H(Wt , Yt ; A∗1 ) ≥ H(Wt , Yt ; A1 ) ≥ H(Wt , Yt ; A∗2 ) = H(Wt , Yt ) .

That is, H(W, Y ) is increasing in W and G(W, Y ) = H(W, Y )+W is strictly increasing
in W .
    Second, we show that G(W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ). Note that
G(W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ) since the firm exercises its growth
option immediately and P (W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y as shown in Proposition
1. Therefore, we need to show that G(W, Y (1) ) > G(W, Y (2) ) if Y (W ) > Y (1) >
Y (2) ≥ Y (W ). We can use the same argument as for the monotonicity in W . Again,
we define the policies A1 , A∗1 and A∗2 as above, and let A1 = A∗2 . Furthermore, we
let W (1) and W (2) denote the liquidity of the firm with initial earnings fundamentals
Y (1) and Y (2) respectively. Observe next that the dynamics of liquidity are then such
        (1)       (2)                               (1)    (2)
that Ws > Ws for t < s, path by path, if Wt = Wt . This further implies that
   (1)      (2)
Ws > Ws for s = τ 1 = min{τ 2,∗          2,∗   2,∗
                                   i , τ L , τ U }.
    Since G∗ (W, Y ) is always strictly increasing in W and Y , the terminal payoff
with initial earnings fundamentals Y (1) is always higher than with initial earnings
fundamentals Y (2) , path by path, under the same policy A∗2 , so that:

             G(W, Y (1) ; A1 ) = G(W, Y (1) ; A∗2 ) > G(W, Y (2) ; A∗2 ) = G(W, Y (2) ) .

Furthermore, G(W, Y (1) ) = G(W, Y (1) ; A∗1 ) ≥ G(W, Y (1) ; A1 ), so that:

             G(W, Y (1) ) > G(W, Y (2) )            for Y (W ) > Y (1) > Y (2) ≥ Y (W ) .

  Finally, since G(W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ), we have that
G(W, Y ) is strictly increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ). 

                                                       67
Proof for the Uniqueness Property. Let ΣG denote the interior region where
L1 G = 0:

          ΣG = {(W, Y )|0 < W < max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, Y (W ) < Y < Y } .                            (C.12)

Let Σ0G denote the boundary of ΣG :

         Σ0G = {(W, Y )|W = {0, max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}}, Y (W ) ≤ Y < Y (W )}
                    ∪{(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, Y = {Y (W ), Y (W )}} .

We first show that the solution is unique for a given region ΣG and then show that
ΣG is unique. Finally, we show that the solution is unique on the whole region
b 1 = ΣG ∪ Σ0 .
Σ            G
    Suppose by contradiction that for a given region ΣG where L1 G = 0, there are
two solutions G(1) (W, Y ) and G(2) (W, Y ) which satisfy:
                                                                              (1)
                                 (1)                    (1)           σ 2 Y 2 GY Y (W, Y )
0 = (rW + m1 Y − Z1 )GW (W, Y ) + µY GY (W, Y ) +                                          − rG(1) (W, Y ) ,
                                                                                2
        and
                                                                              (2)
                                 (2)                    (2)           σ 2 Y 2 GY Y (W, Y )
0 = (rW + m1 Y − Z1 )GW (W, Y ) + µY GY (W, Y ) +                                          − rG(2) (W, Y ),
                                                                                2
in the region ΣG . Let G(W,
                       b    Y ) = G(1) (W, Y ) − G(2) (W, Y ). Then G(W,
                                                                    b    Y ) also
satisfies
                                                    2 2b
 0 = (rW + m1 Y − Z1 )G               bY (W, Y ) + σ Y GY Y (W, Y ) − rG(W,
                      bW (W, Y ) + µY G                                b    Y ),
                                                         2
in region ΣG . Let
                              (W
                               c , Yb ) ∈ arg       max          G(W,
                                                                 b    Y ).
                                                (W,Y )∈ΣG ∪Σ0G

If (W
    c , Yb ) ∈ ΣG , we have that G
                                 bW (W
                                     c , Yb ) = 0, G
                                                   bY (W
                                                       c , Yb ) = 0, and G
                                                                         bY Y (W
                                                                               c , Yb ) ≤ 0.
    Under Assumption 2, we also have:
                                              2 b2 b
                                  c , Yb ) = σ Y GY Y (W , Y ) ≤ 0 .
                                                       c b
                              rG(
                               b W
                                                     2
Therefore,
                              G(
                              b Wc , Yb ) ≤ 0 ,     if (W
                                                        c , Yb ) ∈ ΣG .                         (C.13)
    Note that (W, Y (W )) ∈ Σ0G , so that

    max          G(W,
                 b    Y)≥     max        G(W,
                                         b    Y ) ≥ G(1) (W, Y (W ))−G(2) (W, Y (W )) = W −W = 0.
(W,Y )∈ΣG ∪Σ0G              (W,Y )∈Σ0G
                                                                                                (C.14)

                                                   68
That is
                        G(
                        b Wc , Yb ) ≥ 0 ,        for            c , Yb ) ∈ ΣG ∪ Σ0 .
                                                               (W                                              (C.15)
                                                                                 G

Combining (C.13) and (C.15), we have

                               G(
                               b Wc , Yb ) ≡ 0 ,          if (W
                                                              c , Yb ) ∈ ΣG .                                  (C.16)

    Next, we prove that G(
                        b W                 c , Yb ) ∈ Σ0 . By using the value functions
                           c , Yb ) ≡ 0 if (W
                                                        G
at the boundaries: Y = {Y (W ), Y (W )} and W = max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, we have

                                            G(
                                            b Wc , Yb ) = 0 ,                                                  (C.17)

if (Wc , Yb ) ∈ {(W, Y )|W = max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, Y (W ) ≤ Y < Y (W )} ∪ {(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤
max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, Y = {Y (W ), Y (W )}}.
      Next we show that G(  b Wc , Yb ) = 0, if (W  c , Yb ) ∈ {(W, Y )|W = 0, Y (W ) ≤ Y <
Y (W )}. First, note that G     b W (Wc , Yb ) ≤ 0, G
                                                    bY (Wc , Yb ) = 0 and G
                                                                          bY Y (W
                                                                                c , Yb ) ≤ 0 if
                Z
W
c = 0, and
                m1
                  1
                    ≤ Yb < Y (W ). Therefore, we have rPb(0, Yb ) = (m1 Yb −Z1 )GbW (W, Y )+
  2   2
σ Y GY Y (0,Y )
                 ≤ 0 if Z1 ≤ Yb < Y (W ) . Then from (C.15), we obtain that
    b   b     b
      2               m1

                                                           Z1
                             G(0,
                             b Yb ) = 0 ,            if       ≤ Yb < Y (W ) .                                  (C.18)
                                                           m1
                     (1)       (2)
   Finally, let F1 and F1 denote the optimal equity issues in that G(1) (0, Yb ) =
supF1 >0 G(1) (F1 , Yb ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) and G(2) (0, Yb ) = supF1 >0 G(2) (F1 , Yb ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ).
We then have
     b Yb ) = G(1) (0, Yb ) − G(2) (0, Yb )
     G(0,
                        (1)          (1)    (1)      (2)        (2)   (2)
            = (G(1) (F , Yb ) − F − Φ(F )) − (G(2) (F , Yb ) − F − Φ(F ))
                            1              1            1                       1               1            1
                      (1)    (1)           (1)          (1)             (2)     (1)             (1)          (1)
               ≤    (G (F1 , Yb )     −   F1     −   Φ(F1 ))       − (G       (F1 , Yb )   −   F1     −   Φ(F1 ))
               =     b (1) , Yb ) .
                    G(F                                                                                        (C.19)
                       1

 This is obviously a contradiction unless G(W,
                                           b    Y ) ≡ 0. That is G(0,b Yb ) = 0 if
             Z1
Y (0) ≤ Yb < m1
                . Together with (C.18) and (C.17), we therefore conclude that

                               G(
                               b Wc , Yb ) ≡ 0 ,              c , Yb ) ∈ Σ0G .
                                                          if (W                                                (C.20)

Further, by combining (C.16) and (C.20), we conclude that

                            G(
                            b Wc , Yb ) ≡ 0      for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣG ∪ Σ0G .                                      (C.21)

This, in turn, implies that

                   G(1) (W, Y ) ≤ G(2) (W, Y )                 for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣG ∪ Σ0G .                        (C.22)

                                                          69
   Since the entire argument also holds if we switch G(1) (W, Y ) with G(2) (W, Y ), in
that
                G(2) (W, Y ) ≤ G(1) (W, Y ) for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣG ∪ Σ0G ,           (C.23)
we conclude that

                        G(2) (W, Y ) ≡ G(1) (W, Y )             for (W, Y ) ∈ ΣG ∪ Σ0G .

   We next show that the region ΣG is unique, which is equivalent to showing that
the boundary Σ0G is unique. From the definition of Σ0G , we only need to show that
Y (W ) is unique and Y (W ) is unique, for 0 ≤ W ≤ Λ2 . First, suppose that there are
two liquidation boundaries Y (1) (W ) and Y (2) (W ), with Y (1) (W ) ≥ Y (2) (W ) for some
W , and let G(1) (W, Y ) and G(2) (W, Y ) be the corresponding solutions. We then have:

          W = G(1) (W, Y (1) (W )) ≥ G(2) (W, Y (1) (W )) ≥ W = G(2) (W, Y (2) (W )) ,

where the first inequality follows from the optimality of the liquidation decision,
and the second inequality is obtained from (31). It follows that G(2) (W, Y (1) (W )) =
G(2) (W, Y (2) (W )). Moreover, the value function is increasing in both W and Y so
that: Y (1) (W ) = Y (2) (W ).
                                                                 (1)             (2)
   Suppose next that there are two investment boundaries Y (W ) and Y (W ),
        (1)           (2)
with Y (W ) > Y (W ) for some W , and let G(1) (W, Y ) and G(2) (W, Y ) be the
                                                      (2)
corresponding solutions. It follows that G(1) (W, Y (W )) > supF1 P (W + F1 −
    (2)                     (2)
I, Y (W )) since Y                (W ) is not the optimal investment boundary for G(1) (W, Y ).
We then have:
             (1)                        (2)                                  (2)                        (2)
G(1) (W, Y         (W )) > G(1) (W, Y         (W )) > sup P (W +F1 −I, Y           (W )) = G(2) (W, Y         (W )) ,
                                                      F1
                                                                                                          (C.24)
 where the first inequality follows from the monotonicity property shown in Propo-
                   (2)
sition 3. Since Y (W ) is the optimal investment boundary for G(2) (W, Y ), we have
           (2)                   (2)
G(2) (W, Y (W )) > G(1) (W, Y (W )), which is conflicting with (C.24). Hence, we
               (1)      (2)
have that Y (W ) = Y (W ) for all W .
    Finally, we show that the solution is unique on the remaining liquidation/investment
region Σ01 = Σ1 − (ΣG ∪ Σ0G ). From the definition of the regions ΣG and Σ0G , and total
region Σ1 , we have that

                     Σ01 = {(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, 0 ≤ Y < Y (W )}
                                   ∪{(W, Y )|0 ≤ W ≤ max{Λ1 , Λ2 + I}, Y (W ) < Y } .                     (C.25)

 Since both of Y (W ) and Y (W ) are unique it follows that Σ01 is also unique. In the
liquidation region the value function is G(W, Y ) ≡ W , and in the investment region

                                                           70
the the value function is G(W, Y ) ≡ supF1 ≥0 P (W + F1 − I, Y ), so that the solution
for P (W + F1 − I, Y ) is unique as shown in Proposition 1. Hence, the solution for
G(W, Y ) is unique in Σ01 . In sum, the solution for G(W, Y ) in the region Σ1 is unique.


C.8     Proof for Proposition 4
Proof for the Monotonicity Property of the Liquidation Boundary. Here,
we want to show the optimal liquidation boundary, Y (W ), is decreasing in W in
the growth phase. Let Y (W (1) ) and Y (W (2) ) denote the optimal liquidation bound-
ary with respectively liquidity W (1) and W (2) , where W (1) < W (2) . Recall that
H(W, Y ) = G(W, Y ) − W is increasing in W as shown in Proposition 3. We therefore
have 0 = H(W (1) , Y (W (1) )) ≤ H(W (2) , Y (W (1) )). In addition, G(W, Y ) is strictly
increasing in Y before liquidation as shown in Proposition 3. This implies that
H(W, Y ) = G(W, Y ) − W is also strictly increasing in Y for Y ≥ Y (W ). Hence, we
have Y (W (1) ) ≥ Y (W (2) ), otherwise 0 = H(W (1) , Y (W (1) )) ≤ H(W (2) , Y (W (1) )) <
H(W (2) , Y (W (2) )) = 0, a contradiction. That is, we have established that Y (W (1) ) ≥
Y (W (2) ) if W (1) < W (2) , which shows that the optimal liquidation boundary is de-
creasing in W in the growth phase. 

Proof for Delaying Costly Equity Issuance. First, we need to show that the
                                                                         Z1
firm has to issue equity if W = 0 for given Y , where Y (0) < Y < m       1
                                                                            , to continue
operations. We assume that F1∗ (0) is the optimal amount of equity issuance, so
that G(0, Y ) = G(F1∗ (0), Y ) − F1∗ (0) − Φ(F1∗ (0)). This implies that GW (0, Y ) >
1 + Φ∗0 (0)) = 1 + φ1 , for otherwise F1∗ (0) = 0 and the firm defaults immediately,
                                              Z1
which is a contradiction with Y (0) < Y < m    1
                                                 . Next, denoting M = F1∗ (0), we have
that GW (W, Y ) > 1 + φ1 for 0 < W < M and GW (M, Y ) = 1 + φ1 . Otherwise, F1∗ (0)
is not the optimal amount of equity issuance.
    To show that the firm will delay costly equity issuance until entirely exhausting
its cash, we only need to show that G(W, Y ) > supF1 ≥0 G(W + F1 , Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) for
W > 0. First, since GW (W, Y ) ≤ 1+φ1 for W ≥ M , the firm has no incentive to issue
equity because G(W, Y ) ≥ G(W + F1 , Y ) − F1 − φ1 F1 > G(W + F1 , Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
for W ≥ M . Second, we show that G(W, Y ) > supF1 ≥0 G(W + F1 , Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
for 0 < W < M . Let F1∗ (W ) be the optimal amount of equity issuance if the firm
chooses equity issuance at some W such that 0 < W < M for given Y . This means
that supF1 ≥0 G(W + F1 , Y ) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) = G(W + F1∗ (W ), Y ) − F1∗ (W ) − Φ(F1∗ (W ))




                                            71
and M = W + F1∗ (W ). We then have

                 G(W, Y ) − (G(W + F1∗ (W ), Y ) − F1∗ (W ) − Φ(F1∗ (W )))
                    = G(W, Y ) − (G(M, Y ) − F1∗ (W ) − Φ(F1∗ (W )))
                    = G(W, Y ) − W − (G(M, Y ) − M − Φ(F1∗ (W )))
                    = H(W, Y ) − H(M, Y ) + Φ(M − W ) .                             (C.26)

Recall that G(0, Y ) = G(F1∗ (0), Y ) − F1∗ (0) − Φ(F1∗ (0)) and M = F1∗ (0), so that
H(0, Y ) = H(F1∗ (0), Y ) − Φ(F1∗ (0)) = H(M, Y ) − Φ(M ), and

                 G(W, Y ) − (G(W + F1∗ (W ), Y ) − F1∗ (W ) − Φ(F1∗ (W )))
                    = H(W, Y ) − H(0, Y ) + Φ(M − W ) − Φ(M )
                    = H(W, Y ) − H(0, Y ) − φ1 W
                    > φ1 W − φ1 W = 0 ,

where the above inequality follows from GW (W, Y ) > 1 + φ1 for 0 < W < M ,
which implies that HW (W, Y ) > φ1 for 0 < W < M . Finally, G(W, Y ) − (G(W +
F ∗ (W ), Y ) − F ∗ (W ) − Φ(F ∗ (W ))) > 0 implies that the firm has no incentive to issue
equity for 0 < W < M and that the firm will delay costly equity issuance until
entirely exhausting its cash. 

Proof for the behavior of the investment threshold when W → I. If
PW (0, Y (I)) ≤ φ1 , the firm delays costly equity issuance as shown in Proposition
2, so that P (0, Y (I)) > P (F1 , Y (I)) − F1 − φ1 F1 > P (F1 , Y (I)) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
for any 0 < F1 ≤ M where PW (M, Y (I)) = φ1 . Hence, we have G(I, Y (I)) =
supF1 ≥0 P (F1 , Y (I)) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) = P (0, Y (I)) if PW (0, Y (I)) ≤ φ1 . That is, the
firm directly uses its internal liquidity to finance the investment cost I if the marginal
value of internal liquidity is lower than the external financing cost.
    Denote Y (I−) = limW →I Y (W ). Now we show that Y (I−) = ∞. First, we have
Y (I−) ≥ Y (I), otherwise if Y (I−) < Y (I) for given Y (I−) we have

  lim G(W, Y (I−)) =        lim sup P (W + F1 − I, Y (I−)) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
 W →I                      W →I F1 >0

                       = sup P (I + F1 − I, Y (I−)) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) < G(I, Y (I−)) ,
                           F1 >0


where the second equality follows from the continuity of G(W, Y ), and the inequality
from Y (I−) < Y (I) and the fact that supF P (W + F1 − I, Y (I−)) − F1 − Φ(F1 ) <
G(W, Y ) if Y < Y (W ). Hence, we have that Y (I−) ≥ Y (I).


                                            72
    Now, assume that Y (I) ≤ Y (I−) < ∞, then we have

        lim G(W, Y (I−)) =          lim sup P (W + F1 − I, Y (I−)) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
       W →I                         W →I F1 >0

                                = sup P (I + F1 − I, Y (I−)) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
                                    F1 >0

                                =   lim P (F1 , Y (I−)) − F1 − Φ(F1 )
                                    F1 →0

                                = P (0, Y (I−)) − φ0 = G(I, Y (I−)) − φ0 .

The above result violates the continuity of G(W, Y ) in W if Y (I) ≤ Y (I−) < ∞.
In sum, we have Y (I−) → ∞ if PW (0, Y (I)) ≤ φ1 , so that the investment threshold
tends to infinity when W → I if PW (0, Y (I)) ≤ φ1 . 


D      Solution Algorithm
    First, we note that solving the following problem

  max{L2 P, max{ sup P (W + F2 , Y ) − F2 − Φ(F2 ), W } − P (W, Y )} = 0 ,                     (D.1)
                     F2 ≥0

in the region (W ≥ 0, Y ≥ 0) is equivalent to solving the following penalty equation:

                                 L2 P + q max{W − P, 0} = 0 ,                                  (D.2)

in the region [0, Λ2 ] × [0, Ymax ] where the approximate boundary Ymax and the penalty
factor q are sufficiently high. The following boundary conditions are associated with
(D.2):

  1. When the firm has no savings, i.e., W = 0 :
                                                                                        Z2
              P (0, Y ) = max{sup P (F2 , Y ) − φ0 − (1 + φ1 )F2 , 0},         if Y <      ,
                                                                                        m2
                                                                             Z2
                             L2 P + q max{W − P, 0} = 0 if             Y ≥      .
                                                                             m2
  2. When the firm’s liquidity is sufficiently high, i.e., W = Λ2 :
                                                               ∗
                             P (W, Y ) = W,           if Y < Y2,a ,
                             P (W, Y ) = Q∗ (Y ) + W,          if           ∗
                                                                      Y ≥ Y2,a .

  3. When the firm’s earnings is at the origin, Y = 0, a permanently absorbing state,
     it is immediate to see that P = W .

                                                 73
  4. When the firm’s earnings is sufficiently high, i.e., Y = Ymax , the firm’s can
     finance its operations in an unconstrained way with probability one. Therefore,
     P (W, Ymax ) = P ∗ (W, Ymax ) = Q∗ (Ymax ) + W .

    We use the finite-difference method to solve the penalty equation (D.2). That
is, we divide the interval [0, Λ2 ] via Nw equally spaced points {(i − 1)∆w }N
                                                                             i=1 , where
                                                                               w


∆w = Λ2 /(Nw − 1), and divide the interval [0, Ymax ] via Ny equally spaced points
             Ny
{(j − 1)∆y }j=1 , where ∆y = Ymax /(Ny − 1). We then solve the penalty equation
L2 Pi,j + q max{Wi − Pi,j , 0} = 0 by using Newton-SOR iterative method, by setting
Wi = (i − 1)∆w , Yj = (j − 1)∆y , and Pi,j = P (Wi , Yj ). Under Assumption 2
and Assumption (3), the value function is well defined and the numerical procedure
converges.




                                          74
References
Abel, A.B., and J.C. Eberly, 1994. A unified model of investment under uncertainty.
    American Economic Review 84, 1369–1384.
Aiyagari, S. R., 1994. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 99, 659–684.
Alfaro, I., N. Bloom, and X. Lin. 2016. The real and financial impact of uncertainty
    shocks. Stanford University Working Paper.
Anderson, R., and A. Carverhill, 2012. Corporate liquidity and capital structure.
   Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429–1460.

Asquith, P., and D. W. Mullins, 1986. Equity issues and offering dilution. Journal
    of Financial Economics 15(1-2), 61–89.

Babenko I., and Y. Tserlukevich, 2013. Embracing risk: Hedging policy for firms
   with real options, working paper, Arizona State University.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis, 2016. Measuring economic policy uncer-
    tainty. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4), 1593–1636.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002. Market timing and capital structure. The Journal
    of Finance 57, 1–32.

Black, F., and M. Scholes, 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities.
    Journal of Political Economy 81, 637–659.

Bloom, N., 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77, 623–685.

Bloom, N., Floetotto, M., Jaimovich, N., Saporta-Eksten, I., and S.J. Terry, 2016.
    Really uncertain business cycles. Stanford University Working Paper

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang, 2011. A unified theory of Tobin’q, corporate
    investment, financing, and risk management. Journal of Finance 66, 1545–1578.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang, 2013. Market timing, investment, and risk
    management. Journal of Financial Economics 109, 40–62.
Bolton, P., N. Wang, and J. Yang, 2014. Investment under uncertainty and the value
    of real and financial flexibility (No. w20610). National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

Bolton, P., N. Wang, and J. Yang, 2019. Optimal Contracting, Corporate Finance,
    and Valuation with Inalienable Human Capital. Journal of Finance, 74, 1363–
    1429.


                                        75
Boot, A.W.A., and V. N. Vladimirov, 2014. Entrepreneurial vision, information,
    and cash. Working paper. University of Amsterdam.
Boyle, G., and G. Guthrie, 2003. Investment, uncertainty, and liquidity. Journal of
    Finance 58, 2143–2166.
Brennan, M.J., and E. Schwartz, 1985. Evaluating natural resource investments.
    Journal of Business 58, 135–157.
Campello, M., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey, 2010. The real effects of financial
   constraints: Evidence from a financial crisis. Journal of financial Economics
   97(3), 470–487.
Campello, M., Giambona, E., Graham, J. R., and Harvey, C. R. 2011. Liquid-
   ity management and corporate investment during a financial crisis. Review of
   Financial Studies 24(6), 1944–1979.

Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino, 2006. Corporate investment and asset
    price dynamics: Implications for SEO event studies and long-run performance.
    The Journal of Finance 61, 1009–1034.

Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino, 2010. SEO risk dynamics. Review of
    Financial Studies 23, 4026–4077.

Calomiris, C. W. and C. P. Himmelberg, 1997. Investment Banking Costs as a Mea-
    sure of the Cost of Access to External Finance. Columbia University Working
    Paper.

Chen, H., J. Miao, and N. Wang, 2010. Entrepreneurial finance and non-diversifiable
   risk. Review of Financial Studies, 23, 4348–88.

Chen, P., L. Karabarbounis, and B. Neiman, 2017. The Global Rise of Corporate
   Saving. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chen, G., 2017. Corporate savings, financing, and investment with aggregate un-
   certainty shocks. Columbia University Working Paper.
Copeland, T., and A. Lyasoff, 2013. Seeking q: the marginal efficiency of liquidity
   and its effect on investment financing and valuation. Working paper. University
   of San Diego and Boston University.
Dayanik, S. and I. Karatzas, 2003. On the optimal stopping problem for one-
    dimensional diffusions. Stochastic processes and their applications, 107(2), 173-
    212.

DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and R.M. Stulz, 2010. Seasoned equity offerings, market
   timing, and the corporate lifecycle. Journal of Financial Economics 95, 275–295.


                                        76
Décamps, J.P., S. Gryglewicz, E. Morellec, and S. Villeneuve, 2017. Corporate
     policies with permanent and transitory shocks. Review of Financial Studies 30,
     162–210.
Décamps, J.P., T. Mariotti, J.C. Rochet, and S. Villeneuve, 2011. Free cash flow,
     issuance costs and stock prices. Journal of Finance 66, 1501–1544.
Décamps, J.P., and S. Villeneuve, 2007. Optimal dividend policy and growth option.
     Finance and Stochastics 11, 3–27.
Deuflhard, P., 2011. Newton methods for nonlinear problems: affine invariance and
    adaptive algorithms (Vol. 35). Springer.
Dixit, A.K., 1989. Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty. Journal of Political
    Economy 97, 620–638.

Dixit, A.K., and R.S. Pindyck, 1994. Investment under uncertainty. Princeton
    University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Duffie, D., 2010. Dynamic asset pricing theory. Princeton University Press.

Eckbo, B. Espen, R. W. Masulis, and O. Norli., 2007. Security offerings. Handbook
    of corporate finance: Empirical corporate finance, 1, 233–373.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 2001. Disappearing dividends: changing firm char-
   acteristics or lower propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3–43.

Froot, K.A., D.S. Scharfstein, and J.C. Stein, 1993. Risk management: Coordinating
    corporate investment and financing policies. The Journal of Finance 48, 1629–
    1658.

Gorbenko, A.S. and A. Malenko, 2017. The timing and method of payment in
    mergers when acquirers are financially constrained. The Review of Financial
    Studies, 31, 3937–3978.
Graham, J.R., and C. Harvey, 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance:
    Evidence from the field. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.
Graham, J.R., and C. Harvey, 2002. How do CFOs make capital budgeting and
    capital structure decisions? Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 15, 8–23.
Grenadier, S.R., 1996. The strategic exercise of options: development cascades and
    overbuilding in real estate markets. Journal of Finance 51, 1653–1679.

Grenadier, S.R. and A. Malenko, 2010. A Bayesian approach to real options: The
    case of distinguishing between temporary and permanent shocks. The Journal
    of Finance, 65, 1949–1986.


                                       77
Grenadier, S.R. and A. Malenko, 2011. Real options signaling games with applica-
    tions to corporate finance. The Review of Financial Studies 24, 3993-4036.
Grenadier, S.R., A. Malenko, and N. Malenko, 2016. Timing decisions in organi-
    zations: Communication and authority in a dynamic environment. American
    Economic Review. 106, 2552–81.
Grenadier, S.R., and N. Wang, 2005. Investment timing, agency, and information.
    Journal of Financial Economics 75, 493–533.
Grenadier, S.R., and N. Wang, 2007. Investment under uncertainty and time-
    inconsistent preferences. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 2–39.
Hackbarth, D., and D. Mauer, 2012. Optimal priority structure, capital structure,
    and investment. Review of Financial Studies 25, 747–96.

Hugonnier, J., S. Malamud, and E. Morellec, 2015. Capital supply uncertainty, cash
   holdings, and investment. Review of Financial Studies, 28(2), 391-445.

Ivashina, V., and D. Scharfstein. 2010. Bank lending during the financial crisis of
    2008. Journal of Financial Economics 97, 319–338.

Kaplan, S.N., and L. Zingales, 1997. Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide
    useful measures of financing constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
    169–215.

Karatzas, I., and S. Shreve, 1988. Brownian motion and stochastic calculus. Springer
    Science & Business Media.

Kim, W., and M. S. Weisbach, 2008. Motivations for public equity offers: An
   international perspective. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 281-307.

Kyle, A.S., H. Ou-Yang, and W. Xiong. 2006. Prospect theory and liquidation
    decisions. Journal of Economic Theory 129 (1), 273–288
Lambrecht, B.M., and W.R. Perraudin, 2003. Real options and preemption under
   incomplete information. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 27, 619–
   643.
Lambrecht, B.M., and S. C. Myers, 2007. A theory of takeovers and disinvestment.
   Journal of Finance 62, 809–845.
Lambrecht, B.M., and S. C. Myers, 2008. Debt and managerial rents in a real-options
   model of the firm. Journal of Financial Economics 89, 209–231.
Leland, H. E., 1994. Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital
    structure. Journal of Finance 49, 1213–1252.


                                        78
Loughran, T., and Ritter, J. R. 1995. The new issues puzzle. The Journal of Finance
    50(1), 23-51.
Loughran, T., and Ritter, J. R. 1997. The operating performance of firms conducting
    seasoned equity offerings. The Journal of Finance 52(5), 1823–1850.
Lucas, D. J., and R. L. McDonald, 1990. Equity issues and stock price dynamics.
    The Journal of Finance 45, 1019–1043.
Mauer, D., and A.J. Triantis, 1994. Interactions of corporate financing and invest-
   ment decisions: A dynamic framework. Journal of Finance 49, 1253–1277.
McDonald, R., and D. Siegel, 1985. Investment and the valuation of firms when
   there is an option to shut down. International economic review. 331-349.

McDonald, R., and D. Siegel, 1986. The value of waiting to invest. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 101, 707–727.

Merton, R.C., 1973. Theory of rational option pricing. Bell Journal of Economics
    and Management Science 4, 141–183.

Miao, J., and N. Wang, 2007. Investment, consumption, and hedging under incom-
    plete markets. Journal of Financial Economics 86, 608–642.

Miao, J., and N. Wang, 2011. Risk, uncertainty, and option exercise. Journal of
    Economic Dynamics and Control, 35, 442–461.

Miller, M. H., and D. Orr, 1966. A model of demand for money by firms. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 80, 413–435.

Morellec, E., 2004. Can managerial discretion explain observed leverage ratios?
   Review of Financial Studies 17, 257–294.

Myers, S. C. 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial
   Economics 5(2), 147–175.

Myers, S. C., and N. S. Majluf, 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions
   when firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial
   Economics 13, 187–221.
Orlov, D., A. Skrzypacz, A. and P. Zryumov, 2019. Persuading the Regulator To
    Wait. Journal of Political Economy. forthcoming.
Sundaresan, S., N. Wang, and J. Yang, 2015. Dynamic Investment, Capital Struc-
    ture, and Debt Overhang. Review of Corporate Finance Studies 4, 1-42.

Titman, S., 1985. Urban land prices under uncertainty. American Economic Review
    75, 505–514.

                                       79
Titman, S., and S. Tsyplakov, 2007. A dynamic model of optimal capital structure.
    Review of Finance 11(3), 401–451.
Wang C., N. Wang, and J. Yang, A unified model of entrepreneurship dynamics.
   2012. Journal of Financial Economics, 106(1), 1–23.
Williams, J.T., 1991. Real estate development as an option. Journal of Real Estate
     Finance and Economics 4, 191–208.




                                       80
