                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EFFECTIVE MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES IN NEW KEYNESIAN MODELS:
                          A RE-EXAMINATION

                                           Hess Chung
                                          Edward Herbst
                                          Michael T. Kiley

                                        Working Paper 20611
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20611


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014






The views expressed herein are those of the authors, and do not reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Board, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We have benefited from comments
by participants at the NBER conference, especially our discussants Lars Svensson and Mark Gertler,
and from workshop participants and colleagues at the Federal Reserve Board, especially those of Matthias
Paustian and Edward Nelson, and the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Richmond.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hess Chung, Edward Herbst, and Michael T. Kiley. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effective Monetary Policy Strategies in New Keynesian Models: A Re-examination
Hess Chung, Edward Herbst, and Michael T. Kiley
NBER Working Paper No. 20611
October 2014
JEL No. E31,E37,E52

                                            ABSTRACT

We explore the importance of the nature of nominal price and wage adjustment for the design of
effectivemonetary policy strategies, especially at the zero lower bound. Our analysis suggests that
sticky-priceand sticky-information models fit standard macroeconomic time series comparably well.
However,the model with information rigidity responds differently to anticipated shocks and persistent
zero-lowerbound episodes – to a degree important for monetary policy and for understanding the
effects of fundamentaldisturbances when monetary policy cannot adjust. These differences may be
important for understandingother policy issues as well, such as fiscal multipliers. Despite these
differences, many aspects of effective policy strategy are common across the two models: In particular,
highly inertial interest rate rules that respond to nominal income or the price level perform well, even
when hit by adverse supply shocks or large demand shocks that induce the zero-lower bound. Rules
that respond to the level or change in the output gap can perform poorly under those conditions.


Hess Chung                                     Michael T. Kiley
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve      Federal Reserve Board
Hess.T.Chung@frb.gov                           20th and Constitution Avenue, NW
                                               Washington, DC 20551
Edward Herbst                                  mkiley@frb.gov
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
edward.p.herbst@frb.gov
1    Introduction
The Great Recession has led to a prolonged period of high unemployment, below-target inflation,
and extraordinary policy actions from monetary authorities. While economists at central banks
and other researchers have, by now, explored the nature of the recession and appropriate policy
strategies in numerous models, the diversity across such models along key dimensions, including
the controversial nature of nominal price adjustment, has been limited. This lack of diversity
is potentially important for assessing how robust effective alternative strategies may be, as the
standard “sticky-price” assumption–whereby price adjustment is based on current information
and looks forward to expected future conditions–can imply large swings in the price level at the
zero-lower bound (ZLB) in response to shocks or monetary-policy shifts.
    In this paper, we consider how an alternative assumption about the nature of price and wage
dynamics affects policy assessments. Specifically, we consider “sticky-information” paradigms
(Mankiw and Reis, 2002) for price and wage adjustment, in which some price and wage setters do
not base their decisions on current information. We explore the differences between sticky-price
and sticky-information models, focusing on the efficacy of a range of monetary policy strategies.
    Our analysis highlights several central results. First, the dominance of the sticky-price paradigm
within central bank and academic research on monetary policy is not driven by superior fit to the
usual macroeconomic data. Rather, while the fit of our sticky-information and sticky-price models
to standard macroeconomic time series is comparable, the differences in price-level dynamics, es-
pecially at the zero-lower bound, can be significant–both quantitatively and from the perspective
of effective policy design.
    Second, many aspects of effective policy strategy off of the zero-lower bound are nevertheless
very similar under these alternative models of price dynamics. In particular, aggregate demand
remains primarily a function of long-term (or the sequence of expected short-term) interest rates,
implying that inertial strategies, which strongly influence expected interest rates, are central to
good policy design (as found in, for example, Levin et al. (2003)). Moreover, the importance
of markup shocks in the trade-off between inflation and activity implies that strategies which
respond strongly to the level of the output gap perform very poorly. While responding to out-
put growth ameliorates this problem in the absence of the zero lower bound, such an approach
performs poorly when that constraint binds. Instead, flexible price-level targeting is required to
ameliorate the adverse effects of both cost-push shocks and the zero-lower bound.
    When the zero lower bound is hit, however, several important differences emerge between
the sticky-price and sticky-information models. Most notably, when the policy rate is bound, the
forward-looking nature of inflation under sticky prices strongly amplifies adverse shocks relative
to the sticky-information case. Similarly, the price level is far more volatile under sticky prices, as
agents in the sticky-information framework choose price-level plans, which typically induce some
degree of mean reversion in the aggregate price level.1
   1 This is a relative statement – amplification of adverse developments through the zero-lower bound (and hence the

absence of some monetary accommodation) is a general feature – it simply tends to be larger under sticky prices.


                                                         1
   The larger amplification of developments at the zero-lower bound within the sticky-price
framework implies that steps to alleviate such adverse developments can also be amplified signif-
icantly – implying that, for example, a commitment to keep interest rates “lower-for-longer” can
be very stimulative. Indeed, such promises can lead to large increases in inflation for seemingly
moderate shifts in interest rates – a tendency that is again most apparent under sticky-prices, albeit
present under the sticky-information approach as well.
   While not our primary focus, the different amplification of shocks across the sticky-price and
sticky-information frameworks may also be important for a range of issues in the recent literature,
including the size of the fiscal multiplier and the potential for improvements in aggregate supply
to place a drag on economic activity when the ZLB binds. Kiley (2014) explores these issues in a
small model similar to that we outline in the next section.
   Our exploration of these issues begins with a review of the frameworks for price dynamics
used in central bank models (and academic research). We then illustrate, in a small model, some
of the dimensions along which the predictions from the dominant sticky-price paradigm differ
substantially from those associated with our alternative model of price adjustment, sticky infor-
mation. With the intuition from such a small model in hand, we turn to an empirical comparison
of sticky-prices and sticky-information. Our subsequent examination of policy strategies com-
pares outcomes across the sticky-price and sticky-information models, with a particular focus on
the ways in which the simple mechanisms identified in the small model continue to drive results
in the larger, estimated models. In addition, we emphasize the parallels between the effective
strategies we identify and the related literature on optimal monetary policy in New Keynesian
models – although we refrain (for the most part) from focusing specifically on optimal policy, and
instead focus on strategies which have received extensive attention in policy circles. Finally, we
emphasize that some strategies that effectively stabilize prices and activity in response to ZLB
events destabilize inflation in response to shocks to the Phillips curve. (Conversely, some strate-
gies that stabilize inflation in response to Phillips-curve shocks perform very poorly in response
to shocks that induce the ZLB.)
   Before turning to our analysis, it is important to note that we build upon a substantial body
of work. For example, our models simply replace the sticky-price assumptions in the model of
Smets and Wouters (2007) with the sticky-information framework of Mankiw and Reis (2002) and
Mankiw and Reis (2010). We chose these two models for two reasons: First, they are both tractable
methods of incorporating nominal price adjustment into dynamics-stochastic-general-equilibrium
(DSGE) models; and second, the dynamics of prices – and in particular the degree to which price
setting is forward looking – are dramatically different across the two models (e.g., Mankiw and
Reis (2002), with important implications for behavior at the zero lower bound (Kiley (2014))).
Note that we do not choose these models for their realism from a microeconomic perspective –
neither specification is capable of fitting (all of) the microeconomic facts of price adjustment (e.g.,
Klenow and Malin (2010)), and our focus is on empirically plausible models that are useful for
policy analysis. In this regard, sticky information provides a model of price adjustment that is


                                                  2
less forward looking than the sticky-price model, but which incorporates an important role for the
interaction of monetary policy strategy and expectations formation (in contrast to the assumption
of backward-looking price setting use in some studies of robustness, e.g., English et al. (2013)).
    The discussion of policy strategies also builds on a long literature. For example, Levin et al.
(2003) and Taylor and Williams (2010) emphasize the importance of examining the robustness of
policy conclusions to model specification; herein, we take a focused approach to robustness and
focus solely on the role of wage and price dynamics within a standard New Keynesian DSGE
model. Taylor and Williams (2010) also find that, absent a lower bound on the policy rate, policies
that respond to the change in the output gap tend to be close to optimal – a finding also suggested
in, for example, Blake (2012). Billi (2011) raise questions about the efficacy of responding the
change in the output gap once the analysis acknowledges the zero-lower bound – a concern that
our analysis suggests is quantitatively very important.
    Our focus on policies that actively anchor the price level builds off of the earlier analyses of
Woodford (2003) and Ball et al. (2005), and our emphasis on the particular importance of such
considerations at the zero-lower bound follows Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Woodford
(2010). However, we use large, estimated models and emphasize how the predictions of the price
level across the estimated sticky-price and sticky-information models differ in a manner that is
quantitatively important for policy strategy at the zero lower bound.


2   Looking for Robustness
The basic New-Keynesian model, expanded to include some degree of detail with respect to the
key components of aggregate demand (e.g., consumption, investment, government expenditure,
and net exports) and, in some cases, indicators of financial frictions and their effects as captured
in credit-market spreads, has become the core framework for monetary policy analysis in research
and in practice. This can be seen in the frameworks employed at a range of central banks and
affiliated institutions, as summarized in Table 1.
    While a large number of models are employed, the models are very similar in key respects,
even within an institution. For example, the core framework of the domestic DSGE models at the
Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Chicago (whose groups
collaborate and for which specification details can be found in Kiley (2013), Del Negro et al. (2013),
and Brave et al. (2012)) are similar in most respects. One key dimension along which these models
is similar is the specification of price and wage dynamics: Each of these models – and all of the
others on the list, which includes groups at the major central banks whose research groups have
been advancing the modeling frontier – uses a variant of the Calvo (1983) or Rotemberg (1982)
price adjustment mechanism (with various degrees of modification such as indexation or other
methods to introduce inertia).




                                                     3
                           Table 1: DSGE Models at Selected Central Banks
 Central Bank                         Prices/Wages              Other              Documentation
 Federal Reserve (FRB/US)              Sticky Price          Reduced form     Brayton and Tinsley (1996)
 Federal Reserve (EDO)                 Sticky Price             DSGE                 Kiley (2013)
 Federal Reserve (SIGMA)               Sticky Price             DSGE              Erceg et al. (2006)
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York      Sticky Price             DSGE            Del Negro et al. (2013)
 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago       Sticky Price             DSGE              Brave et al. (2012)
 ECB (NAWM)                            Sticky Price             DSGE            Christoffel et al. (2008)
 ECB (FF)                              Sticky Price             DSGE            Christiano et al. (2010)
 BoE (BEQM)                            Sticky Price         Reduced Form         Harrison et al. (2005)
 BoE (COMPASS)                         Sticky Price       DSGE/Reduced Form      Burgess et al. (2013)
 Riksbank (RAMSES I or II)             Sticky Price             DSGE            Adolfson et al. (2011)


2.1     Why So Little Diversity?

In some respects, it is not surprising that there exists little diversity in the core model of price
and wage adjustment used in central bank models or within academic research. The sticky-price
model delivers “reasonable” empirical fit: This property was emphasized in the (single equation)
analysis of Gali and Gertler (1999) and Sbordone (2002) and confirmed in a number of later studies
concurrent with the rise of DSGE models at central banks (e.g. Kiley (2007)). As a consequence, the
first set of empirically successful DSGE models adopted this framework (e.g., Smets and Wouters
(2007)). Moreover, there is research that has confirmed that such models are as good (or perhaps
bad, as forecasting is difficult) as professionals at prediction (e.g., Edge et al. (2009) and Del Negro
and Schorfheide (2013)). Subsequent modeling efforts drew on this literature.
      A variety of studies have pointed to concerns regarding the sticky-price specification. We high-
light those raised in Mankiw and Reis (2002) and subsequent work – in particular, their emphasis
on the notion that the forward-looking nature of the sticky-price model had seemingly counter-
factual predictions regarding the effects of anticipated shocks; this observation will prove useful
in our analysis, as behavior at the zero-lower bound depends importantly on anticipation effects.
The alternative of sticky-information delivers a central role for expectations management – but
the expectations that matter are past expectations for current conditions, rather than expectations
for future conditions – a contrast that will prove important. Empirical work has found mixed
evidence regarding the fit of this approach, largely based on smaller models (e.g., Meyer-Gohde
(2010)), This evidence does not suggest such a framework should not be considered in applied pol-
icy research. Given this, it may be that other factors, including inertia in the research process and
the fact that sticky-information models are (slightly) more challenging to incorporate and estimate
in DSGE models: For example, the models do not fit compactly in the state-space representation
of software such as DYNARE (Adjemian et al. (2011)); that said, estimation and simulation is
certainly feasible (e.g., Reis (2009)) and there is code widely available (e.g., Meyer-Gohde (2010)).




                                                      4
2.2     Consequences of A Lack of Diversity

A comprehensive review of the differences between the sticky-price and sticky-information frame-
works is well beyond our scope. But there are differences in how these specifications behave at
the zero-lower bound which bear importantly on our consideration of effective policy strategies
and which suggest that greater consideration of significantly different frameworks, such as sticky
prices and sticky information, would benefit policy analysis.
      These differences can be illustrated with a three-equation model, consisting of a New-Keynesian
IS curve (determining output y), a monetary policy reaction function (determining the nominal
interest rate r), and an inflation/price (p) equation (where the last is either a sticky-price or sticky-
information Phillips curve):

                                    ∞   h                                    i
                            yt = −σ ∑ Et rt+ j − ( pt+1+ j − pt+ j ) − rt∗+ j ,                       (1)
                                      j =0

                             rt = max rt∗ + φ∆p Et ( pt+1 − pt ) + φy yt , 0 ,
                                     
                                                                                                      (2)

The nominal interest rate (rt ) is constrained by the zero-lower bound and rt∗ is the natural (real)
rate of interest, which is assumed to be exogenously determined. The parameter σ (> 0) controls
the interest rate elasticity of output, while φ∆p and φy govern the monetary authority’s response
to inflation and output, respectively. If the current and anticipated natural rate of interest does
not lead to a binding zero lower bound (ZLB), the nominal interest rate will equal the natural rate,
and output and the price level will be stabilized at their steady-state values.
      The price equations in the sticky-price and sticky-information cases are given by

                                                 ∞
                                pt − pt−1 = Et ∑ ηαyt+ j ,                                            (3)
                                                 j =0
                                                 ∞
                                        pt = λ ∑ (1 − λ) j Et− j [ pt + αyt ]                         (4)
                                                j =0


where α governs the link between marginal cost and output and η and λ are related to the process
of price or information adjustment. Note that we have included no disturbances other than the
real natural rate of interest. As a result, the output gap, in the price equations, equals output.
      Absent the ZLB, these models predict exactly the same sequence for output, nominal interest
rates, and prices. While this result is special to the very limited set of disturbances and type
of monetary policy considered, it is a clue that empirical work may have trouble differentiating
between these models, as we will find below. However, the models can differ notably at the ZLB.
As can be seen through comparing (3), which includes expectations of future conditions, with
(4), a persistent anticipated swing in output has potentially important effects under sticky prices
that are absent under sticky information; as a result, a persistently binding ZLB may lead to quite
different movements in output and the price level across frameworks. To see this, consider an
example in which it is known that the natural rate of interest will be rr n < 0 for T periods (and set

                                                        5
     Table 2: ZLB Episode (of T + 1 periods) in Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models
               Sticky Price                                   Sticky Information
 Period (j)         yj                p j − p j −1                     yj                             pj
 t+T+1              0                      0                              0                            0
                                                                    (1 − λ ) T +1             1−(1−λ) T +1
 t+T               σrr n               ηασrr n           σ ((1−λ)T+1 +(1−(1−λ)T+1 )ασ) rr n    (1 − λ ) T +1
                                                                                                             αyt+T
                                                                      (1− λ ) T               1−(1−λ) T
 t+T−1        σ(2 + ηασ)rr n   ηασ(1 + (2 + ηασ ))rr n    2σ ((1−λ)T +(1−(1−λ)T )ασ) rr n      (1− λ ) T
                                                                                                         αyt+T −1
Notes: Assumes that the natural rate of interest equals rr n < 0 in periods t through T and 0 in all
other periods.


to 0 in all other periods). This brings about a binding zero lower bound from periods t through
t + T. The effects on output and prices for each model are reported in Table 2.
   Several properties of these outcomes are important. First, the output response in the sticky-
price model is bounded above (that is, the decline in output is larger, as rr n < 0) by the remaining
drop in the natural rate of interest multiplied by the interest rate elasticity (e.g., σ in period t+T, 2σ
in period t + T − 1, etc.), whereas this is the lower bound for the drop in output (that is, the decline
in output is smaller) in the sticky-information model. Moreover, the initial decline in output can
be much larger than this upper bound for the sticky-price case for a very persistent event (a large
T) because the additional disinflation in each intervening period between t and t + T can raise
real interest rates substantially. Indeed, summing the inflation responses for the sticky price case
can imply a large swing in the price level for this model in the event of a persistent zero lower
bound episode. In contrast, the price level (in this particular example) is anchored, in the long
run, at baseline in the sticky-information model. This occurs because the passive approach to
the price level in the monetary policy rule (2), which only responds to expected inflation and
output (and not the price level) interacts with the sluggish adjustment of information to limit
price level movements (as those price setters with updated information want to keep their prices
near those from price setters without updated information, which remain near baseline). Because
the price level is anchored, real interest rates do not rise by a large amount through the effects
a substantial period of disinflation on real interest rates, and hence the output (and inflation)
declines are moderate relative to the sticky price model.
   Perhaps just as significantly, amplification of “larger” shocks can be large in the sticky-price
model. Consider the sticky-information model first: Iterating backward to period t, we see that the
response of output in period 0 increases linearly with the size of the shock, where size is denoted
by its length, T; in particular, the long-run price level is pinned down, and hence disinflation
does not contribute to a large increase in real interest rates that depresses output substantially.
In contrast, in the sticky-price model the response of inflation increases (that is, inflation falls)
exponentially with increases in the horizon T, as anticipated disinflation feeds through to current
disinflation and lower real interest rates. Therefore, amplification is highly nonlinear at the zero-
lower bound under sticky prices – extending the duration of the zero-lower bound leads to larger


                                                     6
and larger declines in output.
      The simple intuition we have highlighted depends on the simple nature of the model, as well
as the assumed form of monetary policy (where the fact the the nominal interest rate responds
to expected (one-period ahead) inflation contributes to the anchored long-run price level under
sticky-information). Nonetheless, aspects of this intuition will carry over to a larger model – which
includes more complicated dynamics and alternative policy strategies. Moreover, this intuition is
important for understanding a spate of research on the New Keynesian model at the zero lower
bound. For example, the effects of backward induction in the sticky-price model (through Equa-
tion 3) explain why forward guidance is so very powerful in the sticky-price model, as reported
in, for example, Levin et al. (2010), Laseen and Svensson (2011), Del Negro et al. (2012), Carlstrom
et al. (2012), and Burgess et al. (2013). Under extended forward guidance to be accommodative, in-
flation, through backward induction, can raise inflation substantially and lower real interest rates,
thereby stabilizing activity and inflation. These effects are absent under sticky information, as only
past expectations of current conditions matter – not current expectations of future conditions.2


3     Empirical Evidence
We now turn to an empirical examination of the sticky-price and sticky-information frameworks.
First, we introduce the model and data used in the estimation and subsequent policy experiments.
Next, we compare the estimated sticky-price and sticky-information variants of the model in their
assessments of key drivers and mechanism behind the US economy. Then, we examine the fit
of both models using measures of in-sample fit. Finally, we discuss some the robustness of the
results.


3.1     Model Description

We use the model of Smets and Wouters (2007) as a baseline model for estimation and simulation
exercises. The model is a benchmark in macroeconomics and forms the core of many larger, more
recent New Keynesian DSGE models such as those displayed in Table 1.
      We present the key log-linearized equilibrium conditions for the sticky-price and sticky-information
variants of the model; Smets and Wouters (2007) contains more details. Consumers face both con-
sumption (ĉt ) and labor (lˆt ) decisions–which enter non-separably into their utility function. De-
noting the nominal interest rate by r̂t and inflation by π̂t , the intertemporal consumption decision
   2 Kiley (2014) shows that this intuition is important for a range of results at the zero lower bound associated with

the sticky-price New Keynesian model, including the power of forward guidance, the size of the fiscal multiplier, the
paradox of thrift, and the paradox of volatility. Carlstrom et al. (2012) note the first of these points – that is, that forward
guidance performs differently in the sticky-information model.




                                                               7
is described by the following linearized Euler equation.

                                  h/γ                1                 wlc (σc − 1) ˆ
                        ĉt =           ĉt−1 +            Et ĉt+1 +               (lt − Et lˆt+1 )                 (5)
                                1 + h/γ         1 + h/γ                σc (1 + h/γ)
                                    1 − h/γ                           1 − h/γ b
                                −              (r̂t − Et π̂t+1 ) −               ε
                                  (1 + h/γ)σc                       (1 + h/γ)σc t

The quantity h/γ denotes habit in consumption, adjusted for technological growth; σc is the the
coefficient of relative risk aversion over consumption-leisure bundles; wlc weights steady-state
labor income to consumption. The variable εbt is an exogenous process. It can be thought of as
a wedge between the nominal rate controlled by the Central Bank (rt ) and those faced by con-
sumers (r̂t + εbt ). It follows an autoregressive process: εbt = ρb εbt−1 + ηtb , with ηtb independently-
and normally-distributed. We will tend to refer to this shock as a “risk premium” shock, reflecting
its role as a wedge between the central bank rate and the return affecting household decisions.
     Output is produced using installed capital (k̂s ) and labor (lˆt ) via an aggregate Cobb-Douglas
                                                                  t
production technology subject to fixed costs.

                                            ŷt = Φ(αk̂st + (1 − α)lˆt + ε at )                                      (6)

Φ is an parameter incorporating fixed costs (which generate short-run increasing returns to scale)
and 1 − α represents labor’s share of income. The exogenous variable ε at represents total factor
productivity, it follows an autoregressive process: ε at = ρ a ε at−1 + ηta , with ηta independently- and
normally-distributed. Capital is available only with a lag, but can be utilized at different rates
contemporaneously, or, k̂st = k̂ t−1 + ẑt , where k̂ t is capital and ẑt represents utilization. Utilization
is a function of the return on capital r̂tk , ẑt = (1 − ψ)/ψr̂tk , where ψ is parameter reflecting the (real)
cost of adjustment.
     Capital depreciates at rate δ and is accumulated via investment ît . The accumulation process
is given by:

                         (1 − δ )
               k̂ t =             k̂ t−1 + (1 − (1 − δ)/γ)ît + (1 − (1 − δ)/γ) ϕγ2 (1 + βγ(1−σc ) )εit              (7)
                            γ

The exogenous variable εit is an investment-specific technology shock, which has been suggested
as an important driver of the business cycle.3 It follows an autoregressive process: εit = ρi εit−1 + ηti ,
with ηti independently- and normally-distributed. The parameter ϕ represents the real cost of ad-
justment of capital. The presence of adjustment costs implies that investment responds sluggishly,
as described by its own Euler equation:

                                1                         βγ(1−σc )                         1
                 ît =                −
                                             î t − 1 +            −
                                                                          Et ît+1 +                     q̂t + εit   (8)
                           1 + βγ ( 1   σc )            1 + βγ ( 1   σc )            ϕγ (1 + βγ(1−σc ) )
                                                                                       2

   3 The   code on the American Economic Review website for Smets and Wouters (2007) is missing the factor (1 +
βγ(1−σc ) ); we reintroduce it into the model.



                                                                8
Here q̂t represents the value of the capital stock. Demand for capital is linked to the marginal
product of capital and the interest rates in the model, r̂tk , and r̂t , via:

             q̂t = β(1 − δ)γ−σc Et q̂t+1 − r̂t + Et π̂t+1 + (1 − β(1 − δ)γ−σc ) Et r̂tk+1 − εbt .           (9)

Price Setting. The Smets and Wouters (2007) features a continuum of firms exerting some pricing
power via monopolistic competition. The model assumes the “standard” sticky-price framework
with pricing as in Calvo (1983): each period, a (random) fraction 1 − λ p of firms may freely adjust
their price. Other firms may partially index a fraction (ι p ) of their price to an inflation adjusted
version of last periods price. This framework leads to a version of the New-Keynesian Phillips
curve:

                                       βγ(1−σc )                          ιp
                            π̂t =                  −
                                                          Et π̂t+1 +               π̂t−1              (PC-SP)
                                    1 + ι p βγ ( 1   σc )            1 + βγ(1−σc )
                                        (1 − βγ(1−σc ) λ p )(1 − λ p )                p
                               +                                             m̂ct + ε t
                                    (1 + ι p βγ(1−σc ) )(1 + (Φ − 1)e p )λ p

Here, e p represents the steady state markup over costs, while the steady state profit share enters
due to assumption on the aggregator used combine differentiated goods. While the parameter
restrictions are specific to this model, Equation (PC-SP) embodies the contemporary Phillips curve:
current inflation depends on both lagged inflation and expectations of tomorrow’s inflation. The
“fundamental” relationship is one between price inflation and marginal costs (m̂ct = αrtk + (1 −
α)ŵt − ε at ). In Smets and Wouters (2007), an important exogenous driver of inflation is the price
                  p                                                    p         p         p   p
markup shock ε t , which follows an ARMA(1, 1) process: ε t = ρ p ε t−1 + ηt − µ p ηt−1 .
    Our formulation of the Phillips curve with sticky-information follows Reis (2009). In each
period only a fraction (λ p ) firms can update their information set.

                                                ∞
                                                                           ∆m̂ct
                                                                                               
                    λp
                                   m̂ct + λ p ∑ (1 − λ p ) Et− j−1
                                                          j                                          p
 π̂t =                                                                                     + π̂t + ε t . (PC-SI)
       (1 − λ p )(1 + (Φ − 1)e p )            j =0
                                                                     ( 1 + ( Φ − 1 ) e p )

Note that only past expectations of the current marginal costs and inflation matter for inflation
today. There is no direct influence of expected future conditions, as is present in in the sticky-price
case (as can be seen by iterating Equation (PC-SP) forward).
    In Smets and Wouters (2007) wages are governed by similar mechanisms, with the fundamen-
tal driver being the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption as in Erceg




                                                          9
et al. (2000). The dynamics for real wages (ŵt ) follows

                             βγ(1−σc )                                      1
                   ŵt =              −
                                             ( Et ŵt+1 + Et π̂t+1 ) +               (ŵt−1 − ι w π̂t−1 )   (10)
                           1 + βγ ( 1   σc )                           1 + βγ(1−σc )
                     1 + βγ(1−σc ) ι w              (1 − βγ(1−σc ) λw )(1 − λw )
                      −                π̂ t +                                    µ̂w + εwt .
                       1 + βγ(1−σc )          (1 + βγ(1−σc ) )(1 + (Φw − 1)ew )λw t
                              ˆ        1
              −µ̂w
                 t = ŵt − σl lt −            (ĉt − h/γĉt−1 )                                             (11)
                                   1 − h/γ

The parameters λw and ι w are the wage counterparts of their price parameters, while ew and Φw
are related to the steady-state wage markup. The variable µw
                                                           t refers to the wedge between the
wage and the marginal rate of substitution. The exogenous markup shock εwt follows an ARMA(1,
1), like the price process: εwt = ρw εwt−1 + ηtw − µw ηtw−1 . The sticky-information curve is, by contrast,

                 ŵt                        λw
                      − ŵt−1 =                              µ̂w                                            (12)
               1 − λw           (1 − λw )(1 + (Φw − 1)ew ) t
                                     ∞
                                                                 ∆t µ̂w
                                                                                      
                              + λw ∑ (1 − λw ) Et− j−1
                                              j                       t
                                                                                  + π̂t + εwt .
                                   j =0
                                                         ( 1 + ( Φ w  − 1 ) e w )

As with the price Phillips curve, it is the past expectations of the (change in the) wedge between
the wage and the marginal rate of substitution that drive the sticky-information curve.
Closing the Model. The model is closed by the resource constraint,

                                                                                g
                                             ŷt = cy ĉt + iy ît + zy ẑt + ε t .                         (13)

               g                                                                                            g
The variable ε t represents an exogenous demand shock which follows the following process: ε t =
                     g
ρ g ε at−1 + ρ ga ηta + ηt . The presence of the technology shock ηta in the process reflects the fact that
productivity may influence demand–such as through net exports–see Smets and Wouters (2007).
Finally, the monetary authority follows the Taylor-type rule:

                               r̂t = ρr̂t−1 + (1 − ρ)(rπ (π̂t − π̂t∗ ) + ry (ŷt − ŷ∗t ))                  (14)
                                  + r∆y ((ŷt − ŷ∗t ) − (ŷt−1 − ŷ∗t−1 )) + εrt .

The starred variables refer to the counter-factual quantities in the absence of nominal rigidities in
prices and wages, so that the monetary authority is responding to the so-called “flexible-price out-
put gap.” Here ρ indicates the inertia embodied in the monetary policy rule, while rπ , ry , and r∆y ,
refer to the monetary authorities response to inflation, the output gap, and the change in the out-
put gap, respectively. We have departed from Smets and Wouters (2007) by adding an exogenous,
time-varying inflation target π̂t∗ (as in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2013)). The target follows an
                                         ∗             ∗
AR(1) process, π̂t∗ = ρπ̂t∗−1 + ηtπ , with ηtπ independently- and normally-distributed. The mon-
etary policy shock εrt also follows an AR(1) process, εrt = ρr εrt−1 + ηtr , with ηtr independently- and
normally-distributed.


                                                              10
3.2    Estimation

We estimate the sticky-price and sticky-information versions of the model to assess the relative
empirical fits of the paradigms and to recover plausible parameterizations for the policy experi-
ments given later. Our estimation is informed by eight macroeconomic time series. The first seven
are those of Smets and Wouters (2007), given below.

                                    per capita output growth = γ + ŷt − ŷt−1
                             per capita consumption growth = γ + ĉt − ĉt−1
                                per capita investment growth = γ + ît − ît−1
                                      per capita wage growth = γ + ŵt − ŵt−1
                                                     hours index = l¯ + lˆt
                                                   GDP deflator = π̄ + π̂t
                                              federal funds rate = r̄ + r̂t

The parameter γ represents the steady state growth rate of output, consumption, investment, and
             ¯ π̄, and r̄ represent steady state labor, inflation, and interest rates. The eigth time
wages, while l,
series is data on long-run expected inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, which
we link to the model by:

                                                                       40
                                                                  1
                                  expected inflation = π̄ +
                                                                 40    ∑ Et [π̂t+ j ].
                                                                       j =1


Our estimation sample uses data from the so-called “Great Moderation” period (1984-2007), re-
flecting evidence of a break in monetary policy with important consequences for macroeconomic
dynamics (e.g., Boivin et al. (2010)). In the robustness section, we consider including a larger por-
tion of the postwar period. We do not include the zero-lower bound period in our estimation to
avoid dealing with this non-linearity in estimation.
      We employ likelihood-based methods to estimate the model. First, we solve the model for
a (locally) unique rational expectations equilibrium, using the method of Meyer-Gohde (2010).
Importantly, this method accounts explicitly for the presence of an infinite number of lagged ex-
pectations within the sticky-information model and avoids arbitrarily truncating equilibrium con-
ditions, which can affect inference. The solution for the observables, denoted by yt in a slight
abuse of notation, is described by MA(∞),

                                                        ∞
                                             yt = ȳ + ∑ Θ j ηt− j ,                                            (15)
                                                       j =0

                            g            p     ∗
where ηt = [ηta , ηti , ηtb , ηt , ηtm , ηtw , ηt , ηtπ ]0 , the vector of innovations to structural shocks and ȳ is
the unconditional mean of yt . A key to the Meyer-Gohde (2010) algorithm is that for sufficiently


                                                         11
large j, Θ j follows a recursive law of motion.
      The objective is to estimate the parameter vector θ, where θ is comprised of 37 parameters: the
35 estimated by Smets and Wouters (2007) and [ρπ ∗ , σπ ∗ ].4 To estimate θ for both models, which
we index Msi (sticky information) and Msp (sticky price), we rely on Bayesian inference. Under
the Bayesian approach, a prior distribution, represented by the density p(θ |Mi ) is combined with
the likelihood function p(Y o |θ, M) for the observed data Y o (= {yt }tT=1 ), to obtain, via Bayes rule,
the posterior:
                             p(θ |Y o , Mi ) ∝ p(Y o |θ, Mi ) p(θ |Mi )      i ∈ {sp, si }.

The autocovariance function for yt from (15), together with the normality assumption on ηt , makes
construction of the likelihood function is straightforward. To complete the model specification, we
must specify a prior distribution over the parameters for each model, p(θ |Mi ). For both models,
we use the priors for Smets and Wouters (2007), which are listed in Appendix Table A-1. This
means that the priors for the parameters representing information rigidities in the sticky informa-
tion model, [λ p , λw ], are the same as the Calvo parameters in the sticky-price model.
      To facilitate estimation, we must access the posterior p(θ |Y o , Mi ) for each model. Unfortu-
nately, the posteriors are analytically intractible, owing to the complex ways θ enters the likeli-
hood function. To produce draws from the posteriors, we resort to Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
techniques for the baseline models and Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for the ex-
panded suite of models in the robustness section. Detailed information on SMC and MCMC for
DSGE models can be found in Herbst and Schorfheide (forthcoming) and An and Schorfheide
(2007).


3.3     Results

Parameter Estimates. Overall, the estimates for parameters not directly related to the wage and
price blocks–including those associated with the monetary policy rule–are similar across the two
models. We present a complete description of the posterior in the Appendix (Table A-2) and con-
centrate here on the parameters which exhibit meaningful differences. Table 3 displays the poste-
rior estimates for the parameters associated with wages and prices in the model. For the sticky-
information model (the left set of columns), the estimates indicate that both wages and prices
exhibit substantial sluggishness via information adjustment. The posterior mode of λ p ≈ 0.33, in-
dicates that only a third of firms adjust behavior in response to current shocks (the mean is slightly
lower, because the posterior is assymmetric). Wages are only marginally more responsive, with
a central tendency of λw ≈ 0.40. Compared to the sticky-price estimates, the proportion of firms
or unions which change their prices contemporaneously is roughly the same, in our formulation,
because under the sticky-price model λi , is the probability a firm (union) will not be able to reset
its prices (wages). For the sticky-price model, both of these are around one half, which the price
   4 For the sticky information model, we do not estimate [ ι , ι ] the indexation parameters. As in SW, we fix δ = 0.025,
                                                             p w
gy = 0.18, e p = ew = 10, Φw = 1.5, and γ = 0.43 for both models.



                                                           12
                          Table 3: Posterior Moments of Key Parameters

                                 Sticky Information                         Sticky Prices
           Parameter     Mode     Mean [0.05, 0.95]                Mode     Mean [0.05, 0.95]
           λp            0.34      0.26 [ 0.16, 0.35]              0.65      0.64 [ 0.55, 0.73]
           ιp             NA                                       0.39      0.43 [ 0.30, 0.58]
           ρp            0.92      0.89      [ 0.82, 0.94]         0.93      0.92 [ 0.84, 0.98]
           µp            0.52      0.50      [ 0.36, 0.61]         0.72      0.67 [ 0.48, 0.80]
           σp            0.18      0.18      [ 0.16, 0.21]         0.10      0.10 [ 0.09, 0.12]
           λw            0.42      0.41      [ 0.23, 0.56]         0.47      0.49 [ 0.38, 0.62]
           ιw             NA                                       0.48      0.48 [ 0.31, 0.64]
           ρw            0.95      0.92      [ 0.81, 0.97]         0.97      0.97 [ 0.93, 0.99]
           µw            0.45      0.40      [ 0.20, 0.62]         0.69      0.66 [ 0.48, 0.83]
           σw            1.34      1.37      [ 0.96, 1.92]         0.38      0.38 [ 0.30, 0.47]



Calvo parameter being slightly higher at 0.64. The sticky-price model features substantial price
and wage inertia in the form of indexation (ι p ≈ 0.4, ι w ≈ 0.5), while this is not present in the
sticky-information model (by assumption). No less important are the differences between the pa-
rameter estimates of the exogenous markups in the model. Recall that the exogenous markups εit
follow ARMA(1, 1) processes,

                              εit = ρi εit−1 + ηti − µi ηti−1 ,   i ∈ { p, w}.

While the ARMA processes have roughly similar AR components, the MA parameters are substan-
tially different. For example, the means of the MA parameter associated with the wage markup
is about two-thirds the magnitude in the sticky-information model (µw ≈ 0.40) than in the sticky-
price model (µw ≈ 0.66). The purpose of this structure in the original SW model is to allow the
model to better track high frequency movements in the markup (and its effect on observables). The
attenuated coefficients for the sticky-information model–coupled with the fact that the overall fit
of the two models are about the same under that baseline setup–suggests the that dynamics of the
sticky-information model are better suited to explain the aggregate wage and price data with less
help from elaborate exogenous drivers. (On the other hand, the magnitude of the innovations to
the markup shocks is larger in the sticky-information model.) We later consider the effect of fixing
the parameters at 0 to confirm this hypothesis.
Model Dynamics. The model responses to two important (unanticipated) shocks, namely the
neutral technology and wage markup shock, illustrate some of the similarities of the alternative
price specifications for macroeconomic dynamics. Figure 1 shows the response of output, infla-
tion, and interest rates to one standard deviation shocks. Responses are broadly similar across the
sticky-price and sticky-information models. Notice that the peak (trough) of the output/inflation
responses is delayed (and larger) under the sticky-information model than under the sticky-price
model. The wage markup shock, in particular, implies a difficult choice for the monetary author-


                                                     13
                   Figure 1: Responses to Technology and Wage Markup Shocks
                               ea −> y                    ea −> pinf                    ea −> r
                     0.5                       0.01                          0.01

                                                 0                             0
                     0.4
                                                                            −0.01
                                              −0.01
                     0.3                                                    −0.02
                                              −0.02
                     0.2                                                    −0.03
                                              −0.03
                                                                            −0.04
                     0.1                      −0.04                         −0.05

                      0                       −0.05                         −0.06
                           0     20      40           0      20        40           0     20      40


                               ew −> y                    ew −> pinf                    ew −> r
                      0                         0.1                          0.03

                                               0.08
                    −0.2                                                     0.02
                                               0.06
                    −0.4                       0.04                          0.01

                    −0.6                       0.02                            0
                                                 0
                    −0.8                                                    −0.01
                                              −0.02

                     −1                       −0.04                         −0.02
                           0     20      40           0      20        40           0     20      40



Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (solid line) and sticky-information (dashed line)
models to an unanticipated technology shock (top row) and an unanticipated wage markup shock
(bottom row), computed at the respective posterior modes.


ity, as output falls and inflation rises in response to this shock. This similarity in response to shocks
is shared across the shocks hitting the models.
   Another way to compare the sticky-price and sticky-information models is by examining the
relative importance each model assigns to shocks at various horizons. Figure 2 shows forecast
error variance decompositions for output, inflation, and interest rates for 4-quarters, 12-quarters,
and 1000-quarters ahead. Roughly speaking, the decompositions for the sticky-price and sticky-
information models are about the same, indicating that the two paradigms point to the same
drivers of the business cycle. One slight difference, however, is that inflation at shorter horizons
(4 and 12 quarters), is less affected by demand shocks in the sticky-information model. To the
extent that one views the importance of markup shocks as a measure of misspecification, this is
a strike against the sticky-information model. On the other hand, this indicates that the sticky-
information model can rationalize readings of moderate inflation in the face of large amounts
of slack in the economy, as seen in the Great Recession. Overall, though, these decompositions
indicate the the models view business cycles similarly.
   Another way to examine differences across models is to ask how these models have interpreted
the last 30 or so years in terms of the sources of business cycles. While there are many ways of po-
tentially examining this issue, we look at a simple measure of differences between models. Specif-
ically, at the posterior mode of each model, we use the Kalman Smoother to produce smoothed
sequences of fundamental shocks from each model. We then compute the (contemporaneous) cor-


                                                           14
       Figure 2: Variance Decompositions for Sticky-price and Sticky-information Models

                                 Output                         Inflation                         Interest Rate
                          1                              1                                   1
              h=4




                                             h=4




                                                                                 h=4
                         0.5                            0.5                                 0.5



                          0                              0                                   0
                               SI     SP                       SI      SP                          SI      SP
                                 Output                         Inflation                         Interest Rate
                          1                              1                                   1
              h = 12




                                             h = 12




                                                                                 h = 12
                         0.5                            0.5                                 0.5



                          0                              0                                   0
                               SI     SP                       SI      SP                          SI      SP
                                 Output                         Inflation                         Interest Rate
                          1                              1                                   1
              h = 1000




                                             h = 1000




                                                                                 h = 1000
                         0.5                            0.5                                 0.5

               Tech
                    0
               Demand                                    0                                   0
                               SI     SP                       SI      SP                          SI      SP
               Markup
               Pitarg



Notes: Figure show the forecast error variance decompositions for 4-quarter (top row), 12-quarter
(middle row), and 1000-quarter (bottom) row for output, inflation, and interest rates.


relations across the models, listed in Table 4. As can be seen in Table 4, the correlations for the
smoothed estimates of the technology, monetary policy, demand, and inflation targets shocks are
very close to one, implying that these shocks are estimated virtually identically (up to a scale) in
the sticky-information and sticky-price models. Less highly correlated are the risk and price and
wage markup shocks. In particular, the price markup “only” has a correlation of 0.908 between the
two models, which though still high, represents a substantive difference between the two models,
touched on above.

                               Table 4: Correlations of Smoothed Structural Shocks
      Shock                                              Correlation        Shock                                 Correlation
      Neutral Technology Shock                             0.998            Price Markup Shock                      0.908
      Risk Shock                                           0.939            Wage Markup Shock                       0.930
      Demand Shock                                         0.999            Monetary Policy Shock                   0.996
      Investment-specific Tech. Shock                      0.994            Inflation Target Shock                  0.994



   Model Fit. In the Bayesian paradigm, a summary of in sample model fit is reflected in the

                                                                15
so called “marginal data density” (MDD), p(Y o ) =                 p(Y o |θ ) p(θ )dθ. We run the SMC sampler
                                                               R

on each model five times. As a by-product of the sampler, we get (five) estimates of the log of
the marginal data density, ln p̂(Y o |Mi ), i ∈ {si, sp}. Table 5 reports the mean estimate of the
log marginal data density, as well as the standard deviation across the five runs, for both the
sticky-information and sticky-price model. The sticky-information model has a log marginal data
density of −257.83, very slightly higher than the sticky price model, which has a mean of −257.97.
In fact, a strict Bayesian decision-maker who had placed equal prior probability on the two models
would place a posterior probability of about 0.54 on the sticky-information model. Still, posterior
odds in the estimation of DSGE models are often implausible. Moreover, the standard errors
associated with the point estimates are quite large, making it difficult to reject a simple equality-
of-means hypothesis. Finally, as we show in the robustness section, these posterior odds can be
easily magnified in favor of the one model over the other by, for example, eliminating the MA
coefficients on exogenous markup shocks. Overall, we think the data shows that models fit about
equally well.


                                    Table 5: Log MDD Estimates

                             Model                        Log MDD Estimate
                                                           Mean   Std. Dev.
                             Sticky-information           -257.83   0.41
                             Sticky-price                 -257.97   0.50

Notes: Table shows mean and standard deviation of estimate of ln p(Y |Mi ) for the sticky-price
and sticky-information model, computed across five runs of the SMC sampler.

   While the MDD provides a summary measure of model fit, the statistic can be opaque with
respect to exact dimensions of fit, especially in a multivariate setting. An additional tool for as-
sessing model adequacy is the so-called predictive check, as detailed in, for example, Geweke
(2005). Under the posterior, the predictive distribution for the observables can be constructed as,
                                                   Z
                                  p(Y ∗ |Y o ) =       p(Y ∗ |θ ) p(θ |Y o )dθ.

Empirically this can be constructed by taking draws from the posterior and simulating data, Y ∗ .
Objectives of interest are generally statistics of these simulations, S(·), for example standard de-
viations or autocorrelations. Given the posterior predictive distribution p(Y ∗ |Y o ), it is easy to
construct distributions p(S(Y ∗ )|Y o ). A view of fit can be informed by how far the statistic for the
observed data S(Y o ) falls in the tail of the predictive distribution. With a view towards under-
standing the differences between the two models, Table 6 displays posterior predictive checks for
the standard deviations and autocorrelations of each of the seven observables under the baseline
model. Both models behave very similarly – with some trouble fitting all of the (marginal) first
and second autocovariances. Evidently the sticky-information model is slightly better at captur-
ing the behavior of wage growth, owing to the differences in the estimated wage markup shock

                                                       16
processes. On the other hand, the sticky-price model exhibits less overall persistent dynamics and
lower volatility. In the end, no clear model emerges as the winner.


              Table 6: Predictive Checks: Standard Deviations and Autocorrelations

                    YGR             CGR              IGR    WGR        H                               PI              R           PI EXP
                                                       Standard Deviations
           Data      0.54            0.50            1.48    0.72    1.99                            0.23            0.59            0.30
           SI        0.83            0.71            1.94    0.76    3.16                            0.46            0.38            0.20
                   [ 0.69, 1.05]   [ 0.53, 0.93]   [ 1.54, 2.49]   [ 0.65, 0.89]   [ 1.82, 6.06]   [ 0.27, 0.69]   [ 0.23, 0.55]   [ 0.10, 0.31]

           SP        0.79            0.68            1.80            0.84            2.43            0.46            0.37            0.18
                   [ 0.66, 0.92]   [ 0.57, 0.80]   [ 1.44, 2.27]   [ 0.67, 1.00]   [ 1.40, 3.71]   [ 0.33, 0.63]   [ 0.26, 0.55]   [ 0.10, 0.34]

                                                         Autocorrelations
           Data      0.18            0.10            0.50    0.13     0.95                           0.60            0.96           NaN
           SI        0.44            0.53            0.65    0.11     0.95                           0.85            0.91           0.93
                   [ 0.23, 0.63]   [ 0.33, 0.71]   [ 0.52, 0.77]   [-0.11, 0.30]   [ 0.91, 0.98]   [ 0.66, 0.93]   [ 0.85, 0.96]   [ 0.85, 0.97]

           SP        0.40            0.49            0.60            0.31            0.94            0.83            0.91            0.92
                   [ 0.25, 0.56]   [ 0.30, 0.63]   [ 0.46, 0.75]   [ 0.06, 0.51]   [ 0.88, 0.98]   [ 0.74, 0.90]   [ 0.84, 0.95]   [ 0.84, 0.97]



Notes: The table shows moments (mean, 5th and 95th percentile) of the posterior predictive distri-
bution for the sticky-price (SP) and sticky-information (SI) model under the baseline assumptions.




3.4   Robustness.

We take the above results to show that the sticky-information and sticky-price model have very
similar properties in response to (unanticipated) shocks, point to the same key drivers of the busi-
ness cycle. In fact, a strictly Bayesian decision-maker with only the two above models at her
disposal would place substantial weight on the both models, based on the marginal data densities
in Table 5. In this section, we examine the effects changes in the estimation sample and other
model modifications, listed below.

  1. AR(1) shock processes. We have above discussed that some of the key differences in the
      estimation relate to the parameters associated with exogenous wage and price markups.
      Moreover, the ARMA(1, 1) specification of these processes is at odds with the other exoge-
      nous processes assumed in Smets and Wouters (2007). This might be important, because
      in likelihood-based estimation, the parameters of a DSGE models are identified, roughly
      speaking, by matching the model-implied autocovariances of observables to those seen in
      the data. The assumptions on the autocovariance structure of the exogenous process could
      play an important role in the identification. In this variant of the model, we consider the SW
      model with AR(1) exogenous processes. That is,

                                                           ρ ga = 0, µ p = 0, µw = 0.


                                                                         17
   2. Sticky-information: prices only, wages only. To assess the marginal impact of each the
      sticky-information assumptions, we estimate variants of the model with either sticky-information
      in only prices or wages.

   3. Financial Frictions. The lack of so-called financial frictions in DSGE models was brought
      into sharp relief during the recent financial crisis. We incorporate financial frictions by in-
      cluded the BBB spread as an observable:

                                                                  40
                                                             1         h       i
                                                    ¯ +
                                          Spread = sp
                                                             40   ∑ Et   ε b
                                                                           t+ j .
                                                                  j =1


      To avoid stochastic singularity, we also incorporate a preference shock into the model. This
      is an easy way of capturing empirically the mechanisms at play.5

We estimate the models on the relevant datasets using samples from 1966-2007 and 1984-2007.
We compute point estimates of marginal data densities using the harmonic mean estimator, in-
stead of the SMC sampler, as in the baseline cases, for computational feasibility. The results are
displayed in Table 7. A few clear points emerge. For one, as under the baseline case, there
is no clearly preferred model. Indeed, small model changes can push model odds more than
one might expect–this kind of implausibility of posterior odds is pervasive in estimated DSGE
models. Second, on the other hand, is it clear that the sticky-price model “relies” much more
heavily on the ARMA(1, 1) markup processes to improve model fit than the sticky-information
model. The sticky-information model is less sensitive to changes along these lines. For example,
the inclusion of the MA coefficients result in an incremental improvement of fit of the sticky-price
model by about 40 log points when considering the model where spreads are observed. Moreover,
the sticky-information variants of the model are uniformly heavily favored under this modifica-
tion. Third, the relative importance of the sticky-information assumption in prices versus wages
is sensitive to sample size and auxiliary model assumptions: it is safer to say, then, that the joint
dynamics of these objects are crucial.6
    Taken together, we view this evidence as suggesting that the sticky-information model rep-
resents a reasonable alternative to the sticky-price model in tracking the co-movements of major
macroeconomic aggregates over the past 50 years. Given that, it should be among the frameworks
used when conducting policy experiments going forward.
   5 We also estimated versions with a financial accelerator under sticky-information and sticky-prices with broadly

similar results.
   6 An important caveat when interpreting marginal data density estimates from the modified harmonic mean (MHM)

estimator may be unreliable when taken over large and complex posteriors. Herbst and Schorfheide (forthcoming)
document that with standard priors, the MHM does reliably estimate the log MDD for the Smets-Wouters model.




                                                        18
                            Table 7: Log Marginal Likelihood Estimates

                                    Sticky Prices Sticky Information Prob(SI)
                         Dataset: SW07 + Inflation Expectations, 1966-2007
                   Baseline            -803.49           -813.93         (0.00)
                   No MA terms         -838.02           -830.84         (1.00)
                   SI Prices Only                -811.47                   —
                   SI Wages Only                 -803.66                   —
                         Dataset: SW07 + Inflation Expectations, 1984-2007
                   Baseline            -257.83           -257.97         (0.54)
                   No MA terms         -274.18           -269.73         (0.99)
                   SI Prices Only                -255.64                   —
                   SI Wages Only                 -264.17                   —
                    Dataset: SW07 + Inflation Expectations + Spread, 1966-2007
                   Baseline            -668.93           -677.04         (0.00)
                   No MA terms         -711.52           -696.84         (1.00)
                   SI Prices Only                -678.62                   —
                   SI Wages Only                 -667.51                   —
                    Dataset: SW07 + Inflation Expectations + Spread, 1984-2007
                   Baseline            -158.72           -154.03         (0.99)
                   No MA terms         -178.76           -169.75         (1.00)

Notes: First two columns list the point estimates of log MDDs for the sticky-information and
sticky-price models. The last column lists the marginal posterior model probability for the sticky-
information model, assuming a prior probability of 0.5.


4     Differences in the Environment Between Sticky-Price and Sticky-
      Information Equilibria
Our empirical analysis suggests that the alternative specifications of price adjustment imply quite
similar dynamics following key structural shocks, present a similar decomposition of history into
structural drivers, and provide similar fits of the data. In sum, a look at macroeconomic data
provides little discrimination across the alternative views of price dynamics.
      Nonetheless, the models differ along an important dimension – specifically, how anticipated
future conditions feed into current outcomes. And these differences have implications for mone-
tary policy,


4.1     Anticipation Effects and Monetary Policy Shocks

As highlighted in the simple model presented in Section 2.2, anticipation effects are different
across sticky-price and sticky-information models: Sticky-price models imply that expected fu-
ture conditions directly affect inflation (and hence real activity through real interest rates), whereas
such effects are indirect, and hence less important, under sticky information.
      These differences can be seen by examining the response of the models to unanticipated and

                                                  19
anticipated surprises in monetary policy. Figure 3 displays the responses of output, inflation, and
interest rates to a 25 basis-point unanticipated monetary policy shock (top row) and a monetary
policy shock anticipated 6 quarters in advance, with the central bank holding the interest fixed
for the preceding 5 quarters. The solid line shows the response of the sticky-price model while
the dashed line shows the response of the sticky information model, both computing using the
parameters at the respective posterior modes. The top row shows that the behavior of the sticky-
price and sticky-information models to unanticipated shocks are broadly similar. In particular, the
output responses are nearly identical across the models. The movements in inflation are broadly
similar, although the inflation drop is a bit sharper in the sticky-price model and more delayed in
the sticky-information model.
    On the other hand, the responses of output and inflation to a sequence of anticipated monetary
policy shocks keeping the federal funds at its steady state value, then increasing increasing 25 basis
points in period 6, are quite different across models. First, the drop in output and inflation is much
sharper in the sticky-price model. In the sticky-price model, output falls by about 35% percent at
its trough, while for the sticky-information model the corresponding fall is about 7%. The fall for
inflation shares similar features, with a drop in inflation about 10% in the sticky-price model. Note
also that these falls come to a large extent in the initial period of the impulse response in the sticky
price model. The reason for the differences across models is the pricing mechanisms. As discussed
in Section 2.2, the anticipated spike in period 6 feeds heavily backwards towards firms pricing
decisions for periods 5, 4, and so on, in the sticky price model. This raises real interest rates in
those periods and further depresses output. The end result is a massive initial drop in output and
inflation, about two orders of magnitude larger than under an unanticipated shock. By contrast,
the feedback mechanism described above is not a feature of the sticky-information model. Here
the driver of the initial drop in output and inflation is mainly coming from the IS relationship–the
fact that consumption depends on the entire path of real rates. Lastly, observe that interest rates
fall in both cases after the anticipated shock is realized.            7   These varying reactions to anticipated
shocks across models will have effects on the policies which involve guidance or commitment
about the future, as we highlight in this work.
    Because of the differences in anticipation effects, the environment confronting monetary poli-
cymakers differs generically along several dimensions between sticky-price and sticky-wage economies.
The heart of these differences is the incentive for price-setters in a sticky-price economy to act
pre-emptively in the face of anticipated cost conditions – an incentive that is absent in the sticky-
information economy. Policymakers acting in a sticky-price environment must therefore account
for significant spill-overs between policy effects on costs and prices in the medium and short
terms. In sticky-information economies, by contrast, the impulse response of inflation is driven
either by contemporaneous marginal cost or by the drift in the price level following the shock.
Monetary policy may thus achieve a significant degree of separation between actions aimed at
   7 It should be noted that the dynamics under the sticky-price model can have oddly different properties under minor

variations of this shock. As in Carlstrom et al. (2012), output and inflation can show strongly positive responses to very
similar anticipated policy paths under a slightly different parameterization.


                                                           20
                                  Figure 3: Responses to Monetary Policy Shocks
                                    output                    inflation                    interest rate
                         0                         0.05                          0.3

                                                                                0.25
                       −0.2                          0
                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                0.15
                       −0.4                       −0.05
                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                0.05
                       −0.6                        −0.1
                                                                                  0

                       −0.8                       −0.15                        −0.05
                              0      20      40           0      20       40           0        20         40


                                    output                    inflation                    interest rate
                         0                           2                           0.5

                        −5                           0
                                                                                  0
                       −10                          −2

                       −15                          −4
                                                                                −0.5
                       −20                          −6

                       −25                          −8
                                                                                 −1
                       −30                         −10

                       −35                         −12                          −1.5
                              0      20      40           0      20       40           0        20         40



Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (solid line) and sticky-information (dashed line)
models to an unanticipated (top row) and 6-quarter ahead anticipated (bottom show) monetary
policy shock, computed at the respective posterior modes.


medium-term cost pressures and short-run inflation.
    Under sticky information, the expected response of the economy to a shock converges to that
under flexible prices, as the fraction of agents aware of the shock goes to one. (Our estimates put
this horizon at around 12-16 quarters.) Accordingly, real effects from monetary policy after this
date must arise through the endogenous propagation of the real state variables inherited as initial
conditions. It follows that medium-term output gap stabilization unavoidably has consequences
for real variables in the short-run.
    Figure 4 illustrates some of these differences by considering the optimal response, under com-
mitment, to a unit wage markup shock, where the solid line displays outcomes for the sticky-price
equilibrium and the dashed line shows outcomes for the sticky-information economy.                              8   Under
sticky prices, in addition to the familiar conflict between inflation and output stabilization at a
given time, such shocks generate considerable intertemporal trade-offs, as medium-term policy
actions taken to limit the prolonged slump in output spill over severely to inflation in the short
run. Given the discussion above, the situation under sticky information is less fraught, as very
short-run inflation is less sensitive to the path of costs in general, while inflation after around
three years can be stabilized without any output loss.
    8 The policy objective function underlying the simulations in this section equally weight the 4-quarter change in

inflation, the output gap and the change in the federal funds rate. We discuss the motivation for this choice of objective
in greater detail below.



                                                              21
      The lower panel of Figure 4 presents results under a more persistent markup shock, with an
autoregressive parameter of .95. Based on the reasoning above, the bottom panel should show
a more stark difference from the top panel under sticky prices, as the spillovers from the (more-
pronounced) medium-term movements in the face of a more persistent shock are greater. The
predicted outcomes can be seen clearly in inflation and output movements, which are much more
different across the top and bottom panels under sticky prices than under sticky information.

Figure 4: Responses of Inflation and the Output Gap Under Optimal Policy to Persistent Wage
Mark-up Shock




Notes: Figure shows the response of the 4-quarter change in inflation and the output gap to a wage
mark-up shock under optimal policy. Top panel: Estimated persistence. Lower panel: 0.95 serial
correlation. Black solid line: sticky-prices. Black dashed line: sticky-information.



4.2    Anticipation Effects and the Zero-Lower Bound in A Great Recession

We now present a simulation of the baseline version of each model that generates a fairly deep
recession in which the nominal short-term interest rate falls to its effective lower bound quickly.
Implementation of such scenarios requires assumptions about both the nature of the shock hit-
ting the economy and the monetary policy strategy that is employed by the Federal Reserve and
understood by the public. With regard to the latter, we assume, as our baseline, that the FOMC
follows the estimated policy rule. With regard to the disturbance bringing about the recession,
we assume an unusually persistent shift in the risk premium entering the households consump-
tion Euler equation: The magnitude and persistence of this shock results in a 200bp increase in

                                                22
the spread between a (hypothetical) 10-yr risky bond and the 10-yr risk-free rate implied by the
expectations hypothesis.9 Emphasis on a widening of risk spreads bears resemblance to the recent
recession – although our models, by hewing closely to Smets and Wouters (2007), ignore financial
intermediation.

                       Figure 5: A Recessionary Shock (under estimated policy rule)




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky-information (blue) models to the
Great Recession shock

    The scenarios are presented in Figure 5.10 Regardless of the model of price and wage dynamics,
output falls sharply (to a level about 7-1/2 percent below potential in the sticky-information model
and nearly 11 percent below potential in the sticky-price model). In each model, the federal funds
rate falls quickly to 0.125 percent (at an annual rate) and remains there until two years following
the shock. Inflation (on a four-quarter basis and at an annual rate) in the sticky-price model drops
dramatically to -7 percent (at an annual rate) by the start of the second year and rises as a recovery
begins to take hold. In the sticky-information model, inflation declines to -2 percent in the second
year. Note that the dramatic fall in inflation in both models is at odds with experience during the
   9 Specifically, the autocorrelation coefficient for the risk premium shock is set to 0.8 (instead of its estimated value).

Note that a variety of studies have considered the implications of adverse shocks calibrated to yield large increases in
10-yr risk spreads, as such longer-maturity spreads are observable in data; an example is Christiano et al. (2013).
  10 A binding zero lower bound can result in equilibrium non-existence or in multiple equilibria , as noted in other

research such as Brendon et al. (2013). We examined this later possibility by inspecting every possible configuration of
dates at which the ZLB might bind between 1 and 40 quarters in the future, subject to the condition that the ZLB begins
to bind within 4 quarters of the start of the simulation and that the ZLB does not bind again following lift-off. Where
indeterminacy arises, we have chosen to focus on the equilibrium with the least volatile outcomes.


                                                             23
Great Recession – a feature of the sticky-price model that has been denoted the “missing deflation”
in some recent research (e.g., King and Watson (2012)),11


                         Figure 6: Amplification of Recessionary Shock at the ZLB




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky-information (blue) models to
alternative Great Recession shocks, with a 200bp (-) or 250bp (-*) increase in the 10-yr risk spread

    As we have emphasized, the non-linearity and amplification of the effects of shocks under the
sticky-price framework is very large relative to that under sticky-information and increases with
the size of the shock. To illustrate this difference more clearly clearly, Figure 6 presents the Great
Recession scenario and an alternative in which the 10-yr risk spread rises by 250bp rather than
200bp. While the shock is only 25 percent larger, the declines in inflation and output are nearly
twice as large under the larger shock with sticky prices, while amplification is modest under sticky
information. As before, this reflects the logic of forward-looking price setting: A deeper recession
lowers future inflation, and through backward induction has a large effect on current inflation.
The decline in inflation boosts real rates, depressing output further. Under sticky information,
this effect from forward looking behavior is absent.
    The tendency of amplification of the effects of shocks at the ZLB can also be seen through a
simulation of the model that does not impose the ZLB, reported in Figure 7. In the absence of the
ZLB, the effects of the demand shock on output are quite similar under sticky prices and sticky
   11 Giannoni et al. (2013) do not find a missing disinflation in their DSGE model, primarily because they estimate a

flatter Phillips curve. Christiano et al. (2013) find a sharp drop in inflation due to the demand shocks in their analysis,
but suggest the disinflation was curbed by slow growth in technology/productivity.


                                                            24
information (the black and blue lines, respectively), with a fall of about 5 1/2 percent in the sticky-
price model and 6 1/2 percent in the sticky-information model. The inflation responses are also
closer than in the case with the ZLB, with inflation falling to -2 1/4 percent under sticky prices
and -1 1/4 percent under sticky information. These similarities are consistent with our earlier
empirical analysis – outside of the ZLB, the models have similar empirical properties.
   Imposing the ZLB in the sticky price model more than doubles the drops in output and infla-
tion, and the decline in the price level is more than four times as large in the presence of the ZLB.
The unanchoring of the price level at the ZLB under sticky prices is central to the amplification
of shocks at the ZLB in this framework. In contrast, under sticky information (the blue lines), the
price level is (relatively) anchored – with the decline at the ZLB a bit more than double that in
the absence of the ZLB: As a result, the amplification of the adverse demand shock by the ZLB is
relatively muted.


                         Figure 7: Risk Shock With And Without the ZLB




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky information (blue) models to the
Great Recession shock, with and without imposing the zero-lower bound. (-) line–With ZLB; (*)
line – Without ZLB

   We have now provided three examples of how anticipation effects result in different amplifica-
tion in the sticky-price model than in the sticky-information model: Anticipated policy shocks are
amplified more under sticky prices; markup shocks of greater persistence are amplified more un-
der sticky prices; amd the ZLB amplifies deflationary forces more under sticky prices. These envi-
ronmental features shape the optimal response to shocks once the policy rate hits its lower bound.


                                                  25
In particular, as shown in Figure 8, the optimal response to a severe aggregate demand shock un-
der sticky prices involves a prolonged period during which inflation is considerably above target,
as a necessary concomitant to the prolonged period of low real interest rates and high marginal
costs.     12   Under sticky information, optimal policy delivers a very similar real interest rate path
and thus achieves very similar real outcomes. However, the separability between medium- and
short-term inflation stabilization under sticky information allows the optimal policy response to
limit higher-than-target inflation to only two or three years.


Figure 8: Responses of Inflation and the Output Gap Under Optimal Policy to a Large Adverse
Demand Shock




Notes: Figure shows the response of the 4-quarter change in inflation and the output gap to the
Great Recession shock under optimal policy. Black solid line: sticky-prices. Black dashed line:
sticky-information.

    In the remainder of our analysis, we will focus on strategies that may approximate an optimal
commitment strategy, but we will not revisit behavior under such approaches in general because
simple strategies may be easier to communicate and more robust across different models (e.g.,
Taylor and Williams (2010)). Nonetheless, the forces illustrated in this example of outcomes under
optimal strategies will be apparent.
  12 The
       shock in this scenario is a large increase in the risk premium. Absent the zero lower bound, the optimal policy
would exactly offset this shock. We describe this shock in more detail below.




                                                         26
5     Effective Monetary Policies
5.1     Strategies we analyze

The set of policy strategies we consider begins with the estimated policy rule within each model
– that is, policy as usual. In addition to representing the historical approach to policy within
our models, such an approach– with substantial interest rate inertia and a sizable response to the
change in the output gap–captures some of the features of good policy emphasized in the previous
literature.   13

      Policymakers in the United States (and elsewhere) have discussed, and arguably pursued de-
viations from such policy as usual during the recent ZLB episode, in part inspired by the research
literature. Focusing on the time-line and discussions within the United States (as discussed more
thoroughly in English et al. (2013)), we highlight three distinct strategies related to the literature
cited in the previous section.

More aggressive responses to economic activity: The estimated policy rule does not respond
much to the level of economic activity. One key conclusion from Reifschneider and Williams
(2000) was that a sizable response to economic activity was important for good monetary policy
performance at the ZLB. Moreover, policymakers and recent analyses (e.g.,Yellen (2012) and En-
glish et al. (2013)) have discussed this aspect of good policy through the lens of an inertial version
of the Taylor (1999) rule, as this rule includes of sizable response to output. This “inertial” Taylor
(1999) rule is given by14

                                                                                           f
                             Rt = 0.75Rt−1 + 0.25(1.5( Pt − Pt−4 − 2) + yt − yt ).                                     (16)


Lower for longer (time dimension): Starting in March 2009, the FOMC communicated that “eco-
nomic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an
extended period”. In August 2011, the Committee substituted “at least through mid-2013” for the
words “for an extended period.” This date was adjusted several times, the last change occurring
in September 2013, when the FOMC shifted the date to mid-2015.
      As has been noted by others (e.g., Campbell et al. (2012)), these communications do not clearly
outline whether the FOMC plan represented a forecast, and hence no deviation from “policy as
usual” or a promise to keep the nominal interest rate “lower for longer” than policy as usual
would imply. Our baseline case, with policy as usual as described by the estimated policy rule in
the models we use, captures this possibility. Another possibility, however, is that market partici-
pants interpreted the Committee as undertaking a commitment to hold the federal funds rate at
   13 One class of strategies that we considered but do not report involve relating the change on the nominal interest

rate to the change in prices and the change in the output gap; the estimated rule, following previous practice, does not
allow a coefficient of unity on the lagged interest rate. Kiley (2012) suggests such rules explain U.S. data well and have
a long history in related research.
   14 The interest rate rule, along with subsequent ones, are presented using annual rates for interest rates and inflation.




                                                            27
the ZLB over some fixed horizon, regardless (within limits) of contemporaneous economic condi-
tions. We therefore also consider lower-for-longer policies specified in terms of date-based guidance.
We assume, for illustrative purposes, that such date-based guidance is followed by reversion to
the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
   As emphasized in our discussion of the basic New-Keynesian model earlier, Laseen and Svens-
son (2011), Del Negro and Schorfheide (2013), and Del Negro et al. (2012) show forward guidance
can have very large effects in the sticky-price framework, whereas Kiley (2014) suggests that such
forward guidance is less powerful in a sticky-information model. We only consider date-based
guidance in our simulations of shocks that precipitate the zero-lower bound: Our more general
discussion – of the properties or various rules in response to all types of shocks (via stochastic
simulations or moments from the models) or of shocks to the Phillips curve will not consider
date-based guidance. Nonetheless, analysis of these strategies is important for highlighting some
of the distinctions related to amplification that arise across the sticky-price and sticky-information
frameworks.

Lower for longer (thresholds): In December 2012, the FOMC announced that exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate will be appropriate “at least as long as the unemployment rate
remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no
more than a half percentage point above the Committees 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-
term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” This language has remained in the
FOMC statement, with minor adjustments, until March 2014.
   Different thresholds have been explored or suggested in Campbell et al. (2012), English et al.
(2013), and Kocherlakota (2013), with the latter two suggesting that economic performance would
likely improve if the unemployment threshold were set to a lower value of 5.5 percent. We ex-
plore this approach for both the inertial rule we use as our baseline and the other strategies that
we examine–but our emphasis is on results using the Taylor rule, as these illustrate the key points.
As our models are all version of Smets and Wouters (2007), our model does not include a mea-
sure of the unemployment rate. Therefore, we implement such thresholds by assuming that the
unemployment rate threshold of 6.5 percent corresponds to an output gap threshold of 2 percent,
consistent with a natural rate of unemployment of 5.5 percent and an “Okun’s Law” coefficient of
2. An unemployment rate threshold of 5.5 percent thus corresponds to an output gap threshold of
0 percent. We include an upper threshold of 2.5 percent for the year-ahead forecast of inflation.

Promising higher inflation: Threshold strategies following a large adverse demand shock have
the property that policy accommodation does not begin to be removed until some combination
of the inflation gap and the output gap turns positive– that is, accommodation is not removed
until either inflation is above objective or output is above potential. This property is a reasonable
one for efficient policies, as failure to satisfy this criterion implies that additional accommoda-
tion would result in improved outcomes for both goals (Svensson (2011) or Kocherlakota (2013)).
Within the academic literature, this property is often emphasized within a class of targeting rules


                                                 28
in which a weighted average of prices and the output gap is set equal to zero, as such approaches
represent optimal policy in simple models (e.g., Woodford (2010)).15 For this reason, we consider
the following two targeting rules; the contrast between the two rules in response to shocks to the
Phillips curve and to demand shocks that induce the zero-lower bound will be striking.

                                                                         f
                                           ( Pt − Pt−4 − 2) + yt − yt = 0,                                             (17)

                                                                 f
                                                   Pt + yt − yt = 0.                                                   (18)

Note that in (18) we suppress the deterministic drift in the price level (in the presentation; such
drift is allowed in the simulations).
      These strategies have the spirit of promising higher inflation to stimulate activity. In the case
of 17, the promise is weak – the approach ensures that inflation is above target if output is below
target, but does not promise to make up any shortfall in the targeting criterion induced by the zero-
lower bound. In contrast, the price-level targeting approach promises to make up any shortfall
in inflation until the price level is brought back to its desired path. excluding the zero-lower
bound (e.g., Blake (2012)). Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), building off earlier work such as
Krugman (1998) and Reifschneider and Williams (2000), suggest that a commitment to higher
future inflation, through a mechanism such as price-level targeting, is an efficient response to the
zero-lower bound.
      Finally, we complement the strict nominal-income targeting approach shown in 18 with a sim-
ple nominal interest rate rule, largely to emphasize that such an instrument rule performs very
similarly to the strict nominal income target:

                                                                               f
                                         Rt = Rt−1 + 0.125( pt + yt − yt ).                                            (19)

Note that we have assumed the change in the nominal interest rate is proportional to the nominal
income gap – as highly inertial policy strategies will dominate (in terms of economic performance)
in all of our simulations. The price-level term in 19 and in the optimized rule below allows for
deterministic growth in the price level of 2 percent.


5.2     Performance of Rules On Average (Outside the ZLB)

We first consider the performance of the rules outlined above in response to the typical set of
shocks hitting the economy and abstracting from the zero lower bound on interest rates. Such an
analysis follows in the tradition for monetary policy analysis summarized in Taylor and Williams
(2010). As in much of this literature, our analysis focuses on 4-quarter change in prices, the output
gap, and the change in the nominal interest rate.
  15 That is, in the simple sticky-price model presented to illustrate ideas, the discretionary optimal policy (ignoring the

zero-lower bound) sets a weighted average of inflation and output to zero, and the commitment optimal policy sets a
weighted average of the price-level and output to zero.




                                                            29
                                       Table 8: Optimal Simple Rules
                                                                   f                                  f
 Taylor Rule (Sticky Prices)           Rt = 0.352π̄t + 1.730(yt − yt ) + 1.140Rt−1 − 1.714(yt−1 − yt−1 )
                                                                   f                                  f
 Taylor Rule (Sticky Information)      Rt = 0.015π̄t + 0.048(yt − yt ) + 1.069Rt−1 − 0.038(yt−1 − yt−1 )
                                                                   f                                  f
 Level Rule (Sticky Prices)            Rt = 0.126pt + 0.980(yt − yt ) + 1.057Rt−1 − 0.255(yt−1 − yt−1 )
                                                                   f                                  f
 Level Rule (Sticky Information)       Rt =  0.001pt + 0.000(yt − yt ) + 1.056Rt−1   + 0.010(yt−1 − yt−1 )
Notes: π̄t is the 4-quarter change in the price level.


    As benchmarks, we will also discuss outcomes under simple rules with optimized coefficients
and under the optimal commitment policy. The focus on simple rules is consistent with our con-
cern for robustness across specifications of price dynamics, while our examination of the more
complex optimal rule provides a benchmark for what is achievable within the alternative frame-
works. For these exercises, we adopt an ad hoc loss function depending only on variances of
inflation, the output gap, and the change in the nominal interest rate (where inflation and interest
rates are expressed at annual rates). This specification is in line with a substantial part of the lit-
erature cited above, but can differ importantly from the form of objective function derived from
maximizing the welfare of the representative household, as in Levin et al. (2006), Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe (2006), or Reis (2009), where additional terms –for example, involving wage inflation –
are typically very important.
    In all of our simulations, we will assume that the alternative policy strategies are fully credible
to the public and incorporated into the public’s information set. As such, we are not focused on
transition issues that may be associated with regime changes.
    Before turning to performance, we present the optimal simple rules. Optimization is done over
rules within two classes: In the Taylor (1999) class, we allow non-zero coefficients on the (four-
quarter) inflation rate, the current and lagged output gap, and the lag of the nominal interest rate;
in the level class, we allow response to the price level (in place of inflation). The optimal simple
rules in each model are shown in Table 8.
    Optimal Taylor rules respond to the change in output, not its level. While all sticky-information
rules have very small coefficients on the determinants other than the lagged interest rate, these
rules are also all super-inertial and so such small responses are consistent with very vigorous
long-run responses to changes in fundamentals. Moreover, outcomes in the sticky-information
model are relatively insensitive to variations in these coefficients, in the sense that responses to
shocks are little affected if the optimal sticky-price coefficients are used.
    Table 9 presents standard deviations for the 4-quarter change in the price level, the output gap
and the change in the federal funds rate for our focal rules, as well as for the optimized rules.
Given the more refractory economic environment under sticky-information discussed above, it
is unsurprising that the sticky-information outcomes are uniformly worse than their sticky-price
counterparts. Moreover, the estimated variances of price and wage mark-up shocks are substan-
tially higher in the sticky information model.
    Looking across rules, consistent with the previous literature, approaches which react strongly


                                                         30
to the level of the output gap, such as the inertial Taylor rules (16), suffer quite severe deterio-
rations in inflation performance. The severity of this deterioration is driven chiefly by behavior
following wage and price mark-up shocks. By contrast, rules which target either the change in
the output gap (e.g., the estimated policy rule) or the nominal income gap deliver stabilization
performance close to the optimal rule benchmark.16 Finally, the simple rule for nominal-income
targeting (19) delivers outcomes for inflation and output very similar to those under strict nominal
income targeting (18), but with much higher variability in the nominal interest rate.


 Table 9: Standard Deviations of Selected Variables, Under Sticky Prices and Sticky Information
                                                  Sticky Prices     Sticky Information
                                               π̄     y−y   f  ∆R    π̄    y − y f ∆R
         Estimated rule (eq. 14)              1.04     4.43   0.40 1.54     7.41    0.39
         Inertial Taylor (1999) (eq. 16)      6.71     3.69   0.65 10.01    5.47    0.67
         Nominal Income targeting (eq. 18) 1.18        4.20   2.36 1.78     6.99    5.88
         Nominal Income rule (eq. 19)         1.17     4.22   0.25 1.76     6.98    0.31
         Optimal rule (inflation)             1.47     4.11   0.41 3.11     5.95    0.05
         Optimal rule (price level)           1.50     4.08   0.31 3.31     5.88    0.03
         Optimal Policy                       1.49     4.07   0.30 2.68     6.03    0.47

Notes: π̄ = 4-quarter change in prices (annual rate). Gap = output gap to flex price equilibrium. R
= federal funds rate (annual rate).

      We will now try to unpack these findings by illustrating the performance of alternative strate-
gies in response to specific shocks, including demand shocks that induce a binding ZLB, in order
to highlight key similarities and differences across the sticky-price and sticky-information frame-
works.


5.3     Adverse Supply Shocks

Strategies that perform well in the face of demand shocks may perform poorly in response to
supply shocks, as shocks to the Phillips curve (for wages or prices) can imply important trade-
offs between activity and inflation in New Keynesian DSGE model. In our models, however, key
supply shocks, such as mark-up shocks, are “measures of our ignorance” (e.g., Chari et al. (2009)),
with relatively weak or indeterminate micro-foundations. Nevertheless, they are essential to the
models’ fit to data on wages, prices, and even activity (especially activity in the labor market) and
so ignoring their implications seems unwise. Moreover, as previously mentioned, these shocks
importantly shape the types of policies that perform well in a variance analysis such as that in
the previous section or in, for example. Taylor and Wieland (2012), and hence are important for
understanding the literature.
      To illustrate the implications of an adverse shock to the Phillips curve, we focus on a large
  16 We do not present results for the inflation-targeting rule 17 as it performs very poorly, as with the inertial Taylor
rule; we highlight the reasons for this poor performance below in our deterministic simulations.



                                                           31
wage markup shock. Specifically, we consider a two standard deviation shock under each strategy
outlined above except the threshold strategies.


                       Figure 9: Adverse Supply Shock in Sticky-Price Model




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price model to an unanticipated wage markup shock,
computed at the posterior mode of the parameters. Black -* line–Estimated rule; black solid line
– Taylor (1999); blue -* – Strict inflation targeting; blue dashed (–) line – Strict nominal income
targeting; blue solid line – Nominal income rule.

   Figure 9 reports results for the sticky-price model. The estimated policy rule performs well
– inflation is held in check, and the decline in output is not greatly worse than that under other
strategies. In contrast, the inertial Taylor (1999) rule performs very poorly, as the rule responds
vigorously to the decline in output, which leads to a very large increase in inflation. Similarly, strict
inflation targeting (17), which balances the level of inflation and output as in the inertial Taylor
(1999) rule, performs poorly; this rule also includes a large response to output, and generates a
very sizable acceleration in inflation. Given these dynamics, the poor average performance of
these rules discussed in the previous section is not surprising.
   Results for the sticky-information model, in Figure 10, are qualitatively similar: Inflation rises
considerably (albeit less than under sticky prices) under the inertial Taylor (1999) rule or strict
inflation targeting, but is well contained by the estimated policy rule.
   Finally, the estimated rule, strict nominal-income targeting, and the nominal income targeting
rules perform well in both models. These approaches also deliver relative price-level stability in
these models (visible in the price response shown in the lower right corner). This is consistent


                                                   32
                       Figure 10: Adverse Supply Shock in Sticky-Price Model




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price model to an unanticipated wage markup shock,
computed at the posterior mode of the parameters. Black -* line–Estimated rule; black solid line
– Taylor (1999); blue -* – Strict inflation targeting; blue dashed (–) line – Strict nominal income
targeting; blue solid line – Nominal income rule.


with the basic notion above that the approach including substantial interest rate persistence and
a response to output growth embedded in the estimated rule has aspects of flexible price-level
targeting (as previously emphaszied in Gorodnichenko and Shapiro (2007)).


5.4     Outcomes Under Alternative Strategies

We compare performance under each strategy following the shock that precipitates the severe
recession under the estimated rule.


5.4.1    Policy as usual vs. more aggressive response to the gap

It is instructive to first compare outcomes under policy as usual, as captured by the estimated
policy rule, and a strategy that does not respond to the change in the output gap.. For this purpose,
we present outcomes under the inertial rule 16 – as this approach implies a strong response to the
output gap and ignores the change in the gap.
      Figure 11 presents results for the estimated policy rule and the inertial rule 16. The red lines
present the cases for the sticky-price model, and the blue lines present the cases for the sticky-


                                                   33
                           Figure 11: Outcomes Under Policy as Usual




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky-information (blue) models to the
Great Recession shock. -* – Estimated rule; Solid line – Inertial Taylor (1999) rule


information model. it is immediately apparent: that, in both models, the estimated policy rule
implies very poor performance relative to the alternative rule which ignores the change in the
output gap. For example, output falls only 6 1/2 percent (at its trough) under the levels-only
rule and sticky prices (in contrast to nearly 11 percent under the estimated rule) and only 4 1/2
percent under the levels-only rule in the sticky-information model (in contrast to 7 1/2 percent
under the estimated rule). Inflation declines much less under the levels-only rule in both models,
and deflation is avoided in the sticky-information model (with inflation falling to only 1 percent).
   The results suggest that a strategy such as that embedded in the Taylor (1999) rule, with a
modest degree of inertia, is much better than the estimated policy rule when zero-lower bound
events transpire. One factor contributing to this finding is that strategies that commit to resisting
declines in resource utilization vigorously perform better than strategies which do not. Indeed,
the specific size of the response to output is not especially important (so long as the degree of
inertia is held constant): For example, the outcomes from the rules with a response of unity (at an
annual rate) to the output gap are similar to those under the Taylor (1993) rule, with a response of
0.5 (not shown). In addition, the estimated policy rule performs very poorly because of the strong
response to output growth: This strong response implies policy tightens as soon as growth starts
to pick up, despite a weak level of activity, which is very detrimental at the zero-lower bound (as
emphasized before in, for example, Billi (2011)).


                                                 34
5.4.2   Lower-for-longer (Date-based)

We now consider date-based guidance. In particular, we assume that policymakers lower the
policy interest rate to zero immediately and promise to keep the nominal interest rate at is lower
bound 2 or 4 quarters later than they would have if they were following the inertial Taylor (1999)
rule and outcomes were as expected under that rule. Moreover, we assume that this strategy is known
to the public. After these intervals have passed (e.g., intervals of 8 and 10 quarters or 9 and 11
quarters, respectively, under sticky information and sticky prices), policy reverts to the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule.


                          Figure 12: Outcomes Under Date-based Policy




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky-information (blue) models to the
Great Recession shock. Solid line – Inertial Taylor (1999) rule; dashed line–2 additional quarters of
accommodation; -* – 4 additional quarters of accommodation.

   Outcomes from these strategies, along with those from the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, are pre-
sented in figure 12. Clearly, a credible promise to remain highly accommodative can lead to sub-
stantial effects on real activity and inflation. Under sticky prices, these effects can be very large,
again reflecting the type of backward-induction argument and wide swings in the price level asso-
ciated with the forward-looking nature of that framework. Specifically, a promise of prolonged fu-
ture accommodation raises future inflation, which leads to higher current inflation, which lowers
real interest rates and raises output (which then raises inflation further). As a result, the promise
of four quarters of extra accommodation leads to a sharp rise in the price level. These effects,


                                                 35
while present, are much more muted under sticky information. As a result, date-based guidance
does not lead to the explosive behavior–at least at these short horizons and under the assumption
of reversion to the inertial Taylor (1999) rule–that characterizes sticky prices.
   The effects of backward induction in the sticky-price model (through equation 3) explain why
forward guidance is so very powerful in the sticky-price model, as reported in, for example, Levin
et al. (2010), Laseen and Svensson (2011), Del Negro et al. (2012), Carlstrom et al. (2012), and
Burgess et al. (2013). Kiley (2014) has previously shown that these effects can be much more muted
under sticky information, with implications for a range of issues (including fiscal multipliers,
and the paradoxes of thrift and volatility). Beyond these technical points, a variety of messages
could be drawn from the simulation results. For example, it is clear that date-based guidance in
the United States did not lead to a surge in inflation. This could be because such guidance was
interpreted as only a forecast (e.g., Campbell et al. (2012)). It could also be because the more muted
effects predicted by sticky information better characterize the data. Finally, it could be because the
public understood that date-based guidance would not tolerate the kind of increase in inflation
reported in the simulations, and that the underlying strategy was one that would resist such a
large increase in inflation, as suggested by Kohn (2010). Indeed, the switch to thresholds by the
FOMC included an explicit reference to an upper bound on inflation, and policymaker projections
in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections, have not shown inflation rising above 2 percent
under “appropriate policy”.


5.4.3   Lower-for-longer (Thresholds)

We now pursue the idea that additional accommodation through thresholds for activity (or in-
flation) may improve performance. We consider thresholds similar to those announced by the
FOMC in December 2012 – an output gap threshold of -2 percent (similar to an unemployment
rate threshold of 6.5 percent) and a threshold for the inflation projection of 2.5 percent. We also
consider whether an unemployment rate threshold closer to potential output (zero gap) or the nat-
ural rate of unemployment, as suggested in Kocherlakota (2013) and English et al. (2013), could
prove beneficial. Before presenting simulations, it is instructive to recall what the optimal pol-
icy response is to the type of recession shock we have outlined. Specifically, the shock we have
assumed generates the severe recession is a pure shock to the natural rate of interest: As such,
the optimal policy (ignoring the zero-lower bound) is to perfectly offset the shock, implying no
response of output, inflation, or any other variable. It is clear that the estimated rule or the in-
ertial rule with a large response to the output gap fall short of this benchmark, and hence more
accommodation – at least over the right horizon – would be welfare-improving. Indeed, this logic
is the same as that suggesting lower thresholds may be appropriate in English et al. (2013) and
Kocherlakota (2013).
   Results for an output gap threshold of -2 percent suggest modest (or even essentially no) ad-
ditional accommodation relative to the inertial rule 16 under sticky-prices, as shown in figure 13.
This occurs because the thresholds, in this model, are very similar to conditions that generate


                                                  36
                  Figure 13: Outcomes Under Lower Unemployment Threshold




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky-information (blue) models to the
Great Recession shock. Solid line – Inertial Taylor (1999) rule; dashed line–Output gap threshold
of -2 percent; -* – output gap threshold of 0 percent.


a departure from the ZLB under the levels-only rule 16. In contrast, this approach generates a
modest, persistent degree of overshooting in inflation, to about 2 1/2 percent for much of the 10-
year period following the shock, in the sticky-information model; as a result, output declines by a
noticeably smaller amount.
   The lower threshold for unemployment succeeds in stabilizing output to a significant degree in
both the sticky-price and sticky-information models. In the sticky-information model, the greater
stability in output is accompanied by more short-run overshooting of inflation than under the
more conservative output gap threshold of -2 percent. In contrast, the aggressive thresholds lead
to a very persistent overshooting of inflation under sticky prices – inflation is near 23/4 percent
for much of the ten year period shown.
   The possibility of prolonged overshooting of inflation may be desirable, depending on how
policymakers weigh improved near-term performance relative to a persistent overshooting of in-
flation. Indeed, some degree of overshooting is the essence of the optimal strategy, as emphasized
in Woodford (2010). In the case of threshold strategies, the overshooting can be quite persistent, re-
flecting the asymmetry inherent in the strategy in response to the shock. Specifically, policy is very
accommodative while unemployment is above the natural rate, but tightens only in the “normal”
and relatively-weak manner embedded in the inertial rule in subsequent years; these mechanisms


                                                 37
will become more clear in the next section, in which another threshold-like approach is examined.
Overall, these results suggest a set of thresholds may improve performance, but may also risk a
deterioration in inflation performance, potentially leading to the concern about anchored inflation
expectations reported in, for example, Kohn (2010).


5.4.4   Promising higher inflation: Nominal-income targeting

The simulations have identified several properties of responses under the various strategies ex-
amined so far. First, the responsiveness of inflation to monetary policy is very sensitive to the
specification of the price-adjustment friction. Second, very accommodative strategies, such as a
commitment to an output gap threshold near zero, can lead to persistent above-target inflation,
even with a fairly low inflation trigger – an outcome which resonates with the fears of some pol-
icymakers, as noted above. Finally, responding to the change in the output gap, while effective
in response to adverse supply shocks, can be problematic in response to large adverse demand
shocks.
    Given these issues, the policy options of date-based guidance or amplifying the focus on re-
source utilization through thresholds only indirectly address some important concerns for poli-
cymakers. In particular, these approaches are passive with respect to a key source of uncertainty
– the dynamics of the price level over a prolonged period. A more direct response to such con-
cerns would be a flexible price-level targeting approach – which actively seeks some stability in
the price level path – such as nominal income targeting. Such an approach limits price level move-
ments while having threshold like properties (in the sense that a certain level of nominal income
must be reached before removing accommodation).
    To illustrate this possibility, Figure 14 presents the results under the strict inflation targeting
approach (17), the difference nominal income rule (19), and the strict nominal income targeting
approach (18). As shown by the solid and starred lines, targeting nominal income delivers most
of the output stabilization benefits of a zero output gap threshold, while also delivering good
medium-term inflation performance and a stable long-run price level. This occurs despite the
fact that policymakers do not begin to raise the federal funds rate under these strategies until the
output gap is near zero, as in threshold approaches. It is also notable that strict-inflation targeting
(the dashed lines) also performs better than something like the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, as it does
include a commitment to have inflation above target if output is below target (so long as such a
combination is possible given the zero-lower bound).


6    Lessons for policy and future research
Put most simply, we find that the dominance of the sticky-price paradigm in central bank models
(reported in Table 1) is neither forced by fit to the usual set of macroeconomic data nor robust
in its policy implications. These different policy implications arise because, in sticky-information
economies, firms can specify plans for future prices and hence do not have an incentive to react

                                                  38
                           Figure 14: Outcomes Under Targeting Approaches




Notes: Figures show response of the sticky-price (red) and sticky-information (blue) models to the
Great Recession shock. Dashed line – Strict inflation targeting; Solid line – Strict Nominal Income
targeting; -* – Nominal income rule.


pre-emptively to anticipated demand conditions, as such. As a result, the price level tends to
swing less sharply following shocks under typical policy strategies, particularly those in the Taylor
(1993) form involving only levels of the output gap and inflation. Because the movements in the
price level are less extreme in sticky-information models, a binding lower bound constraint yields
considerably less amplification than under sticky prices. This result bears importantly on some
other recent research: For example, some research has suggested a substantial missing disinflation
under the sticky-price specification (e.g., King and Watson (2012), and Christiano et al. (2013)), and
the sticky-information case suggests this may be less of a concern–a possibility for future research.
Kiley (2014) suggests that the differences in amplification are also important for issues such as
fiscal multipliers or the paradoxes of toil and volatility.
    Second, the same mechanisms that reduce amplification in sticky-information models also re-
duce the power of date-based forward guidance. Such guidance has been shown to be very power-
ful in the sticky-price framework, reflecting the feedback from promises of higher future inflation
to current inflation (and hence to real interest rates). These effects are attenuated under sticky-
information, where the influence of expected future conditions on price decisions is indirect.               17

  17 These  differences across the two paradigms in responses to anticipated shocks may be important for the recent
literature on “news” shocks, which has typically used the sticky-price framework. The sticky-information framework



                                                        39
     That said, many aspects of good policy are common across sticky prices and sticky informa-
tion. In particular, for policymakers focused on inflation and output stability, highly inertial policy
strategies linked to nominal income or flexible price-level targeting rules behave well in response
to supply and demand shocks, and strategies that respond to the level or change in the output gap
perform poorly – in the former case, in response to supply shocks, and, in the latter case, once the
zero-lower bound is considered.
     Finally, we have focused exclusively on different models of price adjustment. Reis (2009) con-
sidered a broader deviation from Smets and Wouters (2007). Moreover, recent work has empha-
sized that other models of information imperfections may be more easy to rationalize as coherent
microeconomic decision problems. While our interest, for the time being, has been in developing
models to take to the data and that have potentially important differences for policy questions,
our finding that information rigidities are as plausible an explanation for price dynamics as sticky
prices simply reinforces the impetus to consider more fundamental variations in modeling ap-
proaches.


7     Bibliography
A DJEMIAN , S., H. B ASTANI , F. K ARAM , M. J UILLARD , J. M AIH , F. M IHOUBI , G. P ERENDIA ,
    J. P FEIFER , M. R ATTO ,   AND   S. V ILLEMOT (2011): “Dynare: Reference Manual Version 4,”
    Dynare Working Papers 1, CEPREMAP.

A DOLFSON , M., S. L ASEEN , J. L INDE , AND L. E. S VENSSON (2011): “Optimal Monetary Policy in
    an Operational MediumSized DSGE Model,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 1287–1331.

A N , S.   AND   F. S CHORFHEIDE (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric Reviews,
    26, 113–172.

B ALL , L., N. G REGORY M ANKIW,            AND   R. R EIS (2005): “Monetary policy for inattentive
    economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 703–725.

B ILLI , R. M. (2011): “Output gaps and monetary policy at low interest rates,” Economic Review.

B LAKE , A. P. (2012): “Determining optimal monetary speed limits,” Economics Letters, 116, 269–
    271.

B OIVIN , J., M. T. K ILEY, AND F. S. M ISHKIN (2010): “How Has the Monetary Transmission Mech-
    anism Evolved Over Time?” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and
    M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics, chap. 8, 369–422.

B RAVE , S., J. R. C AMPBELL , J. D. M. F ISHER ,      AND   A. J USTINIANO (2012): “The Chicago Fed
    DSGE model,” Working Paper Series WP-2012-02, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
could provide useful comparisons regarding the properties and importance of such shocks, while estimated models
with news shocks may be able to better discriminate between the two classes of models.


                                                      40
B RAYTON , F. AND P. T INSLEY (1996): “A guide to FRB/US: a macroeconomic model of the United
  States,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 96-42, Board of Governors of the Federal Re-
  serve System (U.S.).

B RENDON , C., M. PAUSTIAN , AND T. YATES (2013): “The pitfalls of speed-limit interest rate rules
  at the zero lower bound,” Bank of England working papers 473, Bank of England.

B URGESS , S., E. F ERNANDEZ -C ORUGEDO , C. G ROTH , R. H ARRISON , F. M ONTI , K. T HEODOR -
  IDIS , AND   M. WALDRON (2013): “The Bank of England’s forecasting platform: COMPASS,
  MAPS, EASE and the suite of models,” Bank of England working papers 471, Bank of England.

C ALVO , G. A. (1983): “Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 12, 383–398.

C AMPBELL , J. R., C. E VANS , J. D. M. F ISHER ,   AND   A. J USTINIANO (2012): “Macroeconomic ef-
  fects of Federal Reserve forward guidance,” Working Paper Series WP-2012-03, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Chicago.

C ARLSTROM , C. T., T. S. F UERST,     AND   M. PAUSTIAN (2012): “Inflation and Output in New Key-
  nesian Models with a Transient Interest Rate Peg,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Cleveland.

C HARI , V. V., P. J. K EHOE ,   AND   E. R. M C G RATTAN (2009): “New Keynesian Models: Not Yet
  Useful for Policy Analysis,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1, 242–66.

C HRISTIANO , L., M. E ICHENBAUM , AND M. T RABANDT (2013): “Understanding the Great Reces-
  sion,” Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University and Federal Reserve Board.

C HRISTIANO , L., M. R OSTAGNO ,       AND   R. M OTTO (2010): “Financial factors in economic fluctua-
  tions,” Working Paper Series 1192, European Central Bank.

C HRISTOFFEL , K., G. C OENEN ,    AND   A. WARNE (2008): “The New Area-Wide Model of the Euro
  Area: A Micro-founded Open-Economy Model for Forecasting and Policy Analysis,” Working
  Paper 944, European Central Bank.

D EL N EGRO , M., S. E USEPI , M. G IANNONI , A. S BORDONE , A. TAMBOLOTTI , M. C OCCI ,
  R. H ASEGAWA , AND L. M. H ENRY (2013): “The FRBNY DSGE Model,” Staff Report 647, Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York.

D EL N EGRO , M., M. G IANNONI ,       AND   C. PATTERSON (2012): “The Forward Guidance Puzzle,”
  Staff Report 574, Federal Rsereve Bank of New York.

D EL N EGRO , M.   AND   F. S CHORFHEIDE (2013): “DSGE Model-Based Forecasting,” in Handbook of
  Economic Forecasting, ed. by G. Elliott and A. Timmermann, North Holland, Amsterdam, vol. 2,
  forthcoming.


                                                    41
E DGE , R., M. K ILEY, AND J.-P. L AFORTE (2009): “A Comparison of Forecast Performance Between
  Federal Reserve Staff Forecasts, Simple Reduced-Form Models, and a DSGE Model,” Federal
  Reserve Board of Governors Finance and Economics Discussion Paper Series, 2009-10.

E GGERTSSON , G. B. AND M. W OODFORD (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
  Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34, 139–235.

E NGLISH , W., D. L OPEZ -S ALIDO , AND R. T ETLOW (2013): “The Federal Reserve’s Framework for
  Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,” Tech. rep., Federal Reserve Board.

E RCEG , C. J., L. G UERRIERI ,   AND   C. G UST (2006): “SIGMA: A New Open Economy Model for
  Policy Analysis,” International Journal of Central Banking, 2.

E RCEG , C. J., D. W. H ENDERSON ,      AND   A. T. L EVIN (2000): “Optimal monetary policy with stag-
  gered wage and price contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 281–313.

G ALI , J. AND M. G ERTLER (1999): “Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 44, 195–222.

G EWEKE , J. (2005): Contemporary Bayesian Econometrics and Statistics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

G IANNONI , M., M. D EL N EGRO ,    AND       F. S CHORFHEIDE (2013): “Inflation in the Great Recession
  and New Keynesian Models,” Unpublished Manuscript, FRBNY and University of Pennsylva-
  nia.

G ORODNICHENKO , Y.     AND   M. D. S HAPIRO (2007): “Monetary policy when potential output is
  uncertain: Understanding the growth gamble of the 1990s,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54,
  1132–1162.

H ARRISON , R., K. N IKOLOV, M. Q UINN , G. R AMSAY, A. S COTT,           AND   R. T HOMAS (2005): The
  Bank of England Quarterly Model, The Bank of England.

H ERBST, E.   AND   F. S CHORFHEIDE (forthcoming): “Sequential Monte Carlo Sampling for DSGE
  Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics.

K ILEY, M. T. (2007): “A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models
  of Price Setting,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 101–125.

——— (2012): “The aggregate demand effects of short- and long-term interest rates,” International
  Journal of Central Banking (forthcoming).

——— (2013): “Output Gaps,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 37(C), 1–18.

——— (2014): “Policy Paradoxes in the New Keynesian Model,” Finance and Economics Discus-
  sion Series 2014-29, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).



                                                     42
K ING , R. G. AND M. W. WATSON (2012): “Inflation and Unit Labor Cost,” Journal of Money, Credit,
  and Banking, 44, 111–149.

K LENOW, P. J. AND B. A. M ALIN (2010): “Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting,” in Handbook
  of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook of
  Monetary Economics, chap. 6, 231–284.

K OCHERLAKOTA , N. (2013): “Achieving the Dual Mandate, Together,” The region, Federal Re-
  serve Bank of Minneapolis.

K OHN , D. L. (2010): “Homework Assignments for Monetary Policymakers,” Speech, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

K RUGMAN , P. R. (1998): “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 29, 137–206.

L ASEEN , S.   AND   L. E. S VENSSON (2011): “Anticipated Alternative policy Rate Paths in Policy
  Simulations,” International Journal of Central Banking, 7, 1–35.

L EVIN , A., D. L OPEZ -S ALIDO , E. N ELSON , AND Y. Y UN (2010): “Limitations on the Effectiveness
  of Forward Guidance at the Zero Lower Bound,” International Journal of Central Banking, 6, 143–
  189.

L EVIN , A., V. W IELAND ,    AND   J. C. W ILLIAMS (2003): “The Performance of Forecast-Based Mon-
  etary Policy Rules Under Model Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 93, 622–645.

L EVIN , A. T., A. O NATSKI , J. W ILLIAMS ,   AND   N. M. W ILLIAMS (2006): “Monetary Policy Under
  Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  2005, Volume 20, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 229–312.

M ANKIW, N. G.       AND   R. R EIS (2002): “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal To
  Replace The New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1295–1328.

——— (2010): “Imperfect Information and Aggregate Supply,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics,
  ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics,
  chap. 5, 183–229.

M EYER -G OHDE , A. (2010): “Linear Rational-Expectations Modesl with Lagged Expectations: A
  Synthetic Method,” Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 34, 984–1002.

R EIFSCHNEIDER , D.     AND   J. C. W ILLIAMS (2000): “Three lessons for monetary policy in a low-
  inflation era,” Conference Series ; [Proceedings], 936–978.

R EIS , R. (2009): “Optimal Monetary Policy Rules in an Estimated Sticky-Information Model,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1, 1–28.


                                                     43
R OTEMBERG , J. J. (1982): “Sticky Prices in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, 90, 1187–
  1211.

S BORDONE , A. M. (2002): “Prices and unit labor costs: a new test of price stickiness,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 49, 265–292.

S CHMITT-G ROH É , S.   AND   M. U RIBE (2006): “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a Medium-
  Scale Macroeconomic Model,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, Volume 20, National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 383–462.

S METS , F.   AND   R. W OUTERS (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
  DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–608.

S VENSSON , L. E. O. (2011): “Practical Monetary Policy: Examples from Sweden and the United
  States,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42, 289–352.

TAYLOR , J. B. (1993): “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.

——— (1999): “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Monetary Policy Rules, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 319–348.

TAYLOR , J. B. AND V. W IELAND (2012): “Surprising Comparative Properties of Monetary Models:
  Results from a New Model Database,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 800–816.

TAYLOR , J. B.   AND   J. C. W ILLIAMS (2010): “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy,” in
  Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of
  Handbook of Monetary Economics, chap. 15, 829–859.

W OODFORD , M. (2003): Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press.

——— (2010): “Optimal Monetary Stabilization Policy,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by
  B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics, chap. 14,
  723–828.

Y ELLEN , J. L. (2012): “Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications,” Speech,
  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




                                                  44
                     Online Appendix for
     Effective Monetary Policy Strategies in New Keynesian
                  Models: A Re-examination
                Hess Chung, Ed Herbst, and Michael T. Kiley


A     Data for Estimation of Model.
The data covers 1966:Q1 to 2007:Q4. The construction follows that of Smets and Wouters
(2007). Output data come from the NIPA; other sources are noted in the exposition.
    1. Per Capita Real Output Growth. Take the level of real gross domestic product,
       (FRED mnemonic “GDPC1”), call it GDPt . Take the quarterly average of the Civilian
       Non-institutional Population (FRED mnemonic “CNP16OV” / BLS series “LNS10000000”),
       normalized so that it’s 1992Q3 value is one, call it POPt . Then,
                                                                                              
                                                               GDPt                   GDPt−1
           Per Capita Real Output Growth = 100 log                        − log                        .
                                                               POPt                   POPt−1

    2. Per Capita Real Consumption Growth. Take the level of personal consumption
       expenditures (FRED mnemonic “PCEC”), call it CONSt . Take the level of the GDP
       price deflator (FRED mnemonic “GDPDEF”), call it GDPPt . Then
                                                                                                               
                                                                    CONSt                           CONSt−1
      Per Capita Real Consumption Growth = 100 log                                    − log                             .
                                                                   GDPPt POPt                     GDPPt−1 POPt−1

    3. Per Capita Real Investment Growth. Take the level of fixed private investment
       (FRED mnemonic “FPI”), call it I NVt . Then,
                                                                                                           
                                                                 I NVt                           I NVt−1
      Per Capita Real Investment Growth = 100 log                                 − log                             .
                                                               GDPPt POPt                     GDPPt−1 POPt−1

    4. Per Capita Real Wage Growth. Take the BLS measure of compensation per hour for
       the nonfarm business sector (FRED mnemonic “COMPNFB” / BLS series “PRS85006103”),
       call it Wt . Then
                                                                                              
                                                            Wt                        Wt−1
          Per Capita Real Wage Growth = 100 log                          − log                             .
                                                           GDPPt                     GDPPt−1

    5. Per Capita Hours Index. Take the index of average weekly nonfarm business hours
       (FRED mnemonic / BLS series “PRS85006023”), call it HOURSt . Take the number

                                         A-1
   of employed civilians (FRED mnemonic “CE16OV”), normalized so that its 1992Q3
   value is 1, call it EMPt . Then,
                                                                        
                                                        HOURSt EMPt
                     Per Capita Hours = 100 log                              .
                                                           POPt

   The series is then demeaned.

6. Inflation. Take the GDP price deflator, then
                                                                
                                                        GDPPt
                             Inflation = 100 log                     .
                                                       GDPPt−1

7. Federal Funds Rate. Take the effective federal funds rate (FRED mnemonic “FED-
   FUNDS”), call it FFRt . Then,

                               Federal Funds Rate = FFRt /4.


8. Inflation Expectations. Take the SPF’s measure of 10-year average inflation expec-
   tations, call it LRPt . Since this is a CPI-based expectation, we subtract 0.5 percentage
   points from the annualized number to convert into a number comparable with the
   GDP deflator. Then,

                         Inflation Expectations = ( LRPt − 0.5)/4.


9. Spread. As a measure of financial spreads we use the difference between the S&P
   BBB rate (call it RBBBt ) and the 10-year Treasury rate, call it RG10t . Then,

                              Spread = ( RBBBt − RG10t )/4.




                                          A-2
B    Additional Tables

                      Table A-1: Prior Distribution for SW Model



 Parameter   Type   Para (1)      Para (2)          Parameter    Type       Para (1)        Para (2)
      β̄     Gamma   0.25          0.10                 ρa       Beta        0.50            0.20
     π̄      Gamma   0.62          0.10                 ρb       Beta        0.50            0.20
      l¯     Normal  0.00          2.00                 ρg       Beta        0.50            0.20
      α      Normal  0.30          0.05                 ρq       Beta        0.50            0.20
     σc      Normal  1.50          0.38                ρm        Beta        0.50            0.20
     Φ       Normal  1.25          0.12                 ρp       Beta        0.50            0.20
      ϕ      Normal  4.00          1.50                ρw        Beta        0.50            0.20
      h      Beta    0.70          0.10                ρπ ∗      Beta        0.95            0.05
    λw       Beta    0.50          0.10                 gy       Beta        0.50            0.20
     σl      Normal  2.00          0.75                 µp       Beta        0.50            0.20
    λp       Beta    0.50          0.10                µw        Beta        0.50            0.20
     ιw      Beta    0.50          0.15                 σa       Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
     ιp      Beta    0.50          0.15                 σb       Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
     ψ       Beta    0.50          0.15                 σg       Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
     rπ      Normal  1.50          0.25                 σq       Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
      ρ      Beta    0.75          0.10                σm        Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
     ry      Normal  0.12          0.05                 σp       Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
    r∆y      Normal  0.12          0.05                σw        Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00
     ρa      Beta    0.50          0.20                σπ ∗      Inv. Gamma  0.10            2.00

Notes: Para (1) and Para (2) correspond to the mean and standard deviation of the Beta,
Gamma, and Normal distributions and to the upper and lower bounds of the support for
the Uniform distribution. For the Inv. Gamma distribution, Para (1) and Para (2) refer to
                                      2   2
s and ν, where p(σ |ν, s) ∝ σ−ν−1 e−νs /2σ .




                                             A-3
Table A-2: Posterior For Sticky-Information and Sticky-Price Models


                     Sticky Information       Sticky Price
     Parameter    Mean [0.05, 0.95]       Mean [0.05, 0.95]
     β̄           0.16 [ 0.08, 0.26]      0.18 [ 0.08, 0.29]
     π̄           0.69 [ 0.54, 0.88]      0.71 [ 0.55, 0.89]
     l¯           -1.40 [-4.00, 0.95]     -0.77 [-3.08, 1.35]
     α            0.20 [ 0.16, 0.23]      0.20 [ 0.17, 0.24]
     σc           1.13 [ 0.94, 1.34]      1.10 [ 0.89, 1.31]
     Φ            1.48 [ 1.35, 1.61]      1.53 [ 1.39, 1.68]
      ϕ           6.31 [ 4.47, 8.31]      5.97 [ 4.24, 8.08]
     h            0.63 [ 0.52, 0.73]      0.60 [ 0.50, 0.72]
     λw           0.41 [ 0.23, 0.56]      0.49 [ 0.38, 0.62]
     σl           2.58 [ 1.63, 3.51]      2.00 [ 1.18, 2.89]
     λp           0.26 [ 0.16, 0.35]      0.64 [ 0.55, 0.73]
     ιw           0.50 [ 0.27, 0.74]      0.48 [ 0.31, 0.64]
     ιp           0.49 [ 0.25, 0.74]      0.43 [ 0.30, 0.58]
     ψ            0.74 [ 0.60, 0.86]      0.75 [ 0.62, 0.88]
     rπ           2.13 [ 1.84, 2.43]      2.19 [ 1.92, 2.47]
     ρ            0.88 [ 0.85, 0.92]      0.85 [ 0.81, 0.88]
     ry           0.01 [-0.03, 0.06]      -0.02 [-0.04, 0.01]
     r∆y          0.20 [ 0.16, 0.25]      0.17 [ 0.12, 0.22]
     ρa           0.89 [ 0.85, 0.93]      0.91 [ 0.86, 0.95]
     ρb           0.59 [ 0.25, 0.83]      0.62 [ 0.27, 0.80]
     ρg           0.96 [ 0.94, 0.98]      0.96 [ 0.94, 0.98]
     ρq           0.72 [ 0.60, 0.83]      0.69 [ 0.56, 0.81]
     ρm           0.25 [ 0.12, 0.39]      0.35 [ 0.21, 0.50]
     ρp           0.89 [ 0.82, 0.94]      0.92 [ 0.84, 0.98]
     ρw           0.92 [ 0.81, 0.97]      0.97 [ 0.93, 0.99]
     ρπ ∗         1.00 [ 0.99, 1.00]      1.00 [ 0.99, 1.00]
     gy           0.39 [ 0.22, 0.57]      0.40 [ 0.22, 0.58]
     µp           0.50 [ 0.36, 0.61]      0.67 [ 0.48, 0.80]
     µw           0.40 [ 0.20, 0.62]      0.66 [ 0.48, 0.83]
     σa           0.37 [ 0.33, 0.42]      0.37 [ 0.33, 0.42]
     σb           0.11 [ 0.07, 0.17]      0.11 [ 0.07, 0.17]
     σg           0.39 [ 0.35, 0.45]      0.40 [ 0.35, 0.45]
     σq           0.33 [ 0.26, 0.41]      0.33 [ 0.25, 0.41]
     σm           0.13 [ 0.11, 0.15]      0.13 [ 0.11, 0.15]
     σp           0.18 [ 0.16, 0.21]      0.10 [ 0.09, 0.12]
     σw           1.37 [ 0.96, 1.92]      0.38 [ 0.30, 0.47]
     σπ ∗         0.03 [ 0.03, 0.04]      0.03 [ 0.03, 0.04]




                                4
