                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MICROECONOMIC UNCERTAINTY, INTERNATIONAL TRADE, AND AGGREGATE
                         FLUCTUATIONS

                                          George Alessandria
                                              Horag Choi
                                          Joseph P. Kaboski
                                           Virgiliu Midrigan

                                         Working Paper 20616
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20616


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2014




Molin Zhong provided excellent research assistance. We thank Kyle Handley and Hanno Lustig and
audiences at Carnegie-Rochester NYU conference on public policy, EIEF, Emory University, The
Ohio State University, Northwestern University, and the NBER conference on the Macroeconomic
Consequeneces of Uncertainty for helpful comments. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-NYU-Rochester
conference series.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by George Alessandria, Horag Choi, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Microeconomic Uncertainty, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations
George Alessandria, Horag Choi, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 20616
October 2014
JEL No. E31,F12

                                           ABSTRACT

The extent and direction of causation between micro volatility and business cycles are debated. We
examine, empirically and theoretically, the source and effects of fluctuations in the dispersion of
producer-level sales and production over the business cycle. On the theoretical side, we study the
effect of exogenous first- and second-moment shocks to producer-level productivity in a two-country
DSGE model with heterogenous producers and an endogenous dynamic export participation decision.
First-moment shocks cause endogenous fluctuations in producer-level dispersion by reallocating
production internationally, while second-moment shocks lead to increases in trade relative to GDP in
recessions. Empirically, using detailed product-level data in the motor vehicle industry and industry-
level data of U.S. manufacturers, we find evidence that international reallocation is indeed important
for understanding cross-industry variation in cyclical patterns of measured dispersion.


George Alessandria                                Joseph P. Kaboski
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Rochester                           University of Notre Dame
Harkness 204                                      434 Flanner Hall
Rochester, NY 14627                               Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER                                          and NBER
george.alessandria@rochester.edu                  jkaboski@nd.edu

Horag Choi                                        Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Monash University                                 New York University
900 Dandenong Road                                19 W. 4th St.
Caulfield East, VIC 3145                          New York, NY 10012
Australia                                         and NBER
horag.choi@monash.edu                             virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
1         Introduction

A growing literature attributes an important fraction of cyclical ‡uctuations in output
to changes in the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks a¤ecting heterogenous producers.
This literature shows in a range of closed economy models that more volatile producer-
speci…c shocks can generate a downturn in economic activity. A primary example is the
Great Recession, during which there was a substantial increase in dispersion of growth
rates across establishments. Still, understanding the extent to which volatility leads to
recessions, or recessions lead to volatility, remains an important task.1 In this paper, we
revisit the relationship between idiosyncratic volatility and business cycles empirically and
theoretically. We do so in the context of an open economy model with non-convex trade
participation decisions across heterogenous producers. Trade models and data constitute a
natural laboratory for examining the role of uncertainty, since the selection into exporting is
well understood. Moreover, …rms rely to di¤erent extents on international trade, so swings
in international trade a¤ect …rms di¤erentially. Additionally, international business cycles
are not perfectly synchronized, so net exports ‡uctuate in response to country-speci…c
shocks.
        On the theoretical side, our analysis focuses on the e¤ects of both …rst- and second-
moment shocks in a variation of the two-country real business cycle model of Backus, Kehoe,
and Kydland (1994) extended to include producer heterogeneity and realistic entry and exit
from the export market as in Alessandria and Choi (2007).2 This model captures the well-
    1
     Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al. (2013) argue that volatility leads to recessions. In Bachmann and
Moscarini (2012), recessions lead to experimentation and thus to micro volatility. Bloom (2013) gives an
excellent review of the literature. The work by Decker, D’Erasmo, and Moscoso Boedo (2014) is perhaps
the most relevant to ours. They model endogenous countercyclical volatility through …rm’s choice of the
number of markets in which to sell. Their empirical measures of markets are industries and the number
and locations of establishments, however.
   2
     The Alessandria-Choi model is a general equilibrium variation of the partial equilibrium model of …rm
export participation in the presence of idiosyncratic and aggregate uncertainty and a sunk export cost
developed in a series of papers by Baldwin, Krugman, and Dixit to explain the non-linear relationship
between the real exchange rate and net exports in the 1980’s. Variations of this model have been shown to



                                                    1
known features that (1) not all producers export, (2) those that do are relatively large,
and (3) exporting is quite persistent. We …rst consider the e¤ect of …rst-moment shocks
to the level of productivity on aggregate output and measured producer-level dispersion.
Here we …nd that a home productivity shock (e.g., a recession in the U.S.) will generate
an increase in the dispersion in sales growth across heterogenous producers through two
channels. First, there is a direct cost channel. The country-speci…c shock a¤ects the relative
costs of imported and domestic goods, leading to a reallocation of purchases between the
two and thus an increase in the dispersion of consumer purchases. Second, there is a market
participation channel as domestic producers di¤er in their export participation. A country-
speci…c shock a¤ects non-exporters di¤erently from exporters, leading to a reallocation of
production across these heterogenous producers. Clearly, these channels depend critically
on openness. We show that the model can generate potentially quantitatively important
‡uctuations in dispersion.
   We use the open economy model to consider the e¤ect of exogenous second-moment3
shocks to producer-level productivity, as studied by Bloom et al. (2013) and Arellano,
et al. (2012) in a closed economy. Contrary to this closed economy literature, we …nd
that a shock increasing producer-level dispersion increases exports. Though the increase in
exports is small, it is two orders of magnitude larger than the impact on output itself, as
higher dispersion allows exporting …rms to export more. Thus, the ratio of trade to GDP
rises. Given that trade fell substantially more than output during the Great Recession,
this constitutes a puzzle for the model.
   We next evaluate the importance of …rst-moment shocks on measured producer-level
capture the cross-section and dynamics of export participation of producers in many countries (see Das,
Roberts, and Tybout (2007) and Alessandria and Choi (2011a)) as well as the dynamics of trade growth
(Alessandria and Choi (2011b).
   3
     Novy and Taylor (2014) examine the role of shocks to aggregate uncertainty on trade ‡ows in an
sS inventory model with higher …xed costs of sourcing abroad than at home as in Alessandria, Kaboski,
and Midrigan (2010). Bekes, Fontagne, Murakozy, and Vicard (2014) study how changes in idiosyncratic
demand uncertainty a¤ect the size and frequency of trade ‡ows. Carballo, Handley and Limao (2014)
consider the e¤ect of uncertainty about trade policy on trade in the great trade collapse.

                                                  2
dispersion by examining the role of reallocation from international trade in explaining the
increase in dispersion measured by Bloom et al. (2013). We focus narrowly on the cross-
sectional measures of sales and expenditure growth rather than on other measures, such
as the volatility of stock earnings (e.g., Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh,
2014, and Bloom et al., 2013), which our model is less suited to address.4
       At the aggregate level, we …nd that international reallocation is as strongly related to
‡uctuations in uncertainty as GDP growth is. Across a wide range of industries, interna-
tional reallocation is an important source of ‡uctuations in industry-level dispersion over
time. Industries with the largest increase in dispersion are more open both in the narrow
period 2007 to 2009 and in periods of international reallocation more broadly.
       Finally, we look within a particular industry, using automobiles as a case study. The
automobile industry is an important industry that had a large and persistent decline in
economic activity during the Great Recession. It is also extremely well measured, allowing
us to look at product-level variation as well as at variation for …rms both within and
outside of the U.S. We …nd that an important share of the increased dispersion in sales
and production from 2008 to 2011 can be attributed to reallocation between the Big 3
…rms and Japanese …rms. This reallocation is driven by identi…able shocks: a spike in oil
prices that has a relatively stronger impact on the Big 3, the pre-bankruptcy crisis and
post-bankruptcy recovery of the Big 3, and the Japanese tsunami which lowered Japanese
sales. Indeed, we …nd that the Japanese tsunami, a clear country-speci…c supply shock,
generates a rise in dispersion of sales and production growth that is nearly as large and
persistent as the rise observed during the Great Recession.
       The next section develops and calibrates the two-country model of heterogenous pro-
ducers with an endogenous export decision. In Section 3, we study how the model economy
   4
    Fillat and Garetto (2012) do show that excess stock returns are related to export and multinational
production participation and that these di¤erences in returns can be rationalized in a model of with sunk
costs of export participation and multinational production.



                                                   3
responds to …rst- and second-moment shocks. Section 4 presents evidence on the relation-
ship between industry volatility and trade reallocation both across industries and within
automobiles, our case study. Section 5 concludes.



2     Model

We describe and calibrate a modi…ed version of the model of Alessandria and Choi (2007),
augmented to allow for idiosyncratic volatility with country speci…c time-varying dispersion.
Speci…cally, there are two symmetric countries, home (H) and foreign (F ), each with a unit
mass of heterogeneous producers producing di¤erentiated intermediate goods. Intermediate
goods producers di¤er exogenously by the variety they produce and their productivity, and
endogenously by their capital and exporter status. Exporting requires both an up-front
cost to start exporting and a …xed continuation cost to stay in the market in subsequent
periods. In each country, competitive …rms produce …nal goods with a CES technology
that combines composites of domestic and imported goods. The domestic composite good
is an aggregate of the full range of domestic intermediates, while the composite imported
good combines only intermediate goods from the subset of the other country’s …rms that
export.


2.1       Intermediate Goods Producers

In each country, a unit mass of monopolistically competitive intermediate goods producers
are indexed by i 2 [0; 1]. Each producer produces output for the domestic market (yH for
home), and potentially an export market (yH for Home), using a constant returns to scale,
Cobb-Douglas technology. Producers vary in their productivity z:


(1)   yH (i) + m0 (i)yH (i) = y(i) = ez(i) eA k(i) l(i)1   :


                                                 4
       Here A indicates a (stochastic) aggregate productivity parameter, z (i) is a stochastic
idiosyncratic productivity shock drawn from a process with a time varying country-speci…c
standard deviation of       ",   k (i) is the producer’s capital stock, and l (i) is the labor used
in production. We denote whether or not a …rm is exporting using the indicator function
m0 (i), which equals 1 if the …rm decides to export in the current period and 0 otherwise.
       In addition to this exporting decision, intermediate …rms accumulate capital, hire labor,
and set prices. Given inverse demand functions p(yH ) and p (yH ), within-period pro…ts
depend on productivity, accumulated capital, and the choice of export status:


          (z; k; m0 ) = max p(yH )yH + m0 p (yH )yH     Wt l   s:t: (1);
                        l



where Wt is the wage.
       The export and capital investment decisions, m and x, are dynamic. Capital depreciates
at a rate      and must be purchased in the prior period. Exporting status, m0 ; is chosen
contemporaneously, but it entails a cost that depends on whether the …rm exported in the
previous period, m. Speci…cally, the cost, f (m), in units of labor, depends on the …rm’s
past export status, m, with f (0)          f (1) > 0. That is, f (0)    f (1) is an up-front (sunk)
cost of entering the export market, while f (1) is a per-period …xed cost of exporting.5
       The intermediate …rms choose exports and investment to solve the following dynamic
recursive problem:


         V (z; m; k; ) = max
                          0
                             (z; k; m0 )         Wt m0 f (m)       Px
                             m ;x

                            +EQ0 V (z 0 ; m0 ; x + (1    )k;   0
                                                                   );


where P is the price of the investment good and Q0 denotes the stochastic discount factor.
   5
   Only the previous period’s export status a¤ects the …xed cost of exporting, so once a producer stops
exporting it must pay f (0) to reenter the market.



                                                   5
      Here      denotes the aggregate state. We assume that E(z 0 jz) is weakly increasing in
z. The law of motion for idiosyncratic productivity, z, is potentially subject to stochastic
idiosyncratic volatility shocks. If the distribution of idiosyncratic productivity is su¢ ciently
dispersed, the …xed costs of exporting imply that the optimal export decision follows a
threshold rule: export if z                 z(m; k), where z(m; k) is decreasing in both m and k. The
optimal law of motion for capital also depends on the exporting decision m0 and satis…es


(2)     P = E [Q0 [Vk00 (z 0 ; m0 ; k 0 ;    0
                                                 )]] :



2.2       Final Goods Producers

The demand that intermediate goods producers face comes from the producers of the …nal
goods. There exists a single …nal good in each country that can be used for either con-
sumption or investment. A representative competitive …nal goods producer in each country
aggregates intermediate goods into …nal goods consumption according to an Armington ag-
gregator with a nested constant elasticity of substitution aggregator. For the home …nal
goods producer, the available varieties of intermediates include all domestic varieties but
only the varieties of foreign intermediates of producers that choose to export.
      Using home as an example, it is convenient to de…ne the domestic (i.e., home) and
imported (i.e., foreign) aggregates, YH and YF ; separately as follows:

                0                                                              1
                     X Z
                                                                                        1
                                                             1
(3)     YH = @                       d
                                    yH (z; m; k)                 (z; m; k) dkdz A           ;
                    m=f0;1g   z;k



and

               0                                                             1
                     X Z
                                                                                    1
                                                         1
(4)     YF = @                      yFd (z; m; k)                (z; m; k)dkdz A        ;
                   m=f0;1g    z;k




                                                                    6
where       (z; m; k) and        (z; m; k) denote the measure of home and foreign intermediate
goods …rms, respectively. Note that while the imported goods aggregator is de…ned over
all foreign varieties, demand for foreign varieties that are not exported is constrained to be
zero.
       These domestic and imported composites are then aggregated in Armington fashion to
produce …nal consumption, C, and investment goods, x(z; m; k):

               X Z                                                       1       1      1       1
(5)      C+                   x(z; m; k) (z; m; k)dkdz = D =    YH           + ! t YF               ;
              m=f0;1g   z;k



where ! < 1 produces a bias for domestically produced goods. To match the cyclicality
of trade we allow for shocks to ! t , ! t in each country. Stockman and Tesar (1995) and
Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010) …nd these preference shocks to be important determi-
nants of trade ‡ows.6
       Taking the price of …nal goods, P ; intermediate prices, pH (z; m; k), pH (z; m; k); and
the measures of intermediate …rms as given, the static pro…t maximization of …nal goods
producers yields iso-elastic demand functions for intermediate producers of the form

                                pH (z; m; k)          PH
         yH (z; m; k) =                                    Y;
                                    PH                P
                               8
                               >
                               <                  0             if m0 (z; m; k) = 0
         yH (z; m; k) =                                                                     ;
                               >
                               : !   pH (z;m;k)       PH
                                                           Y         0
                                                                if m (z; m; k) = 1
                                         PH           P

   6
    Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2013) show that these “shocks” may actually primarily re‡ect
the di¤erential inventory investment decisions of importers, exporters, and domestic …rms over the busi-
ness cycles. For our purposes, we abstract from these endogenous ‡uctuations in the import preference
parameters.




                                                       7
and the following equilibrium price formulas:

                                            1
       P =     PH1 + !PF1    1
                                ;
              0                                                             111
                  X Z
      PH    = @          pH (z; m; k)1                         (z; m; k) dkdz A   ,
                   m=f0;1g    z;k

               0                                                                       111
                     X Z
      PH = @                        m0 (z; m; k) pH (z; m; k)1            (z; m; k) dkdz A   :
                   m=f0;1g    z;k



   Given iso-elastic demand, the intermediate goods producers charge a constant markup
over marginal cost:


      pH (z; m; k) = pH (z; m; k) =                        mc(z; m; k);
                                                       1

where the

                             W l(z; m; k)
      mc(z; m; k) =                          :
                          (1    ) y(z; m; k)


2.3    Consumer’s Problem

The representative consumer in both countries is in…nitely lived. Given the symmetry, we
develop the home consumer’s problem, and the analogous problem for foreign is denoted
with an asterisk. The home consumer chooses sequences of consumption, Ct , labor, Lt , and
bond holdings, Bt , to maximize expected utility:

                            X
                            1
                                    t
      VC;0 = max E0                     U (Ct ; Lt )
             Ct ;Lt ;Bt
                            t=0




                                                                8
   subject to the sequence of budget constraints,

                       Wt                        t
      Ct + Qt Bt          Lt + Bt    1   +           ;
                       Pt                    Pt

where    t   is the sum of pro…ts (net of export costs and capital investment) of the home
country’s intermediate goods producers.
   The bond Bt is noncontingent, paying one unit of the home country’s composite …nal
good in period t + 1; and its price in period t is Qt . An analogous bond exists for foreign.
The Euler equation is therefore

                   UC;t+1      UC ;t+1 Pt Pt+1
      Qt = Et             = Et                 ;
                    UC;t        UC ;t Pt+1 Pt

where Uc;t is the marginal utility of consumption.


2.4     Equilibrium and Computation

The equilibrium de…nition largely follows that in Alessandria and Choi (2007). The distrib-
ution of producers by country over export status, capital, and productivity in each country
is part of the state of the economy ( (z; m; k) ;                 (z; m; k)).
   In addition, bond holdings and the stochastic levels of TFP, A and A , are also included
in the aggregate state:


        = (B; A; A ; !; ! ;     ";   ";      ;           );


where ( " ;   ")   denote the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic productivity.




                                                              9
2.5     Calibration

To perform our quantitative analysis, we need to calibrate the utility function, technologies,
and exogenous stochastic processes for aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity. Our cali-
bration again closely follows that of Alessandria and Choi (2007), with the exception of the
shock process to idiosyncratic productivity z, which here allows for stochastic idiosyncratic
volatility.
    We use a constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution utility function that is Cobb-
Douglas in consumption and leisure. Normalizing the time endowment to one, we have



                                      1
                   C (1         L)1
      U (C; L) =
                            1

    We choose standard values for the preference parameters: the discount factor       = 0:96
with a period equaling a year, consistent with an annual return to capital of 4 percent;
logarithmic utility ( = 1); and the share of consumption in utility is chosen so that one-
quarter of non-sleep time is spent working.
    For the Cobb-Douglas intermediate goods production functions, we assign           = 0:36,
consistent with standard measures of capital’s share in income. We assign        = 0:1 as the
annual depreciation rate of capital, which is consistent with a steady state capital output
ratio of 2.5. In the …nal goods aggregator, we choose an Armington elasticity          = 1:5,
in the midrange of estimates of the elasticity between domestic and imported goods in
the U.S. (Gallaway, McDaniel, and Rivera, 2003). The elasticity of substitution between
varieties is set to 3, so       = 3; and implies a markup of 50 percent over marginal cost.
This structure implies that goods from the same country are better substitutes than goods
from di¤erent countries and is necessary to have some chance of generating reasonable




                                               10
international business cycles.7
       We assume that z is drawn from log normal distribution with log mean of zero and
a standard deviation,        ".   For simplicity, we also assume that these shocks are iid over
time.8 Given this iid structure and the persistent export decision, the optimal capital stock
(determined the period before) will vary simply by whether or not the …rm exported in the
previous period.
       The standard deviation for idiosyncratic productivity,           ",   export costs, f (0) ; f (1) ; and
the home bias parameter, !; jointly determine trade ‡ows, export participation, exporter
entry and exit, the size of exporters relative to non-exporters, and volatility of producer
growth. We target a trade to GDP ratio of 20 percent, 22 percent of U.S. producers
exporting, and an annualized exit rate from exporting of about 5 percent. The standard
deviation of idiosyncratic shocks a¤ects both the volatility of producer growth and the
exporter premium. With the iid shocks we consider, we cannot simultaneously match
both features of the data. We target instead intermediate values for these moments: an
employment volatility of 16.5 percent (higher than the 10 percent in U.S. Manufacturing,
e.g. Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh 1998) and 2.5 exporter premium (lower than the 4.5
ratio in the U.S. Census of Manufacturers).
       This calibration yields    "   = 0:075; and a ratio of startup export costs to continuation
costs of 1.03, i.e., f (0)=f (1) = 1:03. The ratio of entry costs to continuation costs in this
calibration is relatively low compared to previous estimates in the literature in models
with persistent idiosyncratic shocks (see Das, Roberts, and Tybout, 2007, or Alessandria
and Choi, 2011a). The highly persistent decision to export arises primarily from capital
being predetermined and the slight cost advantage of serving foreign markets with existing
   7
     Having domestic and foreign varieties be equally substitutable leads to business cycles that are not
very synchronized.
   8
     Adding persistence to the z process requires recalibrating the export costs in order to match the
persistence of exporter behavior but, after recalibration, has small impacts on the overall results we present.




                                                      11
exporters.9 Given the important …nding of high entry costs, we will also consider versions in
which exporting has more of an investment component. Table 1 summarizes our parameter
values.


         Insert Table 1


       Figure 1 shows how trade interacts with idiosyncratic productivity shocks to determine
the (log) size distribution. With iid shocks, productivity is log normally distributed. The
top panel shows the distribution of domestic shipments and overall shipments of domes-
tic producers. Domestic shipments are close to log normally distributed, although there
is more mass in the right tail owing to the di¤erent capital stocks of exporters and non-
exporters.10;11 The distribution of overall shipments, though, has a fatter right tail than
domestic shipments as more productive producers are more likely to export and hence have
larger sales. The middle panel shows the distribution of purchases by domestic produc-
ers. The distribution of domestic shipments is the same as before. In addition, there is a
distribution of expenditures on imports. The typical importer sells more than the typical
domestic producer. When these distributions are put together again, the distribution of
consumer purchases has more mass in the right tail. Changes in export participation by
domestic and foreign producers will a¤ect the sales and production distributions. The bot-
tom panel shows the distribution of changes in sales and expenditures.12 Both distributions
depart slightly from log-normal. The distribution of sales (shipments by manufacturers)
has more producers that grow/shrink 30 to 50 percent than predicted by the shocks. These
   9
     Without a capital accumulation decision, the same dispersion of productivity shocks and stopper rate
would lead to entry costs that are 66 percent larger than continuation costs.
  10
     Recall that exporters with more capital are more likely to continue in the export market, and this
extra capital can contribute to larger sales at home.
  11
     The bimodality of the distribution disappears with more dispersion in idiosyncratic shocks.
  12
     We calculate growth relative to averages over the two periods. Therefore, for sellers’ sales growth
dispersion, foreign exporters who leave the local (i.e., exporting) market are counted as having a decline
of -2 while new exporters have sales growth of +2.


                                                   12
producers are the ones starting and stopping to export. In general, the model captures the
well-known empirical feature that there is a hierarchy of growth rates related to changes
in export participation (i.e. starters grow faster than continuing exporters who grow faster
than continuing non-exporters who in turn grow faster than stoppers, Bernard and Jensen,
1999; and Alessandria and Choi, 2011a).13



3      Model Experiments

The benchmark model is a steady-state model with no aggregate uncertainty. Into this
model we consider two types of experiments. First, we consider shocks to the …rst moments
of productivity and import preferences that lead to recessions and trade ‡ows similar to
the data. Second, we study the impact of shocks to the second moment of idiosyncratic
productivity shocks.


3.1     First-moment Shocks

We …rst consider the impact of the business cycle on the dispersion in economic activity
across producers and sellers in the presence of international trade. We ask: How would a
typical U.S. recession a¤ect measured dispersion in the U.S.? The recession is modeled with
a persistent home negative productivity shock (At ) along with preference shocks on home
and foreign imports (! t ; ! t ). The shock to the preference for imports is included to capture
the well-known cyclical features of trade: Imports tend to fall more than expenditures on
tradable goods, and exports tend to fall less than production of tradables and may even
rise at the start of a recession.14 In this way we can capture how the movements in trade
  13
     The model is consistent with growth premia related to changes in export status at di¤erent horizons.
The quantitative …t of the model is slightly better over longer horizons.
  14
     The preference shock allows us to address a shortcoming in standard international RBC models, where
imports are less procyclical than in the data while exports are more procyclical. Additionally, imports
tend not to fall enough in recessions. The relatively large drop in imports is not solely due to trade being



                                                    13
‡ows give rise to changes in dispersion across home producers and sellers.
    Speci…cally we assume shocks to productivity and preferences for imports have a simple
AR(1) formulation:


      At+1 =        A At   + "A;t

      At+1 =        A At   + "A;t

       ln ! t = (1         ! ) ln !   +   !   ln ! t   1   + "!;t

      ln ! t = (1          ! ) ln !   +   !   ln ! t   1   + "!;t :


We follow much of the literature in setting                    A    =   !   = 0:954 : We set "A =    0:05 and hold
productivity constant in foreign ("A = 0). We then choose "! so that imports fall twice as
                                                                              "!
much as production in the …rst period, and set "! =                            2
                                                                                   to have exports grow slightly.
    We follow the emerging literature on micro volatility and report the standard deviation
of growth in producer-level outcomes. We use “sales” to refer to the distribution of total
shipments of home producers (for both domestic use and exports) and “expenditures”when
referring to the distribution of expenditures of home consumers on varieties (both domestic
and imported) available at home.
    To …x ideas, we report the results for a model in which the sunk cost of exporting is high
enough to essentially …x export participation along with our benchmark model in which 5
percent of exporters exit each year. The results of the model with no entry and exit from
exporting are presented in Figure 2.
    With export participation essentially …xed, a typical recession will tend to temporarily
increase both the dispersion of the growth in sales of domestic producers and the dispersion
of growth of expenditures on goods at home. The increase in domestic shipments is a little
intensive in cyclical goods like capital and durables, but remains even after controlling for composition.
Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2010) document these dynamics of imports and exports in the U.S.
recessions since 1969.



                                                              14
over 1 percent, while the increase in expenditures is close to 4.8 percent. The increase
in dispersion of domestic producer shipments growth arises because sales of home non-
exporters fall more than those of exporters, since exports are initially fairly stable. Overall
sales fall about 11.5 percent for the average non-exporters and only 7.4 percent for the
average exporter.
       Dispersion in expenditure growth rises by more than dispersion in producer shipments
primarily because expenditures on imports fall more than expenditures on domestically
produced goods. This feature of the model arises because of the presence of preference
shocks. Additionally, stable export sales combined with the predetermined capital stock
implies that non-exporter sales at home actually fall by less than those of exporters, which
adds to the increase in sales growth dispersion (because the cost of production rises more
for exporters than non-exporters).
       Figure 3 shows that allowing export participation to respond endogenously to the shocks
increases the change in the dispersion of domestic producer shipments growth from 1 to 2.5
percent.15 The increase arises primarily because the stock of home exporters (denoted N in
the …gure) rises temporarily 16 through an increase in starters (denoted n0) and a reduction
in stoppers (denoted n1). In the model and the data, starters grow faster than continuing
exporters and non-exporters which grow faster than stoppers. The strong initial decline in
imports leads to a decline in the number of foreign exporters driven by a bigger decline in
exit than entry. The decline in foreign exporters is temporary since the aggregate shock
a¤ects only home production, and as the foreign country rebuilds its stock of exporters
(through more entry and less exit) this generates a slightly more persistent increase in
sales dispersion.
  15
     The shocks here have been adjusted to have the same impacts on output, imports, and exports as in
the previous model with exogenous export participation.
  16
     This feature of the model is strongly tied to countercyclicality of net exports, which arises in part from
capital accumulation. With capital, real net exports will move into surplus in a recession, as the recession
leads to a reduction in capital investment at home and a slight increase in foreign investment. Without
capital, one needs much larger trade costs to generate the countercyclical nature of net exports.

                                                      15
3.2       Second-moment Shocks

We next consider the impact of changes in the volatility of shocks to producer-level pro-
ductivity. This sort of shock has featured prominently in the work of Bloom (2009), Bloom
et al. (2013), and Arellano, et al. (2012). Here we …nd that these shocks have a very small
impact on output, but have somewhat larger e¤ects on trade ‡ows through the selection
e¤ects with endogenous exporting.
       As is well known, increasing dispersion will generally increase output in models with
heterogeneous producers (via the Oi-Hartman-Abel e¤ect). As is standard, (Bloom, 2009),
we eliminate this e¤ect by utilizing an aggregate TFP shock that removes this e¤ect in the
closed economy.17 It is assumed that the autoregressive process for              ";t   is


         ln   ";t   = (1   ) ln   "   + ln   ";t 1   + "t :


       In keeping with the relatively short-lived movements of volatility measures in the data,
we assume that shocks to volatility are all temporary ( = 0) and unexpected. The country-
speci…c shock increases the volatility of shocks hitting home producers by 10 percent
(" = 0:1) : The results for our benchmark model are plotted in Figure 4. This shock gen-
erates an increase in the dispersion of domestic shipments growth for two periods. There
is very little change in the dispersion of expenditure growth across varieties.18 In the ini-
tial period, producer shipment dispersion grows by almost 11.7 percent, and in the second
period the increase is 2.5 percent. The magni…ed movements in producer shipment dis-
persion arise from the export decision as the more volatile shocks lead to both more entry
and more exit. On net, entry increases slightly (0.2 percent) while exports rise more than
  17
     With the log-normal shocks this entails shift the mean of the productivity shock to                 =
                 2
         1
    1+ ( 1)     2  :
  18
     This arises primarily because not all producers are hit by the shock and there is some net exit by
foreign exporters from the shock. Eliminating entry and exit would lead to a larger rise in the dispersion
in expenditures.


                                                              16
double that (0.45 percent). Imports decline slightly, so the country temporarily runs a
slight trade surplus. In the second period, exports and exporters temporarily fall back to
below steady state. Raising the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks primarily a¤ects trade
‡ows because the greater dispersion in productivity gives exporters, who tend to be in the
tails, an even greater advantage.
   We next consider how sensitive this e¤ect is to the initial productivity advantage of
exporters by considering a case where exporters are larger than in our benchmark. To
implement this, we increase the dispersion in baseline productivity four fold but hold the
stopper rate constant at 5 percent. This case is also of interest because it makes exporting
a more durable decision than in our baseline. To match the same exit rate from exporting
with more volatile idiosyncratic shocks requires the ratio of entry to continuation cost to
rise from about 1.1 to nearly 4, which is more in line with estimates in the literature. This
increases the exporter premium only slightly, from 2.5 to 2.65.
   Nonetheless, Figure 5 shows that this larger exporter premium has a substantial im-
pact on the e¤ects of the shock to volatility on both trade ‡ows and dispersion measures.
Dispersion in sales and expenditures growth now both rise but by less than the shock, even
though entry and exit rise substantially. On net there are fewer exporters, even though ex-
ports rise by almost 2.5 percent. The boom in exports is temporary: by the second period
exports have fallen below steady state as the stock of exporters is also below the steady
state. The dynamics are a bit more prolonged than in our benchmark model because of
the more durable aspect of the export decision.
   The central …nding here is that increases in uncertainty primarily a¤ect trade ‡ows
rather than output. The increase in exports is much larger than the increase in output.
In the case of the slightly larger exporter premium, this increase becomes quantitatively
signi…cant. Unfortunately, such an increase implies counterfactual business cycle patterns.
Empirical patterns show that, while measured producer-level volatility is high in recessions,


                                             17
trade is procyclical, with aggregate trade much more volatile than output. In recessions,
with the Great Recession as a chief example, trade falls and does so precipitously. This
apparent discord between model and empirics constitutes a puzzle for dynamic business
cycle models with extensive export decisions.


3.2.1   Global Uncertainty Shock

Last, we examine the e¤ect of a global rise in idiosyncratic uncertainty on the global
economy. This experiment is motivated by the highly synchronized nature of the Great
Recession. We consider the e¤ects of this shock in our baseline calibration (low) and one
with a larger exporter premium (high) in which there is a larger sunk cost to exporting.
Unlike the country-speci…c increase in uncertainty, the global increase impacts exporters
in both countries symmetrically, highlighting the potential impact on global trade rather
than just movements in trade balances.
   Figure 6 shows that a global shock to idiosyncratic volatility raises dispersion in sales
and expenditures a little more than 10 percent. The magni…ed increase in dispersion of
growth rates arises from a slight increase in export participation. The global uncertainty
shock stimulates output and trade, although the increase in output is quite small (about
0.013 percent) while the increase in exports is much larger (0.32 percent).
   Turning to the case with a larger exporter premium and more volatile steady-state
idiosyncratic shocks, we …nd that the e¤ects on micro volatility are more muted as the
increases in expenditures and sales are about half of the benchmark case. This muted rise
in dispersion of growth arises because there is now a contraction in export participation.
Despite the reduction in export participation, there is a substantial increase in trade of
almost 3.4 percent and in output of about 0.2 percent.
   This case shows that uncertainty shocks may be a potentially important driver of trade
‡ows. If micro-level uncertainty shocks were an important factor during the Great Reces-


                                            18
sion, then the research seeking to explain the collapse in trade during this period faces
a potentially larger challenge as these types of shocks can potentially expand trade quite
strongly.



4       Empirical Evidence

The experiment in Section 3.1 suggests that reallocations stemming from country-speci…c
…rst-moment shocks may lead to increases in the dispersion of …rm growth rates. We now
examine whether there is evidence for such mechanisms. We begin by examining whether
the dynamics of changes in industry dispersion measures are associated with aggregate
international reallocations, the absolute values of the change in the real exchange rate or
the net export ratio. We then ask whether variation in openness across industries explains
the cross-industry variation in the dynamics of dispersion. Finally, using detailed data
from the auto industry, we examine whether the composition of output within an industry
is important in explaining the variation in measured dispersion over time.


4.1      All Industries

Our starting point for industry-level analysis is the NBER Industry Uncertainty Data from
Bloom et al. (2013), which gives a cross-sectional measure of annual growth rate variation
across 4-digit SIC industries in the U.S.19 The data are an annual panel. Bloom et al.
examine various industry-level measures, but none are able to signi…cantly explain cross-
industry variation, so the determinants of cross-industry variation are an open question. We
focus on the sample from 1989-2012, since these are the available years for our international
industry-speci…c data that we will utilize later.
      In the model, the causal mechanism is clear: the joint shocks to country-speci…c produc-
 19
      These data include the NBER CES manufacturing database.



                                                19
tivity and tastes generate reallocation which leads to an increase in measured dispersion
of …rm growth rates, even if there is no increase in actual micro uncertainty. In these
cross-industry regressions, we do not claim to test causation, but only whether the data
lead to correlations consistent with the theory. Recall that identi…cation of industry-level
correlates in these Bloom et al. data, whether causal or not, represent a contribution.
   We begin by examining whether the time variation in industry-level volatility is asso-
ciated with two aggregate measures associated with international reallocation: 1) absolute
changes in the real exchange rate and 2) the absolute change in normalized net exports. We
use the absolute values, since the theory indicates that any change in reallocation will have
heterogeneous e¤ects on …rms, regardless of its sign. For the real exchange rate, we use the
real “e¤ective” (i.e., trade-weighted by country) exchange rate for the U.S. obtained from
the Bank of International Settlements. We look at a one-year lag, since trade is slower
to respond to changes in the real exchange rate, and we construct percentage changes as
 RERt = (RERt        RERt 1 )=RERt 1 . For net exports, based on current nominal values,
the absolute change in normalized net exports at time t is constructed as

                Xt+1 Mt+1        Xt        Mt
       N Xt =                                    :
                    Yt+1              Yt

   We regress the log of the NBER industry sales volatility measure for industry j at time
t on a time trend, industry …xed e¤ects, and these aggregate predictors of volatility (X,
where X represents    RERt ,    N Xt , and/or, for comparison, real GDP growth at time t):


       salesgrowth
     Vj;t          = Xt + t +    j   +   j;t :




We cluster the standard errors by industry. Here, the estimate of     is of interest.
   The results are presented in Table 2.



                                                     20
     Insert Table 2


   Consistent with the theory, in the univariate regressions, the absolute changes in both
the real exchange rate and the net export ratio are associated with increased measured
dispersion in sales growth, and these are signi…cant at the one percent level. The R2 values
indicate that the explanatory power of these regressors is comparable to the explanatory
power of real GDP growth, the more standard explanatory variable for cyclical behavior.
(The R2 values are relatively high, but much of this comes from the industry …xed e¤ects
and the linear time trend.) In the regression that combines all three, GDP growth is the
most signi…cant, but the change in the real exchange rate is still signi…cant at the 5 percent
level, and the change in net exports is marginally signi…cant at the 10 percent level. Thus,
the trade reallocation variables seem to have some additional explanatory power beyond
that of GDP growth alone.
   We next examine whether we can explain cross-industry variation in the cyclicality of
dispersion using measures of openness and trade. Recall that trade-driven dispersion in the
model depended critically on the openness of the economy. As an analog here, we examine
the openness of particular industries. We construct these measures of industry openness
using annualized import and export data by HS-code from 1989-2012 from Schott (2008),
aggregated to the 4-digit SIC level. Combining this with industry shipment data from
Bloom et al. (2013), we de…ne the following measures of openness for 4-digit industry j at




                                             21
time t:20

                         exportsj;t + importsj;t
         OpenOverall
             j;t     =
                              shipmentsj:t
                                         importsj;t
          OpenImport
              j;t      =
                         (shipmentsj;t exportsj;t ) + importsj;t
                           exportsj;t
         OpenExports
             j;t       =               :
                         shipmentsj;t

       We start by focusing on the recent recession. Our motivation is the fact that the
recession was large and was associated with a large collapse and recovery in trade. The
size of the recession is likely to swamp other potential industry-speci…c trends, so our
speci…cation is quite simple.21 We look at whether the absolute change in industry-speci…c
sales volatility from 2009-2007 is correlated with our measures of openness. Note that this
is the drop in the cross-sectional variance of sales growth, not the drop in average sales.
Table 3 presents the results of these regressions. The coe¢ cients on industry openness are
presented in the …rst row, but the exact measure of industry openness varies by column.


         Insert Table 3


       The coe¢ cients on all three measures of openness are positive and signi…cant, indicating
that openness was associated with larger increases in uncertainty. Since we use the log of
  20
      Merging at the industry, we lose data at several levels. First, the trade data include agricultural
goods, but these are not included in the NBER data. Second, the concordance between HS and SIC is
not perfect, and we lose many manufacturing industries. Even a cursory examination indicates that this is
not because these industries have zero trade, but is a result of an imperfect concordance. Reconstructing
a correspondence goes beyond the task of this analysis. Third, the NBER Industry Uncertainty Data
have fewer industries for reasons unknown. The NBER CES manufacturing database has 459 industries,
whereas the NBER Industry Uncertainty Data include 320 to 390 over the years. Schott’s data has 402 to
447 sectors.
   21
      One potential criticism, especially as it relates to our model, is that while the sources of the Great
Recession are not fully understood, there appears to have been a substantial global element to it. Nonethe-
less, we believe our mechanism is more general, in that international reallocation, caused by di¤erences in
a broader range of aggregate shocks hitting countries di¤erently, should lead to greater dispersion. It is
this aspect of the mechanism that we evaluate.



                                                    22
the uncertainty measure, the coe¢ cient on export openness, for example, indicates that
uncertainty is roughly 1.4 percent higher in an industry that exports all of its shipments
relative to a hypothetical industry that exports none. The magnitude and explanatory
power are substantially larger for import and overall openness than for export openness.
The R2 values are not large for any of the three, but they are comparable to the partial R2
values for the aggregate measures in Table 2.
   We now return to the role of the absolute changes in the real exchange rate and net
exports in explaining changes in industry-speci…c uncertainty in the broader time series.
The dependent variable is again the log of the cross-sectional volatility of sales growth in
industry j in year t. However, since our benchmark is an industry-speci…c measure, we use
the industry-speci…c growth in shipments rather than overall GDP growth to control for
change in economic activity. This is shown in the …rst column of Table 3. Total shipment
growth, i.e., the …rst moment, is highly signi…cant. (Although the R2 is high, again most
of this comes from the industry-speci…c …xed e¤ects and the time trend.)


      Insert Table 4


   Columns two through four show that industry openness alone is not a signi…cant pre-
dictor of volatility in the overall time series as it was during the Great Recession. The
reason may be that both the numerator and denominator of openness change over time
and cyclically. When we add the aggregate real exchange rate (RER) in the third column
and interact it with the industry-speci…c measure of openness, however, we get a positive
and signi…cant coe¢ cient. That is, an absolute change in the real exchange rate seems to
be associated with an increase in cross-sectional volatility, but especially in open industries,
i.e., industries where trade is sizable. Similarly, the fourth column shows that the absolute
change in net exports to GDP is again associated with an increase in cross-sectional volatil-


                                              23
ity. The interaction indicates that this is especially true in industries that are open, but
this term is only marginally signi…cant (at the ten percent level).
   We should note the limitations of our explanatory power. Bloom et al. (2013) eval-
uate alternative measures of uncertainty, including volatility of (…rm-level) stock returns.
Their data include three variants of these …nancial uncertainty measures: 1) cross-sectional
variation in stock returns at a point in time, 2) cross-…rm average 12-month variation
in monthly stock returns within a …rm, and 3) variance of pooled (by …rm and month)
monthly returns within a year. Our international reallocation measures are less successful
in explaining cross-industry variation in these …nancial variants. For example, in the re-
gressions in Tables 2 and 3, if we construct our dependent variables using these …nancial
measures rather than those based on sales growth, we do not …nd a relationship with open-
ness (although the aggregate reallocation measures themselves are still signi…cant). This
is not inconsistent with our model; given the forward-looking nature of …nancial prices,
the information in aggregate shocks that leads to more prolonged reallocation dynamics
and di¤erential …rm growth rates may lead to only immediate one-time variation in stock
returns when the shock is realized.
   In sum, the results are consistent with the model’s prediction where (1) country-speci…c
shocks lead to increased dispersion because changes in exports and imports lead to realloca-
tion of production, but (2) this happens only when trade plays a quantitatively important
role.


4.2     Autos

Having shown suggestive evidence consistent with the model at the economy-wide and cross-
industry level, we now examine the determinants of measured dispersion within a particular
industry. Similar to Bloom et al. (2013) we …nd that dispersion is high when activity is low,
but consistent with our model, this seems to come in large part from reallocation between

                                             24
domestic and foreign producers rather than among all producers.22 Such reallocation is
consistent with our theoretical …nding from country-speci…c shocks. An advantage of the
auto data are that they more readily identify causality, since the Japanese tsunami was a
well-identi…ed exogenous, country-speci…c shock causing international reallocation.
       Data are available on production, yt ; and sales, st ; of autos in the U.S. at the monthly
level. The data are from Autonews and IHS Automotive and are quite disaggregate (by
company, trim, brand, and product). For each producer, a measure of production and sales
growth is constructed as


           xit = ln (xit =xit 1 ) :


The standard deviation of this variable,           ( xit ) ; is weighted by each …rm’s current-period
share of the variable.23 This measure of dispersion is then logged and seasonally adjusted
using a month dummy. Thus, the dispersion measures can be thought of as the log change
in volatility. Quarterly measures are an average of the monthly measure.
       Figure 7 plots the level and volatility of sales and production in a seven-year period
that includes the Great Recession. As is already well known, sales are a bit smoother
than production and fall by less (see Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan, 2013). Indeed,
the drop in production is almost twice that of sales in the …rst two quarters of 2009,
when economic activity was contracting at a fast pace. Figure 7 also plots the change in
the standard deviation of sales and production growth. These two dispersion measures
increase quite substantially as economic activity starts to stagnate in late 2007 (prior to
the start of the recession). Production dispersion rises more initially and surges in 2009.
  22
     Aggregation bias is also a clear driver of rising dispersion as dispersion increases 1) more at the company
level than product level (i.e., split between truck/SUV and cars) and 2) more at the quarterly level than
the monthly level.
  23
     Unweighted measures are strongly in‡uenced by the exit and entry decisions of producers since their
sales growth can be extreme. However, these producers tend to have small market shares in the lead up
to exit or period soon after entry.


                                                      25
By mid-2010, both measures of volatility have returned to normal levels, while the level of
activity remains quite low. Volatility picks up again at the start of 2011. The increase in
volatility coincides with another country-speci…c shock: the Japanese tsunami.
    To clarify the role of reallocation across countries, we consider the reallocation between
the Big 3 and Japanese producers. Speci…cally, let

                                                       !2
                    xBig3
                     t       xJapan
                              t       xBig3
                                       t 1    xJapan
                                               t 1
         ms = 100                                           ;
                            Xt             Xt 1

where Xt is the total production or sales. This is a measure of the amount market share
is being reallocated across country of ownership. Obviously, holding reallocation within
groups constant, more reallocation between the groups will increase the dispersion measure.
Figure 8 plots these dispersion measures for production and sales. The non-seasonally-
adjusted data are plotted. This measure helps clarify that an important source of the rise
in dispersion is predictable and due to the two types of plants having a di¤erent timing of
production. Speci…cally, at year-end and mid-year, there are recurring increases in growth
dispersion. These spikes correspond to the establishments in these periods shutting down
for di¤erent lengths. Once the factories are up and running there is very little dispersion in
growth in the other periods. This point is particularly important since the spike in volatility
in 2009m1 to 2009m7 is larger and more persistent than in the rest of the period. This seems
to correspond to GM and Chrysler experiencing prolonged shutdowns as they reorganized in
early 2009. The monthly sales data tell a similar story: increases in sales growth dispersion
tend to be associated with reallocation between the Big 3 and Japanese brands rather than
within these brands. Comparing reallocation between Big 3 and Japanese producers, there
are much larger swings in production reallocation than sales reallocation at the monthly
level.
    To further explore the idea that a rise in dispersion of sales growth re‡ects realloca-


                                              26
tions from country or country-industry shocks, Figure 9 plots the quarterly sales growth
dispersion against log change in market share of trucks, imports, Big 3, and Japanese …rms
(all measured as averages of the monthly numbers). The data are not seasonally adjusted.
Clearly, the increase in dispersion in 2008 is accounted for by a shift away from trucks and
the Big 3 toward cars, imports, and Japanese …rms. There are two clear phases to this
reallocation in 2008 and 2009. In 2011, sales growth dispersion again rises sharply. This
rise re‡ects a shift away from sales of Japanese cars (produced in the U.S. or imported) as
the tsunami in Japan had a much larger e¤ect on Japanese …rms’sales of cars produced in
the U.S. and Japan.



5     Conclusions

Using quantitative theory and data, we have examined 1) the impact of aggregate inter-
national shocks on measured producer-level volatility or dispersion through the channel of
international trade, and 2) the impact of stochastic micro-level volatility on the cyclical
patterns of international trade and output.
    Examination of the …rst channel uncovered a potentially important source of measured
cyclicality in …rm-level dispersion: shocks that a¤ect international trade patterns increase
sales growth dispersion. The model indicates that such a channel could be quantitatively
important, and our empirical evidence shows that industry volatility measures are indeed
associated with measures of trade reallocation shocks and measures of openness. Moreover,
within the auto industry, through careful investigation, we have con…rmed the importance of
such country-to-country reallocation at the …rm level. Examination of the second channel,
in contrast, uncovered a puzzle for the standard business cycle model used to understand
micro-level trade dynamics: Increases in …rm-level dispersion lead to large increases in
trade rather than the steep declines typically observed during recessions.


                                              27
   The …rst channel we have uncovered motivates several avenues for future research. First,
although autos represent an important industry, it would be informative to examine whether
other industries behave in a similar fashion. This would require access to comprehensive
…rm-level data.
   Second, although trade-induced reallocation appears to be an important channel, it
doesn’t appear to be the entire story. Recall that we are not able to explain cross-industry
variation in the volatility of stock returns. Similarly, the mechanism may also have little
to say about neither the implied volatility of a 30-day option (i.e., Chicago Board Options
Exchange Market Volatility Index, or VIX) that Bloom (2009) examines, nor the di¤erences
in aggregate predictions and greater dispersion in …rm-level forecast errors documented by
Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013). These two empirical patterns may both primarily
re‡ect aggregate uncertainty, and, of course, even …rm-level business cycle dynamics from
country-speci…c shocks would presumably be predictable. In any case, a quantitative de-
composition of the fraction of cyclical changes in dispersion that can be explained by trade
reallocations remains to be done.
   Our analysis is a starting point for examining the impact of country-speci…c shocks
on cyclical ‡uctuations in producer level dispersion. We undertake this in a benchmark
model that captures the key di¤erences in producer heterogeneity and export participation.
Future quantitative work should take into account the di¤erences in international input
usage, the high share of durables and capital goods in trade, and additional shocks to trade
or monetary policy.
   Finally, aggregate uncertainty in trade policy may itself be important to business cycle
and trade dynamics. A quantitative analysis of this channel is the subject of our ongoing
work.




                                            28
References
Alessandria, G. and H. Choi, 2007. “Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export
Dynamics?”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 289-336.

Alessandria, G. and H. Choi, 2011a. “Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dynamics,
and the E¤ects of Trade Liberalization,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working
Paper.

Alessandria, G. and H. Choi, 2011b. “Do Falling Iceberg Costs Explain Recent US Export
Growth”Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper.

Alessandria, G., J.P. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan. 2010. “The Great Trade Collapse of 2008–
09: An Inventory Adjustment?”IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 254-94.

Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan, 2013. “Trade Wedges, Inventories, and
International Business Cycles,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1), 1-20.

Alessandria, G., H. Choi, J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan, 2014. “Aggregate E¤ects of Trade
Policy Uncertainty,”mimeo.

Arellano, C. Y. Bai, and P. Kehoe, 2012. “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in Uncer-
tainty,”mimeo.

Bachmann, R. and G. Moscarini, 2012. “Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty”,
Yale mimeo.

Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. Sims, 2013. “Uncertainty and Economic Activity: Ev-
idence from Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2):
217-49.

Bekes, G., L. Fontagne, B.Murakozya, and V. Vicard, 2014. “Shipment Frequency of Ex-
porters and Demand Uncertainty”mimeo.

Bernard, A.B. and J.B. Jensen, 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, E¤ect,
or Both?”Journal of International of Economics, 47(1), 1-25.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry, 2013. “Really
Uncertain Business Cycles,”Econometrica, forthcoming.

Bloom, N., 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.”Econometrica, May 77, pp. 623-685.

Bloom, N., 2013. “Fluctuations in Uncertainty,”Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Backus, D., P. Kehoe, and F. Kydland, 1994. “Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the
Terms of Trade: The J Curve?”American Economic Review, LXXXIV 84–103.



                                          29
Carballo, J., K. Handley and N. Limao, 2014. “Trade Collapse and Policy Uncertainty in
the Great Recession,”mimeo.

Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger and S. Schuh, 1998. Job Creation and Destruction. The MIT
Press.

Das, S., M. Roberts, and J. Tybout, 2007. “Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity,
and Export Dynamics,”Econometrica, 75(3), 837-73.

Decker, R., P. D’Erasmo, and H. Moscoso Boedo, 2014. “Market Exposure and Endogenous
Firm Volatility,”mimeo.

Fillat, J. and S. Garetto, 2012. “Risks, Returns, and Multinational Production,”mimeo.

Gallaway, M.P., C.A. McDaniel, and S.A. Rivera, 2003. “Short-Run and Long-Run
Industry-Level Estimates of U.S. Armington Elasticities,”North American Journal of Eco-
nomics and Finance, 14(1), 49-68.

Herskovic, B., B. Kelly, H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2014. “The Common Factor
in Idiosyncratic Volatility: Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications,”mimeo.

Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis and Linda L. Tesar, 2010. “The Collapse of Interna-
tional Trade During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun,”IMF Economic
Review, 58(2): 214-53.

Schott, P., 2008. “The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports,” Economic Policy, 5,
5-49.

Stockman, A. and L. Tesar, 1995. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of
the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,”American Economic Review,
85(1), 168-85.

Taylor, A. and D. Novy, 2014. “Trade and Uncertainty,”NBER Working Paper 19941.




                                          30
                              Table 1: Parameter Values
             Common
                                 1    1.5         3   0.96        0.36   0.10

                                        "    f0 =f1      !
             Benchmark               0.075    1.03    0.3659 0.3592
             High Dispersion          0.30    1.66    0.3603 0.3599




Table 2: Industry-level Dispersion and Aggregate Reallocation (1989 - 2011)
                     GDP Growth               RER            Net Exports           All 3
GDP Growth                -0.005                 .                  .             -0.005
                           0.002                 .                  .              0.002
  RER                        .                0.265                 .              0.247
                             .                0.113                 .              0.113
  Net Exports                .                                    1.296            0.841
                             .                                   0.512             0.486
  2
R                          0.61                0.61               0.61              0.61
Observations               5088               5088                5088             5088
Note: ; ; and    denote signi…cance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively. Standard
errors are below each coe¢ cient and are clustered by industry.




                                             31
  Table 3: Industry-level Dispersion and Industry Openness (2007 - 2009)
                         Overalljt           Importj;t                   Exportj;t
Industry Openness           0.034                0.040                     0.014
                            0.011                0.011                     0.005
  2
R                            0.05                 0.07                      0.03
Observations                 195                  193                        195
Note: ; ; and    denote signi…cance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively. Standard
errors are below each coe¢ cient.




        Table 4: Industry-level Dispersion, Aggregate Reallocation
                          and Openness (1989 - 2011)
                   Industry          Industry              RER            Net Exports
                  Shipments         Openness            Interact            Interact
 Shipments          -0.236                .                  .                   .
                     0.028                .                  .                   .
Openness                .               0.010             0.007               0.006
                        .               0.011             0.011               0.012
 RER                    .                 .               2.392                  .
                        .                 .               0.756                  .
 RER x Open             .                 .               0.773                  .
                        .                 .               0.375                  .
 NX                     .                 .                  .                0.549
                        .                 .                  .                0.164
 NX x Open              .                 .                  .                0.135
                        .                 .                  .                0.071
 2
R                     0.64              0.64               0.63                0.63
Observations         4840               4840              4840                4840
Note: ; ; and    denote signi…cance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively. Standard
errors are below each coe¢ cient and are clustered by industry.




                                             32
   Figure 1: Distributions 20 Percent Trade
                           Home Producer Shipment Distribution
           4
                                                                  Mfr Shipments
                                                                  Mfr Domestic Shipments
          3.5


           3


          2.5



Density
           2


          1.5


           1


          0.5


           0
          -3.2   -3         -2.8      -2.6       -2.4    -2.2     -2          -1.8      -1.6    -1.4
                                                   Log sales


                           Home Consumer Purchase Distribution
           5
                                                                                        Domestic
          4.5                                                                           Imports
                                                                                        All
           4

          3.5

           3
Density




          2.5

           2

          1.5

           1

          0.5

           0
          -3.2        -3           -2.8      -2.6      -2.4            -2.2            -2       -1.8
                                                Log sales


                                          Sales Distribution
          3.5
                                                                                     Sales
                                                                                     Expenditures
           3


          2.5


           2
Density




          1.5


           1


          0.5


           0
           -2    -1.5          -1         -0.5         0        0.5           1         1.5         2




                                                    33
                                  Figure 2: Home Recession: Exogenous Export Participation

                                  6                                                             10
                                          Std(Sal es Growth)                                                 Std(Sal es)
                 Percent change           Std(Expendi ture Growth)                                           Std(Expendi ture)




                                                                              Percent change
                                  4                                                              0


                                  2                                                            -10


                                  0                                                            -20
                                      0    4      8          12          16                          0   4    8       12           16
                                                 year                                                        year

                                  5                                                              5
                                                        Y growth                                                           Y
                                                         *                                                                     *
Percent change




                                                                              Percent change
                                                        Y growth                                                           Y
                                  0                                                              0


                             -5                                                                 -5


                     -10                                                                       -10
                                      0    4      8          12          16                          0   4    8       12           16
                                                 year                                                        year



                                  5                                                             10
Percent change




                                                                              Percent change




                                  0                                                              0

                             -5                                                                -10
                                                                                                              NonX E growth
                     -10                       NonX sal es growth                              -20            X E growth
                                               X sal es growth                                                FX E growth
                     -15                                                                       -30
                                      0    4      8          12          16                          0   4    8       12           16
                                                 year                                                        year

                                  5
Percent change




                                  0

                             -5
                                                                  EX
                     -10                                          IM
                                                                  T BY
                     -15
                                      0    4      8          12          16
                                                 year




                                                                          34
                                   Figure 3: Home Recession: Benchmark Model

                          6                                                                      10
                                  Std(Sal es Growth)                                                          Std(Sal es)
                                  Std(Expendi ture Growth)                                                    Std(Expendi ture)
        Percent change




                                                                                Percent change
                          4
                                                                                                  5
                          2
                                                                                                  0
                          0

                         -2                                                                      -5
                              0    4      8          12            16                                 0   4    8       12           16
                                         year                                                                 year

                          5                                                                       5
                                                Y growth                                                                    Y
                                                 *                                                                              *
Percent change




                                                                        Percent change
                                                Y growth                                                                    Y
                          0                                                                       0


                         -5                                                                      -5


                     -10                                                                    -10
                              0    4      8          12            16                                 0   4    8       12           16
                                         year                                                                 year



                          5                                                                      40
                                                           N                                                                n1
                                                               *                                                            n0
Percent change




                                                                        Percent change




                                                           N                                     20
                          0
                                                                                                  0
                         -5
                                                                                            -20

                     -10                                                                    -40
                              0    4      8          12            16                                 0   4    8       12           16
                                         year                                                                 year

                          5
                                                          EX
                                                          IM
Percent change




                          0
                                                          T BY
                         -5

                     -10

                     -15
                              0     4      8          12
                                         year




                                                                        35
                                                     Figure 4: Home Uncertainty Shock

                                  15                                                                                           6
                                              Std(Sal es Growth)                                                                           Std(Sal es)
                 Percent change               Std(Expendi ture Growth)                                                                     Std(Expendi ture)




                                                                                                          Percent change
                                  10                                                                                           4

                                      5                                                                                        2

                                      0                                                                                        0

                                  -5                                                                                       -2
                                          0      4     8          12            16                                                 0   4     8      12           16
                                                      year                                                                                  year

                          0.04                                                                                    0.04
                                                             Y growth                                                                                    Y
                                                              *                                                                                              *
Percent change




                                                                                     Percent change
                                                             Y growth                                                                                    Y
                          0.02                                                                                    0.02


                                      0                                                                                        0


                 -0.02                                                                                    -0.02
                                          0      4     8          12            16                                                 0   4     8      12           16
                                                      year                                                                                  year



                          0.3                                                                                          60
                                                                        N                                                                                n1
                                                                            *                                                                            n0
Percent change




                                                                                         Percent change




                          0.2                                           N                                              40

                          0.1                                                                                          20

                                  0                                                                                        0

                 -0.1                                                                                         -20
                                      0         4      8          12            16                                             0       4     8      12           16
                                                      year                                                                                  year

                          0.6
                                                                       EX
                                                                       IM
Percent change




                          0.4
                                                                       T BY
                          0.2

                                  0

                 -0.2
                                      0         4       8          12
                                                      year




                                                                                     36
                                        Figure 5: Home Uncertainty Shoc: High Export Premium

                                  10                                                                            10
                                            Std(Sal es Growth)                                                               Std(Sal es)
                                            Std(Expendi ture Growth)                                                         Std(Expendi ture)
                 Percent change




                                                                                               Percent change
                                    5                                                                            5


                                    0                                                                            0


                                  -5                                                                            -5
                                        0     4     8          12            16                                      0   4    8       12           16
                                                   year                                                                      year

                                  0.3                                                                           0.3
                                                          Y growth                                                                         Y
                                                           *                                                                                   *
  Percent change




                                                                                  Percent change
                                  0.2                     Y growth                                              0.2                        Y

                                  0.1                                                                           0.1

                                    0                                                                            0

                         -0.1                                                                          -0.1
                                        0     4     8          12            16                                      0   4    8       12           16
                                                   year                                                                      year



                                  0.2                                                                           60
                                                                     N                                                                     n1
                                                                         *                                                                 n0
Percent change




                                                                                   Percent change




                                   0                                 N                                          40

                      -0.2                                                                                      20

                      -0.4                                                                                       0

                      -0.6                                                                              -20
                                       0     4      8          12            16                                      0   4    8       12           16
                                                   year                                                                      year

                                   3
                                                                    EX
                                                                    IM
             Percent change




                                   2
                                                                    T BY
                                   1

                                   0

                                  -1
                                       0      4      8          12
                                                   year




                                                                                  37
                                         Figure 6: Global Uncertainty Shock


                               Std(Sales Growth)                                                   Std(Expenditure Growth)
    Percent change




                                                                  Percent change
                     15                                                               15
                                                      Low
                     10                                                               10
                                                      High
                      5                                                                    5

                      0                                                                    0
                           0    4       8        12          16                                0       4      8       12     16
                                       year                                                                  year
                                    Std(Sales)                                                        Std(Expenditure)
    Percent change




                                                                  Percent change
                     15                                                               15

                     10                                                               10

                      5                                                                    5

                      0                                                                    0
                           0    4       8        12          16                                0       4      8       12     16
                                       year                                                                  year
                                        Y                                                                   Trade
Percent change




                                                                          Percent change




                     0.2                                                                   4

                                                                                           2
                     0.1
                                                                                           0
                      0
                           0    4       8        12          16                                0       4      8       12     16
                                       year                                                                  year
                                        N                                                                  Stoppers
   Percent change




                                                                  Percent change




                      1                                                               40


                      0                                                               20


                     -1                                                                    0
                           0    4       8        12          16                                0       4      8       12     16
                                       year                                                                  year




                                                             38
    Figure 7: Volatility and Level of Activity (Sales and Production of Autos)
     1
     .5
log Change
     0
     -.5




                          Sales Volatility          Production Volatility
                          Sales                     Production
     -1




       2005q1   2006q1   2007q1     2008q1 2009q1      2010q1      2011q1   2012q1
                                        quarter




                                        39
      Figure 8: Volatility and Reallocation by Country Ownership

                  Production Volatility and Change in Market Share
     6
     4
log Change
    20




                             Volatility (Company)                     100*(dBig 3 - dJapan)^2
     -2




       2006m1           2007m1         2008m1         2009m1         2010m1            2011m1   2012m1
                                                       Date
             Note: 100*Squared Market Share change of Big3 - Transplant Production .




                Sales Growth Volatility and Change in Market Share
     6
     4
log change
     2
     0




                          Volatility                100*(dBig 3 - dJAPAN)^2
     -2




       2006m1           2007m1         2008m1         2009m1         2010m1            2011m1   2012m1
                                                       Date




                                                         40
                                 Figure 9: Sales Volatility and Market Shares

             1
             .5
log Change
             0




                                                  Sales Volatility              Imports
                                                  Trucks                        Big3
                                                  Japan
             -.5




              2005q1        2006q1       2007q1        2008q1 2009q1           2010q1     2011q1   2012q1
                                                           quarter
                   Note: Data are not seasonally adjusted.
                   Market shares are log deviations from pre-recession mean.




                                                           41
