                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MONETARY POLICY WITH INTEREST ON RESERVES

                                         John H. Cochrane

                                       Working Paper 20613
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20613


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




I thank Bob Hall, Stavros Panageas, Siddhartha Sanghi, Tom Sargent, John Taylor, and many seminar
and conference participants for helpful comments and conversations. I gratefully acknowledge research
support from CRSP. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 20613
October 2014
JEL No. E5,E52,E58,E61,E62

                                             ABSTRACT

I analyze monetary policy with interest on reserves and a large balance sheet. I show that conventional
theories do not determine inflation in this regime, so I base the analysis on the fiscal theory of the
price level. I find that monetary policy can peg the nominal rate, and determine expected inflation.
With sticky prices, monetary policy can also affect real interest rates and output, though higher interest
rates raise output and then inflation. The conventional sign requires a coordinated fiscal-monetary
policy contraction. I show how conventional new-Keynesian models also imply strong monetary-fiscal
policy coordination to obtain the usual signs. I address theoretical controversies. A concluding section
places our current regime in a broader historical context, and opines on how optimal fiscal and monetary
policy will evolve in the new regime.


John H. Cochrane
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and Hoover Institution and Cato Institute
and also NBER
john.cochrane@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction

During the last few years, the Federal Reserve has made two changes that will fundamentally a¤ect
monetary policy, or at least the theory of monetary policy, going forward. First, the Fed now pays
interest on reserves. Second, the Fed has amassed a large balance sheet, buying about $3 trillion
of assets, and creating about $3 trillion of bank reserves in return. Before the crisis, banks only
held about $50 billion of reserves. Required reserves – the amounts banks must hold at the Fed
corresponding to deposits –are still only about $80 billion, so almost all of the $3 trillion are excess
reserves, held voluntarily by banks.
    When interest rates rise, the Fed has announced that it will maintain the large balance sheet, and
pay market interest rates on reserves. Indeed, the Fed will attempt to control short-term interest
rates primarily by changing the rate it pays on abundant reserves, rather than by controlling the
quantity of reserves via open market operations. This plan is articulated in Chairman Bernanke’s
(2010) testimony and most recently reinforced in the July 2014 FOMC minutes (Federal Reserve
(2014)).
    A large balance sheet, with interest on reserves, is a desirable state of monetary a¤airs. Friedman
(1969) explained that the optimal quantity of money is obtained when there is no interest-rate
spread between money and bonds. In this case, the “shoe-leather costs” of money management
disappear. More important, in my view, are the bene…ts for …nancial stability. $3 trillion of interest-
paying reserves represent $3 trillion of narrow-banking deposits, and $3 trillion of the most liquid
asset one could want on a bank balance sheet. (Cochrane 2014.)
    However, interest on reserves and a large balance sheet, together with the spread of interest-
paying electronic money, deeply challenge standard monetary policy analysis. We will continue
to be satiated in liquidity. Reserves and short-term treasuries are and will remain essentially
perfect substitutes at the margin. Reserve demand becomes indeterminate –banks are indi¤erent
to holding another dollar of reserves and another dollar less short-term treasuries.
    Standard answers to fundamental questions such as how the Fed controls real and nominal
interest rates, what are the channels by which monetary policy a¤ects the economy and the banking
system, and how or whether in‡ation is determined, all fall apart in this regime.
    The standard story says that to tighten, the Fed sells treasuries in exchange for reserves. A
lower supply of reserves forces banks to work down a reserve demand curve, bidding up the interest
rate. With the reserve requirement binding, banks must reduce lending and deposit creation via
the money multiplier. Depending on your tastes, a lending channel and Phillips curve then reduce
employment and prices, or less money supply and MV=PY do the same.
    In the interest-on-reserves regime, however, there need be no open market operations, and
reserve requirements will not come within $3 trillion of binding. Bank lending and money creation
will continue to be completely una¤ected by the quantity of reserves.
    Not everyone believed this story already –banks had so much funding by non-reservable sources,
non-bank credit markets and the shadow-banking system were so large, that the $50 billion of
reserves remaining were essentially meaningless. But now we don’t have to argue about that point
–the story simply cannot apply any more.
    We must face monetary policy with no monetary frictions. Interest-paying reserves are just
overnight government debt, held entirely as an asset with no additional liquidity value, which
incidentally can be transferred electronically at low cost to make transactions.



                                                   2
   Standard theory predicts that in‡ation is not even determined in an interest on reserves regime.
Sargent and Wallace (1985) is a classic example. (See also the excellent and wide-ranging Sargent
2010.) Yet, we have several years of experience in the US, and more in other countries, suggesting
that in‡ation is quite stable with …xed interest-rate targets and the same interest on reserves and
Treasuries.
    In this context, I revisit classic questions. What can monetary policy do, when we are satiated
in liquidity? What can’t monetary policy do? How will in‡ation be determined? How should an
e¤ective monetary policy work?
   I adopt a model with no monetary frictions at all, and the …scal theory of the price level. Not
only does this theory determine the price level without monetary frictions, it is, I will argue, the
only existing theory that can do so.
    The name “…scal theory” seems to imply that monetary policy is ine¤ective. I …nd quite the
opposite: Monetary policy can set the nominal interest rate and can determine expected in‡ation.
The price level remains determinate even with completely …xed (no Taylor-rule responses needed)
interest-rate targets. With long-term debt, monetary policy can determine the nominal term struc-
ture of interest rates. Furthermore, rearrangements of the maturity structure of government debt,
reminiscent of QE operations, can create some in‡ation today in exchange for less in‡ation in the
future.
    I then add pricing frictions, so that monetary policy can have real e¤ects. One contribution
of the paper is to study a model with …scal-theoretic price determination and sticky prices. I …nd
that an in‡ationary reduction in expected future surpluses reduces real interest rates and increases
output. These are signs conventionally attributed to monetary policy, and the opposite of what one
might expect for …scal policy. But they make sense: If the price level cannot adjust, the real value
of one-period government debt cannot change. Hence, if expected surpluses decline, their discount
rate, the real interest rate, must decline, and this decline raises output growth.
    More importantly, I …nd that monetary policy with sticky prices can also a¤ect output and the
real rate of interest. I also …nd that monetary policy which desires to stabilize prices should raise
and lower the interest rate target one-for-one with changes in the underlying real rate of interest,
a standard optimal-policy result. However, I …nd Fisherian responses: an interest rate rise increase
raises real interest rates, but raises consumption and output, before raising in‡ation.
   Why do we think otherwise? I argue that events in real-world experience combine monetary
and …scal shocks, as both monetary and …scal authorities respond to shocks. Combining monetary
and …scal policies, in a coordinated monetary-…scal tightening, produces responses like those we
seem to see in historical experience.
    Comparing these results to a standard new-Keynesian model, I …nd the “monetary policy shock”
in the latter also implicitly assumes a coordinated contractionary …scal policy. Without that …scal
policy change, the standard new-Keynesian model also has the Fisherian result that interest rate
rises cause more, not less, in‡ation.
   I …nd that ties between …scal and monetary policy are and will remain more important than
conventionally acknowledged. For example, the presence of a large stock of outstanding Treasury
debt, of relatively short maturity, means that interest rate changes will have large impacts on the
Federal budget. The mark-to-market losses on the Fed’s portfolio, which monetary analysts have
worried about, are tiny in comparison. Fiscal considerations will limit monetary policy in ways
that the Federal Reserve is barely thinking about at all.



                                                 3
    My concluding comments point out the many unanswered questions that remain for our new
regime, and this style of analysis. What does good or optimal monetary policy look like? How
can we better structure the coordinated monetary and …scal policy regime, in particular to better
commit and communicate the …scal underpinnings of a stable price level?


2     In‡ation and interest rate targets in a frictionless model

I start with the simplest possible model, to answer the most fundamental questions: Can the Fed
control nominal interest rates? How will in‡ation be determined in the interest on reserves regime?


2.1   Valuation formula

I base this analysis on the valuation formula for government debt, which states that the real value
of nominal debt equals the present value of the primary surpluses that will pay o¤ that debt,

                                                       X    1
                                             Bt 1                  j
                                                  = Et                 st+j :                   (1)
                                              Pt
                                                        j=0

Here, Bt 1 is the nominal value of government debt outstanding at the beginning of time t, Pt is
the price level, = 1=(1 + r) is a constant real interest rate, and st are real primary surpluses.
   I provide a general-equilibrium derivation of (1) below, and I address below many common
misunderstandings and objections to the use of equation (1). But it’s better to get on with the
analysis …rst, and defend the …rst equation later.
   Equation (1) establishes that the price level is determinate, even with no monetary frictions
at all, so long as the government follows a policy that suitably controls nominal debt fBt g and
primary surpluses fst g. We will quickly see that this is the case.


2.2   Monetary policy and in‡ation in the simple model

I further specialize to the case that there is only one-period debt: Bt 1 is sold at time t 1 and
comes due at time t. The U.S. maturity structure, including reserves, is in fact pretty short, with
most debt rolling over in less than two years. So, we can apply these simple equations as a …rst
approximation if we think of the “period”as at least two years. I return to longer-term debt below.
   To examine the roles of “monetary” and “…scal” policy, I take expected and unexpected com-
ponents of (1),
                                                              X1
                      Bt 1              Pt 1                       j
                            (Et Et 1 )        = (Et Et 1 )           st+j :                (2)
                      Pt 1               Pt
                                                                                      j=0
                                                                           1
                                                                           X
                               Bt   1            Pt 1                            j
                                        Et   1              = Et       1             st+j :     (3)
                               Pt   1             Pt
                                                                           j=0

Equation (2) shows us that

      Unexpected in‡ation is determined entirely by expectations of future surpluses.



                                                        4
    The face value of one-period debt Bt 1 is known ahead of time, so the price level must adjust
if there is an unexpected shock to the present value of surpluses. By contrast, Equation (3) shows
that

     The government can entirely determine expected in‡ation by nominal bond sales Bt        1,   even
     with no change at all in surpluses

    I de…ne “monetary policy”as manipulating government debt fBt g without any change in taxes
or spending –surpluses fst g. I de…ne “…scal policy” as taxing and spending, i.e. determination of
the surpluses fst g. A discussion follows. With this terminology,

     Monetary policy can control expected in‡ation in this completely frictionless model.

   To clarify the e¤ect, write (3) as
                                                                      1
                                                                      X
                                       Bt    1 Qt 1                         j+1
                                                          = Et    1               st ;             (4)
                                            Pt    1                   j=0

where Qt   1   is the one-period bond price,

                                                    1                        Pt 1
                                  Qt   1   =                  = Et      1                :         (5)
                                                 1 + it   1                   Pt

Now, think about the government’s decision to sell additional nominal debt Bt 1 at the end of time
t 1. The real value that the government raised by debt sales Bt 1 Qt 1 =Pt 1 is …xed by the time
t 1 present value of real surpluses as shown by (4). The price level Pt 1 is already determined
by (1) at time t 1, independently of Bt 1 . Thus, if the government sells more Bt 1 , it faces
a unit-elastic demand curve; the nominal bond price Qt 1 falls one for one with the increase in
nominal debt, because expected in‡ation Et 1 (Pt 1 =Pt ) rises one for one. This operation is just
like a share split or a currency revaluation. The government has complete power over units in this
frictionless model, which means it can control expected in‡ation without changing anything real.
   Furthermore, writing (4) as
                                                                      1
                                                                      X
                                  Bt   1       1                            j+1
                                                          = Et    1               st+j ;           (6)
                                  Pt   1    1 + it    1               j=0

we can replace a government decision of the quantity of debt to sell Bt 1 with constant surpluses
with to a much more realistic-sounding interest rate target. To set an interest rate target, the
government auctions bonds –it says “the nominal interest rate will be 5%. We sell nominal bonds
at 1/0.95 dollars per face value. We will sell any amount demanded at that price.” Equation (6)
then is a simple reading of private demand –if the government targets nominal interest rates at a
level i, that equation tells us how many bonds Bt 1 will be demanded. It reassures us that a …nite
amount will be demanded, and therefore the nominal interest rate target will work.
   In sum, then,

     In this frictionless model, monetary policy can set a nominal interest rate target, without any
     adjustments to …scal policy fEt st+j g.

                                                              5
     By setting nominal interest rates, monetary policy completely controls expected in‡ation.

     In‡ation and the price level are determinate in the interest-on-reserves regime, even with …xed
     interest rate targets.

    The combination (3) and (2) thus address classic issues in monetary economics. The Fisher
relationship it 1 = r + Et 1 t already says that by controlling nominal interest rates, the govern-
ment can control expected in‡ation. But it is not clear by that simple statement just how the
government controls nominal interest rates in a frictionless world – rationing non-interest-paying
reserves doesn’t work. Woodford (2003) discusses a cashless limit, but still one in which the Fed
sets interest rates by rationing the last dollar of reserves against a two dollar reserve requirement.
Ireland (2012) (see also Ireland 2008) writes of such models “the central bank’s ability to man-
age short-term interest rates has rested, ultimately, on its ability to control, mainly through open
market purchases and sales of government bonds, the quantity of reserves supplied to the banking
system.”
   Now we see that the government can set the nominal interest rate in a …scal-theory world,
without controlling reserves at all, and the action it must do to achieve that result: sell nominal
bonds at a …xed price, with …xed surpluses.
    Fixed nominal interest rate targets have been troubling since Friedman (1968) argued they would
lead to unstable in‡ation, and Sargent and Wallace (1975) showed they would lead to indeterminacy:
it 1 = r + Et 1 t can pin down expected in‡ation Et t+1 but unexpected in‡ation t Et 1 t can
be anything. Here we see that even a completely …xed interest rate target need not lead to in‡ation
instability or indeterminacy. A Taylor-type rule reacting to in‡ation is not needed.

     Recognizing the …scal backing of nominal debt in the government valuation equation solves the
     indeterminacy problem resulting from interest rate targets, and from the absence of monetary
     frictions in the interest-on-reserves regime.

    Finally, if it is not clear, this is the interest on reserves regime. The quantity Bt 1 includes
treasury debt and reserves, which are perfect substitutes here since reserves pay interest. One
could write Bt 1 + Rt 1 to emphasize that they are equivalent securities which enter symmetrically
in everything. Equation (1) by itself then tells us that the price level is determinate under the
interest on reserves regime, and (3) and (2) show us how monetary and …scal policy contribute
to that result, generating fBt g and fst g which result in a determinate price level. Now, Sargent
and Wallace (1975) show that interest on reserves loses control of the price level. Here we see that
result overturned.

     The price level and in‡ation rate are uniquely determined in the interest on reserves regime.

   This result is a great comfort. One might have thought we need to accept less than the optimum
quantity of money and …nancial stability in order to achieve control of in‡ation, a long-standing
tension analyzed by Sargent (2010). We do not.
    These classic results are overturned since they explicitly ignored the …scal backing provided by
equation (1). If you read carefully, they say “unless there is …scal backing...” Section 5 covers the
relation of these results to the classic literature in more detail.



                                                  6
2.3     Mapping the simple model to our world

Now, let us step back a bit to interpret this model in the context of current institutions. It’s pretty
straightforward to think of the primary surplus fst g as “…scal policy.” The non-…scal operation in
the above simple model consists of the government setting an interest rate target by announcing
the price of one-period debt, and then selling whatever quantity is demanded at that price, without
changing expected future surpluses as in (6). That doesn’t sound like what the Fed does. The Fed
sets interest on reserves, and the Treasury auctions …xed quantities of debt.
    I will argue here, however, that monetary policy by interest on reserves (and, in fact, the previous
regime as well) can be read in to this operation. In essence, the Fed and Treasury coordinate so that
the Fed announces the interest rate and the Treasury sells the bonds. This separation is desirable,
as it allows the Treasury separately to buy and sell debt in a way that does promise changes in
future surpluses, which is how it funds current de…cits without causing in‡ation.


2.3.1    Can the Fed control interest rates?

First, can the Fed even control interest rates? It’s not a stupid question. The usual answer is “yes,
it can work down a reserve demand curve.”But that answer is over. Fama (2013) even challenges
Fed interest-rate control empirically. Here, I have described how the government as a whole can
target nominal rates by expand or contracting the amount of all Federal debt in private hands, as
described by (6). But how does the Fed accomplish that?
    The Fed can certainly increase the rate it pays on reserves. The question is whether and how
those rates will spread to other rates. If the Fed simply announced a higher interest rate on
reserves and an unlimited quantity, “we pay 5% on reserves, come and get it. Give us your short-
term treasuries, we will create reserves and pay you 5% interest,” then clearly the interest rate on
treasuries must rise to 5% by arbitrage. But then the Fed would potentially lose control of the
balance sheet. A “tightening” might well imply a large increase in the balance sheet, opposite the
usual sign, a point made by Ireland (2012). In this analysis, there is nothing particularly bad about
a large balance sheet. But our Federal Reserve plans to pay interest on reserves and to control the
size of the balance sheet.
    Arbitrage relationships should allow the Fed to control interest rates by changing the interest
rate on reserves and, if necessary, the discount rate, without expanding the balance sheet. If the
Fed pays 5% on reserves, banks should compete to attract depositors, and end up raising deposit
rates to 5% minus costs. The banks cannot collectively hold more reserves, but each bank can get
the reserves of another banks if it can steal away that bank’s depositors. Once deposit rates rise to
5%, depositors should then try to sell Treasuries to get bank deposits, until Treasuries rise to that
level. Banks may also try to dump treasuries to hold more reserves. Banks will surely not lend at
less than 5% if they can get 5% on reserves.
    It’s not clear how strong these arbitrage relationships are in practice. Just paying your nanny
$50 will not, by arbitrage, raise all nanny wages to $50 tomorrow morning. Banks are big, but
not that big. The Fed’s new reverse repo program essentially allows non-bank …nancial companies
to transfer bank deposits directly to reserves. The introduction of this program re‡ects the Fed’s
uncertainty how strong the bank competition and arbitrage mechanism is, and it adds another
connection between interest on reserves and Treasury markets. (See Singh 2014 for a good overview
of …nancial “plumbing” and limits to arbitrage under IOR.)
   Nonetheless, at the level of this frictionless model, arbitrage relationships should allow the Fed

                                                   7
to control all interest rates by paying interest on reserves, and lending freely at the discount window,
even if the Fed does not allow the balance sheet to expand and contract. Furthermore, if Treasury
rates rise as they should when interest on reserves rises, then the Fed can …nance the payment
of interest on reserves entirely from the larger interest it receives on Treasuries, in a neat trick of
picking itself up by its bootstraps. Mark-to-market losses on the Fed’s long term portfolio make
the accounting harder, but don’t change the basic picture.
    Now, back to the Treasury. The Treasury decides the current and expected future surplus or
de…cit fst+j g. These choices determine the real value of debt Qt 1 Bt 1 =Pt 1 that the Treasury
can sell. The Treasury next determines the quantity of debt it needs to sell to …nance the current
de…cit. When it does so, it observes market interest rates. So, when interest rates rise and bond
prices Qt 1 fall, the Treasury raises the face value of the debt Bt 1 that decides to sell. Treasury
auctions are designed purposely not to move markets, and come within a few basis points of existing
rates. But by deciding on the face value of the debt Bt 1 that it sells after observing interest rates,
the Treasury essentially calculates the face value of the debt Bt 1 that equation (6) demands given
the Fed’s determination of the interest rate.
    In this way, the Treasury and Fed acting together do, in fact, institute a system in which the
government as a whole sets the interest rate it 1 and then sells whatever face value of the debt
Bt 1 that equation (6) demands, even though the Fed does not directly change the overall quantity
of debt, and even though the Treasury seems to sell a …xed quantity, not a …xed price.


2.3.2   The Treasury and the Fed: a desirable distance

The expected surplus terms in all these equations suggests a good reason for the strong institutional
separation between Treasury and Fed. When the Treasury sells more debt to …nance a current
de…cit, war, or other temporary spending st 1 , it wants to raise more real revenue, and it does
not want to cause in‡ation or cause an adverse move in interest rates. The Treasury thus wants to
sell more debt Bt 1 and communicate a simultaneous rise in promised real surpluses fEt 1 st+j g.
    By contrast, the Fed wants to communicate the opposite expectations: To raise interest rates,
it wants the government to sell more debt Bt 1 with no implications about future surpluses. If the
government’s only tool was nominal debt sales fBt g conducted by a single agency, it would be very
hard to tell these two actions apart.
    Isolating the debt sales Bt 1 in two distinct branches of the government is a great way to
communicate di¤erent expectations of future surpluses of otherwise identical debt sales. In one
case the “Fed” sets interest rates, and the Treasury passively sells more face value of debt Bt 1 ,
with no change in market value of debt. It’s clear that no increase in surpluses is promised by the
increase in face value of the debt. In the other case, the Treasury directly sells more face value of
debt Bt 1 , with more real market value. The government’s implicit promise to raise future taxes
or cut future spending to pay o¤ that debt is clear.
    In the same way, corporations market share splits –fully-diluting increases in shares outstanding
with no changes in earnings – and public o¤erings – increases in shares outstanding that are
intended to fully correspond to changes in earnings with no dilutions– in ways that convey the
right expectations. In the …rst case, the corporation wants to change prices only, and in the second
case it wants to raise money with as little price impact as possible. Governments market currency
reforms or unions –fully-diluting changes in nominal debt with no change in future real surpluses,
designed to a¤ect nominal prices and raise no revenue –very di¤erently from debt sales –changes
in nominal debt with one for one changes in promised real surpluses, designed to raise revenue

                                                   8
with no change in nominal prices –in ways designed to convey the desired implicit promises about
surpluses. The increase in debt Bt 1 is the same in all cases. As we think about better institutional
design for monetary policy –which we should really call coordinated monetary-…scal policy –better
communicating the intended promises about future surpluses is a central issue.


2.4   Long-term debt and quantitative easing

In this model, there is no di¤erence at all between interest-paying reserves and Treasury debt held
directly by the public. The symbol Bt 1 refers to the sum of the two quantities, and I ignore cash.
Equivalently, we study the consolidated government budget, encompassing Treasury and Fed. So
without further frictions, (1) tells us that

      In the interest-on-reserves regime, open-market operations exchanging reserves for short-term
      government debt have no e¤ ect at all. The size of the Fed’s balance sheet is irrelevant.
      Arbitrary amounts of interest-paying reserves are not in‡ationary.

    If the Fed, or the government, buys real assets such as mortgage-backed securities, increasing
debt Bt 1 but at the same time adding real assets on the right hand side that can either be sold or
generate a stream of surpluses, that action also has no e¤ect on the price level. The only e¤ect would
be if the assets are not worth what they seem, or later default resulting in a shock to surpluses.

      Open market operations or quantitative easing operations that buy real assets from the private
      sector have no e¤ ect on the price level.

    In traditional monetary economics, it was thought not to matter what the Fed bought, or if it
bought anything at all. Only the increase in reserves or money mattered. The drop-in-the-bucket
size of traditional open market operations relative to the supply of liquid debt, plus the Modgliani-
Miller theorem for government asset purchases (the private sector still holds the same risk, just
through state-contingent taxes) made a lot of sense of that view.
     With trillions of excess reserves, however, that doctrine is turned on its head. The usual story
for QE e¤ects is not that the increased reserves have any e¤ect, but that the asset markets are
segmented or illiquid, so the government soaking up large quantities a¤ects the asset prices. The
“illiquidity” or “friction” is in the asset market, not the money market. (How such e¤ects depend
on ‡ows rather than stocks of assets, and how such price impact can be long-lasting, as often viewed
by the Fed, are deeper puzzles, or perhaps mistakes.)
   Balance-sheet irrelevance is an important result. For example it means that

      Reserves that pay market interest, in arbitrary quantities balanced by arbitrary less quantities
      of short-term government debt, are not in‡ationary. The size of the balance sheet is irrelevant.

   When money pays market interest, MV = PY ceases to control PY because velocity V absorbs
any change in the supply of M. Yet commentator after commentator in the last …ve years has noticed
the quantity labeled “money” (reserves) shooting up 5,600%, from $50 billion to $2.8 trillion and
worried about hyperin‡ation.



                                                  9
2.4.1   A QE that works

However, changes in the maturity structure of nominal government debt relative to changes in
the maturity structure of future surpluses can a¤ect the path of nominal in‡ation, and thus give a
rationale for the e¤ectiveness of “quantitative easing”operations. To investigate these possibilities,
I extend the analysis to include long-term debt. Cochrane (2001) undertakes a deeper analysis. I
present a simple example here.
    Suppose the real interest rate is zero, r = 0. Suppose at time t = 0 the government issues
                           (1)     (2)
one-and two-year debt, B0 , B0 : The government will retire this debt with surpluses s1 , s2 ,
and thereafter run balanced budgets st = 0. At time 1, the government sells or repurchases
some additional t = 2 debt without changing current or promised surpluses. This will be our
“quantitative easing.” Denote the amount of time t = 2 debt outstanding at the end of time one,
                               (2)                                            (2)  (2)
after the purchase and sale, B1 , so the purchase or sale is in the quantity B1   B0 .
     I now expand the de…nition of “monetary policy” to include changes in the maturity structure
of nominal debt outstanding in public hands, as well as the size, but with no change in surpluses
fst g. So, what can this monetary policy do?
   We have to …nd what the price level P1 , P2 will be given debt and surpluses. To do so, we work
backward. The ‡ow equation money in = money out for time t = 2 in this situation states that
                                                 (1)
the money “printed” to redeem maturing debt B2 must all be soaked up by tax payments net of
spending P2 s2 ,
                                             (2)
                                           B1 = P2 s2 :                                        (7)
                                                                                              (2)
This equilibrium condition tells us what P2 will be. The nominal bond price Q1                      at time 1 for
bonds that come due at time 2 is then
                                  (2)           1             P1
                                Q1 = P1 E1                =     (2)
                                                                      E1 (s2 ) :
                                                P2            B1

                                                                                       (1)
   The ‡ow equation at time 1 states that money printed to redeem debt B0                    must be soaked up
by surpluses or by sales of time 2 debt,
                                   (1)            (2)         (2)        (2)
                                 B 0 = P 1 s 1 + Q1       B1           B0          :

               (2)
Substituting Q1 ,
                                     (1)         (2)          (2)
                                  B0        B    B
                                      = s1 + 1 (2) 0 E1 (s2 ):                                                (8)
                                   P1         B1
Together, (8) and (7) tell us what the equilibrium price level will be at time 1 and 2, as a function
of debt sold and surpluses.
   To see what policy can do, again take expected values,
                                                 !       2                        3
                       1       (2)          s2                        s2
                E0         = Q0 = E0         (2)
                                                   = E0 4                         5
                      P2                  B1                (2)
                                                           B0 + B1
                                                                       (2)    (2)
                                                                             B0
                                                         "                  ! #
                                                               (2)      (2)
                       1       (1)   E0 (s1 )      1        B1       B0
                E0         = Q0 =       (1)
                                              +       E
                                                   (1) 0           (2)
                                                                             s2
                      P1              B          B               B
                                           0          0                        1


                                                 10
Fixing the surpluses s1 and s2 , “monetary
                                     n     o policy” can achieve whatever values on the left hand
                                       (n)
side it desires by the choice of debt Bt     :

       The maturity structure of debt, together with expected future bond purchases and sales, controls
       the time-path of expected in‡ation and the nominal term structure of interest rates, …xing
       surpluses.

   Expected future sales and purchases are not even needed here. If there are no time-1 sales and
 (2)     (2)
B1  = B0 , then the maturity structure at time 0 simply sets the time path of in‡ation and the
nominal term structure of interest rates,
                                                  1        (2)   E0 (s2 )
                                             E0        = Q0 =          (2)
                                                  P2              B0
                                                  1        (1)   E0 (s1 )
                                             E0        = Q0 =          (1)
                                                  P1              B0

    As monetary policy can target short rates, the Fed could just as easily directly target the long
rates, or even the entire term structure. Why it does not do so is a bit of a puzzle. If the Fed
wants the 10 year rate to be 50 bp lower, why does it just not say “we buy and sell Treasuries at
a 2.0% ten year yield. Come and get them?” Or, it could …x the interest rate on term deposits at
the Fed. If the Fed can control the overnight rate by controlling interest on reserves, then it can
control the term structure by …xing the interest rate on term deposits.
   Taking unexpected values, we …nd at t = 2 that …scal policy fully determines the unexpected
time 2 price level.
                              (2)            1
                            B1 (E2 E1 )          = (E2 E1 ) s2 :
                                            P2
But at time 1, we …nd
                                                                                (                           )
                                                                                     (2)         (2)
                  (1)                   1                                           B1        B0
                B0 (E1      E0 )             = (E1     E0 ) s1 + (E1     E0 )              (2)
                                                                                                       s2       :           (9)
                                        P1                                               B1

   Equation (9) o¤ers an exciting new opportunity: By unexpectedly selling more time-2 debt, the
government dilutes existing claims to time-2 surpluses. This action raises real revenue and that
revenue can be used to increase the payo¤ to period 1 bondholders, lowering in‡ation at time 1.
   There is a catch however: Selling additional long-term debt raises in‡ation at time 2,
                                                 !
                                             (2)
                                           B1
                              (E1 E0 )             = (E1 E0 ) (s2 ):                                                       (10)
                                            P2

                                                                             (2)                                           1
Fixing s1 and s2 , for example, a surprise debt sale increasing B1                 at time 1 raises (E1             E0 )   P1
                                   1
in (9) and lowers (E1     E0 )     P2    in (10).

       “Monetary policy” – a change in the maturity structure of government debt with no change
       in …scal stance – can even a¤ ect unexpected in‡ation in the presence of long-term debt. It
       does so by rearranging the path of in‡ation, delaying in‡ation or bringing in‡ation forward.

                                                         11
    We may read current “quantitative easing”as this policy with the opposite sign. By unexpect-
edly (relative to when the debt was sold) buying long-term debt, the Fed tries to “stimulate,” i.e.
to increase in‡ation today, in exchange for less in‡ation later on.
                                                                                              (2)    (2)
    This result also points to a stabilization role for quantitative easing. Extra debt sales B1    B0
in (9) can be used to o¤set surplus shocks (E1 E0 ) s1 or (E1 E0 ) s2 , thus insulating the price
level (E1 E0 ) (1=P1 ) from surplus shocks. Active debt management emerges as a policy to stabilize
the price level in the face of shocks to surpluses, as well as other shocks, not just to create in‡ation
or disin‡ation. The general case of these formulas is quite complex (Cochrane 2001), suggesting a
very interesting job of maturity management for governments that want to stabilize in‡ation and,
with pricing frictions, output.


3     Real rates and sticky prices

The simple frictionless models got us quite far in describing the potential and limits for monetary
policy to a¤ect in‡ation, but leave out any e¤ects on output and real interest rates. In particular,
increased interest rates increase expected in‡ation with no real interest rate or output e¤ects so
far. Belief in the opposite sign is strong, so a model with some frictions is worth exploring.
    It is not at all obvious that monetary policy in an interest on reserves regime will have the
traditional e¤ects. The mechanism for interest rate increase, and the mechanism for its transmission
to the price level are utterly di¤erent from the standard story. Rationing liquidity, rationing bank
lending or deposit creation are simply absent. So, experience in the previous regime may be a
poor guide. There is a genuine need for theory, and we should not demand that theory produce the
traditional response.


3.1   A simple sticky-price model

I maintain a model without monetary frictions –reserves still are perfect substitutes for overnight
Treasury debt, and people hold no non-interest-bearing money overnight. I add pricing frictions.
To innovate as little as possible, I add them in the simplest possible way: I force producers to state
prices ahead of time, and then sell whatever quantity people want at those prices. The point here
is not to create an empirically successful model of pricing dynamics, but to explore the basic signs
and mechanisms by which monetary policy might work in the absence of monetary frictions.
   I set the model out in detail in the Appendix. It is a simpli…cation of Galí (1999). Households
                                        R1     1       1
consume a CES composite good ct = j=0 cjt dj             of many varieties. Each household i uses
labor nit to produce one variety yit with production function yit = Anit . Each household must set
its price k periods in advance.
   The aggregated version of the formal model is easy to work with. The government debt valuation
equation remains, unsurprisingly,
                                                     1X
                                            Bt 1
                                 u0 (ct )        = Et     j 0
                                                           u (ct+j )st+j :                          (11)
                                             Pt
                                                    j=0

Now Pt is determined at time t k. Therefore, u0 (ct ), consumption, output and bond prices, will
react when there is a surplus shock. Since prices are completely free after k periods, however,

                                                    12
marginal utility can only be expected to diverge from the frictionless value for k periods. With c
equal to the frictionless level of consumption and output, we have

                                       Et   j   u0 (ct ) = u0 (c): j        k:

Asset markets are una¤ected, so the nominal interest rate still obeys

                                        1                u0 (ct+1 ) Pt
                                             = Et                       :
                                      1 + it              u0 (ct ) Pt+1

Using these simple rules, one can work out dynamics of the aggregate system in response to shocks,
as I did with the ‡exible-price model.


3.2    Surplus shocks

I start with the usual expected and unexpected technique to isolate what …scal and monetary policy
can do.
    In general, (11) will lead us to a risk premium for the valuation of government debt, since future
surplus shocks will correlate with future consumption shocks Et [u0 (ct+j )st+j ] 6= Et [u0 (ct+j )] E [st+j ].
This e¤ect is very interesting for empirical application –as elsewhere, varying risk premiums help
us to understand many puzzling features of the data. But here, let us …rst understand very basic
parts of what monetary and …scal policy can do.
    So, consider a simple example: suppose prices are sticky for one period. Suppose there is a
once and for all shock to expected surpluses in the far o¤ future. Suppose st = 0: this is a period
in which debt must be rolled over, though possibly with news about future surpluses, but no new
de…cits must be …nanced. The unexpected component of (11) then reads
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  X
                          Bt 1                u0 (ct )                                  j
                               (Et     Et 1 )          = (Et           Et    1)             st+j :        (12)
                           Pt                 u0 (c)
                                                                                  j=1


    This …scal-news shock produces a jump in the price level Pt in the frictionless model, (2). But
now, Pt cannot change in response to the shock. All the adjustment to the surplus shock now
comes by adjustment to u0 (ct ) and hence P
                                          to the real interest rate. A negative (in‡ationary) shock
to expected future surpluses (Et Et 1 ) 1    j=1
                                                   js               0
                                                     t+j lowers u (ct ), i.e. raises ct . An in‡ationary
…scal shock thus produces a temporary output expansion. The in‡ationary shock also lowers the
real interest rate,
                                                 1     1 u0 (ct )
                                      1 + rt =      =             ;
                                                qt       u0 (c)
where qt denotes the real bond price.
    These are the “usual” signs – in‡ation is preceded by higher output and lower real interest
rates. In this model, that course of events is out of the Fed’s control; it is part of …scal, not
monetary policy. But observers accustomed to thinking the Fed controls real interest rates might
well think that the Fed lowered real rates, induced the output
                                                             P1 expansion,    and later the in‡ation;
                                                                    j
they might think that the ex-post observed fall in surpluses j=1 st+j represented a “Ricardian”
or passive-…scal reaction by the Treasury. Little in the data could falsify this impression.




                                                        13
   To get some insight into how the real rate change absorbs the surplus shock in place of in‡ation,
write (12) in the form
                                                                              1
                                                                              X
                       Bt 1                 1                                       j
                            =                                 (Et   Et   1)             st+1+j :    (13)
                        Pt    (Et      Et   1 ) (1   + rt )
                                                                              j=0

The left-most term is the real value of nominal debt coming due in the morning, which must be
rolled over. With a constant real interest rate, the real value of debt sold in the evening declined
when expected future surpluses declined, as the right-most term declined. To match that decline,
the real value of debt coming due in the morning declined, as Pt on the left hand side of (13) rose.
But that mechanism is now absent. The real value of debt coming due in the morning Bt 1 =Pt
cannot decline. How can the real value of debt paid o¤ in the morning stay the same, in the face
of a decline in expected surpluses? The answer is that the real interest rate also declines, the bond
price rises, so the lower expected surpluses now have the same real value and the bonds are rolled
over.
    The same mechanism in nominal terms: We can imagine the government printing up money
Bt 1 to pay o¤ debt at the beginning of period t, money which must be soaked up with bond sales
by the end of time t. (In this simple examplePwith  st = 0.) With ‡exible prices and a constant real
                                              1
interest rate, the real value of surpluses Et j=0 j st+j was …xed, and at the same nominal price
level Pt these would no longer soak up all the dollars. So at that price level, people tried to buy
more goods with their excess dollars. In doing so, they pushed up goods prices until the lower real
quantity of debt sold in the afternoon soaked up the excess nominal dollars brought in by Bt 1 .
    But now prices cannot rise. People still have more newly-printed money in their pockets Bt 1
than will be soaked up by debt sales. What happens? First, they try to buy more goods and
services as before. With prices …xed one period in advance, this extra “aggregate demand” now
leads to greater output, not higher prices. But the greater output does not soak up any money in
aggregate. More money spent by the buyer is received by the seller, and at the end of the day the
excess money Bt 1 relative to bond sales that will soak it up is still there. So, if money holders
cannot bid up the price of goods, they bid up the price of bonds instead. “Asset price in‡ation,”
takes the place of goods in‡ation. The real interest rate decline / real bond price rise continues
until the excess cash is now all soaked up by bond sales at an unchanged price level.
    Given that real interest rate rise, the output increase is determined by the intertemporal …rst
order condition 1=(1 + rt ) = Et [ u0 (ct ) =u0 (ct )]. In words, with a lower interest rate, people want
to buy more today and save less for tomorrow.

      An in‡ationary …scal shock – decline in future surpluses – causes an increase in output, and
      a decline in the real interest rate.

    Though now (I hope) obvious in terms of the model, these are unconventional predictions.
Without the model, we might have thought that a decline in expected future surpluses, a decline
in the government’s ability to service its debt, would lead to an increase in the interest rate, and a
reduction in the value of government debt. Instead, in equilibrium, real interest rates rise and there
is no change in the real value of government debt. The nominal value of government debt cannot
change in a (default-free) rollover, and with sticky prices, the real value of government debt cannot
change. If expected future surpluses decline, then the rate at which those surpluses are discounted
must decline as well.


                                                        14
    This observation may help to make sense of many paradoxes in the data, such as during the
…nancial crisis in which economists note bad news about current and future surpluses, but interest
rates decline and government bond prices rise anyway in a “‡ight to” government debt.


3.3   Monetary policy with one-period stickiness

Next consider “monetary policy,”debt sales with no change in surplus, with sticky prices, deriving
from the expected value of (11). Again assume prices stuck for one period, ignore the risk pre-
mium, and remember the rules that marginal utility can only be expected to vary for one period,
Et 1 [u0 (ct )] = u0 (c). We obtain
                                                 1
                                                 X
                                    Bt 1              j
                                         = Et 1         st+j :                                (14)
                                     Pt
                                                          j=0

This equation functions much as its ‡exible price counterpart (3). The only di¤erence is that 1=Pt is
known at time t 1 so lies outside the Et 1 . This equation tells us that by varying debt Bt 1 , with
…xed surpluses, the government can control the actual price level at time t, Pt with sticky prices,
just as it controlled the expected price level at time t; Et 1 (1=Pt ), with ‡exible prices. Again, this
action is like a share split or currency reform. As before, the government can set the price rather
than the quantity, and follow a nominal interest rate target. The nominal rate and real rate are
related by
                                                               Pt 1
                                     (1 + rt 1 ) = (1 + it 1 )      ;                               (15)
                                                                Pt
the di¤erence being that Pt is …xed at t        1, not expected.
    With the real rate rt 1 determined by …scal shocks at time t 1, (and, in a fuller model, real
shocks), a …xed nominal rate target it 1 = { will result in price level volatility: If the real rate
rt 1 rises and the Fed holds the nominal rate it 1 constant, the price level Pt must decline in (15).
Hence,

      If the Fed wants to reduce price volatility, it should move the nominal rate target one-for-one
      with the real rate.

   This advice has much of the ‡avor of “Wicksellian” advice such as Woodford (2005) that the
nominal rate target (Taylor rule intercept) should follow rises and falls in the “natural” rate.


3.4   Interest rate policy with real e¤ects

However, monetary policy cannot a¤ect output or the real interest rate with one period debt, and
prices stuck for one period. Consumption u0 (ct 1 ) is already set by Bt 2 and time t 1 expected
surpluses. And marginal utility u0 (ct ) can only move for one period, Bt 1 cannot a¤ect Et 1 u0 (ct ).
   When prices are sticky for more than one period, however, monetary policy can a¤ect real
quantities. Suppose now that prices must be set k periods in advance. As there are no asset
market distortions, the government debt valuation equation remains,
                                                      1
                                                      X
                                            Bt 1
                                 u0 (ct )        = Et       j 0
                                                                u (ct+j )st+j :                    (16)
                                             Pt
                                                     j=0




                                                     15
Now, Pt must be determined at time t k, and marginal utility and the real interest rate can
diverge from the frictionless value for k periods.
   The general algebra for this case does not yield much intuition, so I present a simple example.
Start at a steady state Pt = P with interest rate target
                                                1               1
                                                   =       =      ;
                                               1+i             1+
where the last equality de…nes . Suppose that at time t = 1 the government unexpectedly changes
the interest rate target to a path f(1 + i) t g. The sequence f t g captures the dynamic path of
interest rates following the policy shock. A permanent increase in the nominal rate is captured by
a constant t = . The usual AR(1) response, in which the interest rate change gradually fades
away, is captured by t = (1 + t ) for some < 1. Other sequences f t g let us explore the kinds
of dynamic real and nominal responses that the central bank can engineer by changing the dynamic
nature of the policy rule, and thereby change expectations of the persistence of policy shocks.
   The …nite length of price stickiness in this model provides a clean dividing line between the short
run and the long run. Prices P1 ; P2 ; :::Pk = P cannot respond to the interest-rate innovation. Prices
Pk+1 and beyond can respond. Conversely, consumption c1 ; c2 ; ::ck can respond to the interest-rate
innovation, but consumption ck+1 = c and beyond cannot respond.
    To …ll in …scal policy in the simplest way, suppose that surpluses are st = 0; t < k, and will
be constant st = s; t      k. The presence of surpluses st during the price-sticky period leads to
small variations in the value of these surpluses u0 (ct )st at these dates as consumption varies, which
cloud the basic story. Letting the debt be paid o¤ by far in the future surpluses simpli…es later
algebra. Having surpluses resume just as prices become unstuck makes no di¤erence. We could
let stP= 0; t < k + K and all variables but the quantity of debt would be the same. Denote
S= 1   j=0
             j s = s=(1    ). The steady state implies from (16) that nominal debt Bt 1 = k t P S
for t k and Bt 1 = P S for t k.
    Our job is to solve (16) together with the consumer’s optimality condition

                                           1         u0 (ct+1 ) Pt
                                                = Et                                                           (17)
                                         1 + it       u0 (ct ) Pt+1

for for the sequence u0 (c1 ); u0 (c2 ); ::u0 (ck ), B1 ; B2 ; :::, and Pk+1 ; Pk+2 ; :::given this nominal interest
rate path. From the marginal utility path, we can …nd the path of the real rate of interest. The
algebra is straightforward but tedious, so I present it in the Appendix.
    Figure 1 shows the e¤ects of a 1 percentage point rise in interest rates at time 1, when prices
are sticky for k = 4 periods and followed by interest rates reverting with an 0.9 autoregression
coe¢ cient.
    In the model without pricing frictions, this change would just raise in‡ation to Pt =Pt 1 = t 1
immediately, with no change to consumption or the real interest rate. Now the price level cannot
move for four periods. When the price level is …nally free at t = 5, it immediately jumps to the
frictionless level. All the repressed in‡ation arrives at once.
    During the period of price stickiness, the real interest rate rises by exactly the rise in the nominal
rate. This rise in real rate sets o¤ a boomlet in consumption. Consumption growth rises to match
the higher real interest rate. However, at the end of the price-stickiness period, consumption jumps
back to its frictionless value, there is therefore a period of strong negative real interest rate induced
by strong expected in‡ation and a constant nominal rate.

                                                        16
                               5



                               4                                     P

                               3



                               2
                                                         c

                                                                     i
                    Percent


                               1



                               0



                              -1



                                                                             i
                              -2                   r-5                       P
                                                                             c
                                                                             r-5
                              -3
                                   0   1   2   3             4   5       6         7
                                                    T ime



Figure 1: E¤ects of an interest rate rise in a simple sticky-price model. At time 1, the government
unexpectedly raises the nominal interest rate one percentage point. Interest rates then revert with
an 0.9 autocorrelation coe¢ cient. Prices are …xed four periods in advance. The steady state interest
rate is = 0:05:

   The jumps at the end of the sticky-price period are of course not realistic. In a more realistic,
Calvo-style model, price stickiness would evaporate gradually. So we should expect a consumption
boom with little in‡ation, then consumption to revert to normal slowly as in‡ation picks up.
   In sum, we see that

     In a model with price frictions, but no monetary frictions, a rise in nominal interest rate
     target, with no change in …scal surpluses, can induce real interest rate and output dynamics.

   The scenario plotted in Figure 1 does not conform to the usual story told about interest-rate
based monetary policy. This monetary policy is expansionary throughout –…rst consumption rises,
then in‡ation rises. There is no period in which the rise in real interest rate lowers the level of
current consumption, or temporarily lowers in‡ation. Consumption and in‡ation look a lot like you
might imagine Friedman (1968) to describe a monetary expansion. The only di¤erence, Friedman’s
monetary expansion would have started with a period of lower interest rates by working down a
money demand curve. But there is no money demand curve in this frictionless model.
    The prediction that raising nominal interest rates is expansionary is pretty central to the basic
structure of this model, combining no monetary frictions, no …scal response, and price stickiness.
First, we have to see that consumption at time 1 c1 cannot fall. At time 1, the basic equation (16)
reads
                                                 1
                                                 X
                                  0      B0          j 0
                                 u (c1 )    = E1      u (c1+j )s1+j :                            (18)
                                         P1
                                                   j=0

Debt B0 is predetermined. The price level P1 cannot change, by price stickiness. And, with
surpluses equal to zero through the time of price stickiness and marginal utility mobility, the right

                                                   17
hand side can’t change either. Even if we did not make that assumption, discount-rate changes in
the value of surpluses for times less than k would be small.
    When the nominal interest rate i1 rises, the real interest rate r1 rises, so consumption growth
c2 =c1 must rise. If the level c1 could fall, this rise would correspond to a recovery from a recession.
If consumption c1 does not move and growth c2 =c2 rises, well, c2 must rise. Both the level and the
growth rate of consumption must rise.
    In sum, this model alerts us to the neo-Fisherian possibility that perhaps the sign of monetary
policy e¤ects is changed in a model without monetary frictions:

      With no monetary frictions in the interest on reserves regime, raising interest rates is expan-
      sionary for both in‡ation and output.

    The basic logic is pretty simple: raising nominal interest rates either raises in‡ation or raises
real interest rates. If it raises real interest rates, it must raise consumption growth. The prediction
is only counterintuitive because for so long we have persuaded ourselves of the opposite, despite
the Fisher equation and the consumer’s …rst order condition linking consumption growth to the
real rate.


3.5   Mixing monetary and …scal policy

These Fisherian implications for monetary policy seem to violate common views about how mon-
etary policy behaves – that interest rate increases with sticky prices should lower the level of
consumption and lower in‡ation. In standard models, the interest rate rise might eventually raise
in‡ation by the Fisher e¤ect, but impulse- response functions usually imply that the Fed has actu-
ally lowered the interest rate target by that time, so the in‡ation decline is permanent.
    But the pure separation between “monetary policy” with no change in surpluses and “…scal
policy” that only changes surpluses, while convenient for conceptual analysis, is a misleading in
analyzing actual policy actions or historical events. Historical events and policy interventions always
mix monetary and …scal shocks, and monetary and …scal policy react to the same underlying shocks.
    We can produce something like the standard view by mixing a simultaneous monetary and …scal
policy shock. Figure 2 presents calculations. To make the example clearer, I assume that the Fed
raises interest rates by one percentage points for two periods only.
    The top left panel of Figure 2 shows the response to this pure monetary policy shock, with no
change in …scal policy, as I presented in Figure 1. The price level is stuck for 4 periods, then jumps
up 2% to the “repressed in‡ation” implied by two periods of 1% higher interest rates. The real
rate follows the nominal rate while prices are sticky, then jumps down in the period that prices
(expectedly) become unstuck. Consumption growth and level rise when real interest rates rise; the
level of consumption reverts back to its previous value when price become unstuck. In short, an
interest rate rise is expansionary throughout, …rst for consumption and output, then for in‡ation.
    The top right panel of Figure 2 presents a pure contractionary …scal shock. At time 1, people
learn that the surpluses past period 4, originally expected to be s, now will be s0 > s, 3% higher. In
the model without price stickiness, this change would produce an immediate 3% downward jump in
the price level. Now, the price level is stuck for 4 periods, and then jumps down. In the meantime,
consumption jumps down instead. This is just a four-period version of the shock discussed in
section 3.2.

                                                  18
                            3                                                  4
                                                                                                       i
                                                                               3                       P
                            2
                                                                                                       c
                                                                               2
                                                                                                       r-5
                            1
                 Percent




                                                                    Percent
                                                                               1

                            0                                                  0
                                                     i
                                                                              -1
                                                     P
                           -1                        c                        -2
                                                     r-5
                           -2                                                 -3
                                 0   2      4    6         8                       0   2      4    6         8
                                         T ime                                             T ime


                           1.5                                                 2

                            1
                                                                               1
                           0.5
                                                                               0
           Percent




                                                                    Percent
                            0

                     -0.5                                                     -1
                                                     i                                                 i
                           -1
                                                     P                                                 P
                                                     c                        -2                       c
                     -1.5
                                                     r-5                                               r-5
                           -2                                                 -3
                                 0   2      4    6         8                       0   2      4    6         8
                                         T ime                                             T ime


Figure 2: Responses to joint monetary-…scal tightening. Top left: Monetary policy only. The
nominal interest rate rises 1% for two periods, no …scal policy change. Top right: Fiscal policy
only. Long-run surpluses rise 3%, no interest rate change. Bottom left: Monetary policy with a
small …scal change. Interest rate rises 1%, surpluses rise 2%. Bottom right: Monetary policy with
a larger …scal change. Interest rates rise 1%, surpluses rise 3%.


   Now, we are looking for a shock that raises nominal, and hence real, interest rates, thus raises
consumption growth rates, but lowers the level of consumption. To that end, in the bottom left
panel, I mix the 1% interest rate rise from the top left panel with a 2% …scal contraction. The
…scal policy shock pulls the initial level of consumption down, and the long run price level down.
    This joint monetary-…scal policy produces a recession in the level of consumption, by the …scal
contraction. Consumption then regains its original level, due to the growth rate induced by the
high interest rate. In this example, there are very small output or price level dynamics left over
after period 4.
    Clearly, one can produce long run dynamics – positive or negative in‡ation – anyway one
wishes (or, the data indicate) by mixing the size of the …scal shock with the size, persistence and
long-run sign of the interest rate change. The bottom right panel of Figure 2 presents a graph
indicative of the kind of VAR evidence found for “monetary policy shocks” that have unstated
…scal accompaniment. Here I add a 3% …scal tightening along with two periods of 1% interest rate
rise. Now, we see a 3% negative shock to output coincident with the higher real interest rates. The
higher real rates help consumption to recover faster than it would be with the …scal shock alone, in
the top right panel. But since the 3% …scal shock is larger than the 2 1% interest rate increases,
the “tightening” is followed by a decrease in in‡ation in period 5, before prices settle to a lower
level.


                                                               19
    One could also produce a reduction in in‡ation by the interest-rate response to its own shock.
If interest rates fall in the long run, either directly or indirectly by Taylor-rule response to the
emerging …scal de‡ation, then by Fisherian logic the initial tightening will be followed by eventual
disin‡ation.
    In sum, though pure monetary policy without any change in surpluses is Fisherian and expan-
sionary, a joint monetary-…scal “tightening” consisting of interest rate increases coordinated with
a long-run …scal tightening, produce the kind of responses with which we are familiar. However,
such a response hides a far di¤erent menu of causal possibilities. If the Fed wants to in‡ate, in this
model, and without the usual …scal coordination, it needs to raise interest rates, and leave them
there.
    (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe 2013 also reach the conclusion that interest rate increases are in‡a-
tionary, though in a di¤erent new-Keynesian model, writing that their model “shows that raising
the nominal interest rate to its intended target for an extended period of time, rather than exacer-
bating the recession as conventional wisdom would have it, can boost in‡ationary expectations and
thereby foster employment.” Ireland 2012 o¤ers a new-Keynesian model with interest on reserves,
…nding unusual dynamics in response to tightening. )


4     Comparison with a new-Keynesian model

A natural reaction at this point is, wait a minute. We have a whole range of models which specify
the reaction of the economy to interest-rate policy, with no mention of monetary frictions or …scal
backing: The whole New-Keynesian Taylor-rule DSGE literature, epitomized by Woodford (2003).
Why not just reference those models and go on to other questions?
    In fact, however, this class of models does rely heavily on …scal backing. When you look at
them, these models generate in‡ation predictions by imagining that monetary policy leads to …scal
policy responses, and their results depend crucially on the nature of the assumed …scal response.


4.1    Fiscal backing in a simple New-Keynesian model

Consider the absolutely simplest new-Keynesian model, as presented in Woodford (2003) (and, in
detail, in Cochrane 2011) with no pricing frictions. The model consists of a Fisher equation, a
Taylor-type rule by which the Fed sets the nominal rate, and a serially correlated monetary policy
shock:

                                           it = r + Et          t+1                              (19)
                                           it = r +             t   + xt
                                          xt = xt         1   + "t :                             (20)

The equilibrium condition for this model is

                                          Et    t+1   =         t   + xt :

There are multiple equilibria. Any

                                t+1   =     t   + xt +        t+1 ;   Et (   t+1 )   =0          (21)

is a valid solution.

                                                      20
   The New-Keynesian tradition sets     > 1. All but one solution now explodes, kEt+1             t+j k   ! 1.
Ruling out nominal explosions, one selects the unique locally-bounded solution
                                                                       1
                                                      t   =                 xt

and interest rates thus follow:
                                                    it =                    xt

Equivalently, this equilibrium chooses the shock
                                                                       "t
                                                      t   =                     :                          (22)



    Figure 3 presents the response to a one percentage point monetary tightening, "1 = 1; in this
simple canonical model1 . (The plots use the borderline case          = 1 for all solutions. This saves a
lot of plots and discussions exploring both the         > 1 and      < 1 cases. The response functions
depend smoothly on          , so are visually indistinguishable for      slightly above or below one. )
The monetary policy shock xt is positive and slowly declines following the AR(1) pattern. The
lower lines marked “New-Keynesian”plot the response of interest rates and in‡ation to this shock.
In‡ation jumps down; the tightening lowers in‡ation as the standard story says. The actual nominal
interest rate also falls, which seems like counterintuitive sort of “tightening.”But the actual interest
rate falls less than      times in‡ation. This represents “tightening”relative to the Taylor rule. The
dynamics come entirely from the mean-reversion of the shock. A permanent 1% shock leads to an
immediate and permanent decline of interest rates and in‡ation.
    Thus, this completely frictionless model, based only on the Fisher equation with a constant real
rate, produces lower in‡ation from positive shock to the interest-rate rule.
      The valuation equation for government debt
                                                          X            1
                                                Bt 1                        j
                                                     = Et                       st+j                       (23)
                                                 Pt
                                                                   j=0

is part of this model. It just got brushed in to the footnotes with an assumption that the Treasury
will always pass lump sum taxes fst g to validate whatever solution fPt g emerges. The in‡ation
drop at time t = 1 is an unexpected drop, as (22) makes clear. As we have seen, with one-period
debt the only way to produce an unexpected drop in in‡ation by (23) is to imagine a change in
…scal policy,
                                                                   1
                                                                   X
                         Bt 1                Pt 1                       j
                               (Et Et 1 )           = (Et Et 1 )          st+j :               (24)
                         Pt 1                 Pt
                                                                                           j=0

    Thus, to produce the unexpected -4% in‡ation in response to a monetary policy shock shown in
Figure 3, this model must also specify that …scal policy produces a 4% increase in the net present
value of primary surpluses, to validate a 4% increase in the real value of government debt.
  1
      The family of response functions are given by
                                                1                 t 1                  1
                                        t   +       xt        =             1   +          x1 :




                                                                  21
                              4



                              3                                No fiscal


                              2



                              1

                                                           Shock x
                   Percent


                              0



                             -1                        New-Keynesian


                             -2



                             -3
                                                                                     i
                                                                                     π
                             -4
                                  0   2   4   6     8         10           12   14       16
                                                  Time



Figure 3: Responses to a monetary tighteing in the standard and …scally-constrained solutions of
a simple new-Keynesian model. = 0:75;      = 1:


   The in‡ation response is thus really a response to two, simultaneous, shocks: a Taylor-rule
shock and an expected surplus shock. In the US context, with $12 billion dollars of outstanding
public debt, that means that the Treasury must be expected to come up with about $500 billion of
extra tax increases or spending cuts, in present value terms, to validate the desired dis-in‡ationary
e¤ects of a 1% interest rate rise, a not inconsiderable amount of …scal-monetary coordination.
   The …scal coordination is crucial. From the point of view of (23), the mechanism by which
“monetary policy” produces the downward jump in “aggregate demand” or increased demand for
government debt, and thus the mechanism by which it produces disin‡ation, is by inducing this
…scal reaction.


4.2   Simple model, no …scal backing

What if that …scal backing is not forthcoming? Or, what if people just stop expecting it when they
see a monetary policy shock, or if the …scal backing, familiar in the past, would run in to La¤er
curve or political limits in a high-debt environment?
    Equations (24) and (21) allow a nice view of this conundrum: we can index all the multiple
solutions to the new-Keynesian
                           P model    by their implied …scal backing. For example, the case of no
…scal response, (Et Et 1 ) 1 j=0
                                  js
                                    t+j = 0, that I studied above, is the case (Et+1  Et ) t+1 =
 t+1 = 0.

    Figure 3 also includes this “…scal-neutral” solution to the model, plotted in red. This solution
is simply computed as 1 = 0, t =                            t 1 . In this solution, in‡ation does not
                                           t 1 + xt , xt =
jump in the period of the shock – that’s how we identi…ed the equilibrium choice. Then interest
rates follow obvious dynamics generated from the policy rule and Fisher equation
   Now, the …scal-neutral solution gives positive in‡ation in response to monetary tightening.


                                                  22
Which is, in retrospect, quite a natural prediction. This is a purely frictionless model. Real rates
are constant, so there is no mechanism for real rates to lower “demand.” In a totally frictionless
model, all the Fed can do when it raises the nominal rate is to raise expected in‡ation. So of course
raising the nominal rate raises in‡ation. The mystery here is, how did the standard new-Keynesian
solution produce a downward jump in in‡ation from a completely frictionless model, with …xed
real rate, …xed output, and super-neutrality, yet somehow raising the nominal rate lowers in‡ation?
The answer is now clear: The new-Keynesian solution assumed that the monetary change would
also be accompanied with an important …scal tightening, and this …scal tightening produced the
in‡ation decline.


4.3   The three-equation new-Keynesian model

The system (19)-(20) may seem too simple to examine this issue. But the same points hold in more
realistic models.
  To demonstrate this point, I examine solutions to the standard three-equation new-Keynesian
model,

                                    yt = Et yt+1               (it   Et    t+1 )

                                     t   = Et       t+1   + yt
                                    it =        t   + xit

                                           xit =      i xit 1    + "it :

    Figure 4 presents responses to a monetary policy shock in this model. (The algebra is in the
Appendix.) As one might expect, and similarly to the simple model of Figure 3, the monetary tight-
ening lowers in‡ation and output. Again, interest rates actually jump down, but less than in‡ation,
so this shock does represent a tightening. Again, the solution depends on a jump downwards in
in‡ation, which requires a …scal tightening.
   Figure 5 presents a “…scal-neutral” solution of the same model. Here again, I just picked the
equilibrium in which (Et Et 1 ) t = 0.
   This change produces radically di¤erent in‡ation and interest-rate responses. In‡ation cannot
now “jump” down during the period of the shock. The tightening now produces an actual rise in
nominal rates. Nominal rates and in‡ation then chase each other into positive territory, much as
they did in Figure 3. Real rates rise, and the real rate and output responses are not that di¤erent
from the standard new-Keynesian case.
    Even this standard New-Keynesian model produces Fisherian results, that a rise in interest
rates increases in‡ation when not accompanied by a contractionary …scal shock.
    A disclaimer: properly integrating …scal backing into models of this sort is more complex than
simply adding the frictionless valuation equation, as I have implicitly done here to make a clear
illustrative calculation. Since real interest rates change, a change in monetary policy without
change in expected surpluses will have a discount-rate e¤ect on the value of government debt. I
have implicitly plotted a monetary policy change with just enough change in surpluses that the
present value of surpluses is not a¤ected after interest rate changes. More importantly, the details of
asset markets, budget constraints, and the nature of price stickiness need to be speci…ed explicitly,
as I did in the Appendix for the model with prices set k periods in advance, along with the maturity
structure of government debt and state-contingent changes in that maturity structure.

                                                          23
                               1
                                       x
                             0.5
                                       r
                               0


                            -0.5
                                               y
                             -1
                  Percent
                                               i

                            -1.5


                             -2


                            -2.5           π

                             -3


                            -3.5
                                   0   2                   4       6      8    10   12   14   16
                                                                        Time



Figure 4: Response of standard new-Keynesian model to a 1% monetary policy shock.                  = 0:75;   =
  =     = 1:
                             3.5


                               3



                             2.5
                                                       i
                               2
                                                               π
                             1.5
                  Percent




                               1

                                                   x
                             0.5
                                       r
                               0


                            -0.5
                                           y
                             -1
                                   0   2                   4       6      8    10   12   14   16
                                                                        Time



Figure 5: “Fiscal-neutral” response to a 1% monetary policy shock in a new-Keynesian model. I
choose the equilibrium with no shock to in‡ation, t+1 Et t+1 = 0.


   The point here is not to construct a second fully ‡eshed out model, but to show that the
standard new-Keynesian model also stands …rmly on …scal foundations, and that changing those
foundations fundamentally changes the model’s predictions.




                                                                       24
5     Theory and literature

There are three basic approaches to monetary policy and price level determination, in the context
of modern institutions, …at money and a central bank: Money supply and demand, MV=PY,
interest-rate control in new-Keynesian models, and the …scal theory of the price level which I use
here.
   Here, I contrast the three approaches as they apply to the interest on reserves regime. Since
the …scal theory of the price level is controversial, I allay some common theoretical and empirical
objections to its use.


5.1   Monetary theory

Write money demand M V (r rT B ) = P Y; where r is the return on money and rT B is the return
on Treasury bills. When we observe the rate on money equal to the rate on bills, r = rT B , then the
economy is satiated in money. Money demand then becomes a correspondence; in M vs. r space, a
vertical line. People will hold any amount of M , above the satiation point, at zero interest spread.
Money (reserves) and treasuries are perfect substitutes, and exchanging the two has no e¤ect on
prices, output, interest rates, or anything else. Conversely, for a …xed M , any price level can be
observed; the price level becomes indeterminate by this equation.
    In some models of money, we are never completely satiated. But in those models the interest
on reserves can never completely equal the interest rate on Treasuries. In fact, we have observed
substantial periods in which the interest on reserves has exceeded the interest on treasuries, which
has even been slightly negative. Apparently treasuries, which anyone can hold, can be more liquid
or “money-like” than reserves, which only banks can hold.
   Sargent and Wallace (1985) is a classic paper making this point, warning that, “Indetermi-
nacy of equilibrium is a possibility because the proposal eliminates the interest di¤erential be-
tween...reserves, and other assets. ... it tends to produce an indeterminate demand for reserves
and hence for the monetary base.”They add, “This source of indeterminacy is widely recognized.”
    In the relevant case that interest paid on reserves comes from earnings on the Fed’s portfolio
of Treasuries, and nominal interest rates are positive, Sargent and Wallace show that there is no
equilibrium. They survey (section 5) alternative models including cash in advance and money in the
utility function, and again …nd that interest on reserves leads to price-level indeterminacy. Ennis
(2014) is a recent detailed general-equilibrium model also showing indeterminacy with interest
on reserves without …scal price level determination. Ennis argues that capital constraints can
substitute for reserve control.
    Sargent and Wallace, like all well-posed monetary models, contains a version of the government
debt valuation equation (1). They focus on …nancing the interest on reserves as a result. They show
that there is a continuum of r (interest rate) and v (tax rate) pairs that generate an equilibrium.
Their indeterminacy result (Proposition 1) states that for any r, there exists a v that makes it
an equilibrium. But one can reverse the implication: Fixing v,    Pthere     is only one r, and thus one
                                                                      1    j
equilibrium. In the notation of this paper, if Bt 1 =Pt = Et j=0 st+j , then for any Pt there
exists a fst g such that that Pt is an equilibrium. But …xing fst g ; only one Pt is an equilibrium. To
get an absence of equilibrium, Sargent and Wallace implicitly assumed the “passive …scal” special
case, in Leeper’s (1991) terminology, that wipes out the government debt valuation equation. That
case is entirely appropriate to their point –monetary policy alone, with passive …scal policy, leaves


                                                  25
an indeterminate equilibrium with interest on reserves.
     But the contrary point remains as well. With an active …scal policy, we have a unique, determi-
nate equilibrium, with interest on reserves and satiation in money. In fact, to have a determinate
equilibrium in this environment, we must have an active …scal policy. One can regard that state-
ment either as positive or normative. Positive: we entered satiation quite a while ago, yet in‡ation
is if anything puzzlingly stable. So we must be in an active …scal regime, and our job is to …gure
out how it works, and think about how to make it work better. Normative: We are clearly going to
be in a monetary satiation regime, so we had better …gure out quickly how our …scal-active regime
is going to work.


5.1.1      What about cash?

Cash does not pay interest. Fama (1983) …nds price level determinacy with interest on reserves,
by anchoring price level determination in a demand for non-interest-bearing currency and control
of that currency.
    Cash still exists in rather surprising quantity – about a trillion dollars, or more than $3,000
per capita, 77% of it in hundred-dollar bills2 . But you and I, corporate businesses, and …nancial
markets use trivial amounts of cash. The legal, and especially corporate and …nancial economies,
have moved to electronic, interest-bearing money. Almost all of us pay by credit cards or debit
cards, linked to accounts that will, when interest rates rise, pay interest, and are mostly settled
by netting between our banks – an essentially electronic accounting system. Cash really is only
used in any substantial quantity for illegal transactions, undocumented people, and store of value
in foreign mattresses.
    For this reason, as a modeling approximation, it seems wiser to think of cash holdings as
disconnected from nominal (legal) GDP, than to found control of nominal GDP on control of cash
balances not used for most of GDP. Empirically, cash holdings just trundle with little apparent
connection to the economy and, especially, the …nancial system. Unredeemed coupons, unused
subway cards, sock-drawer change, that stack of receipts you’ve been putting o¤ submitting for
reimbursement, and, more seriously, invoices and some trade credit are also non-interest paying
claims. But they’re not tightly connected to output or price level determination. Controlling the
inventory of unredeemed coupons would not control the price level.
    Furthermore, the Fed does not control the quantity of cash, as Fama prescribes. For MV = PY
to control PY, the Fed must control the M, as well as V being de…ned and stable. The Fed allows
banks freely to exchange cash for reserves.
    For these reasons, it makes more sense, I think, to abstract from cash –along with unredeemed
coupons and the rest of my humorous list of non-interest-bearing claims – and think of a mon-
etary system based entirely on interest-paying reserves, and consisting entirely of interest-paying
electronic money. Reserves, not cash, are really our fundamental numeraire and means of …nal pay-
ment/. We certainly don’t want to embark on the alternative abstraction –that the functioning of
monetary policy and the control of in‡ation centrally revolves around the demand for cash, almost
all of which is held for illegal purposes.
   More generally, some monetary frictions do remain. There are tiny spreads between treasuries
and reserves. There are on-the-run and other small liquidity spreads in treasuries. But I think it
  2
      http://federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/coin_data.htm




                                                      26
would be a mistake to base our basic analysis of big questions of monetary policy –can monetary
policy a¤ect GDP and the price level, and if so how – on these ephemeral frictions, using models
that, if those frictions were to disappear, would not be able to describe monetary policy and price
level determination at all. Instead, it seems more sensible to base our analysis on a theory that is
valid in a world with no monetary frictions at all, and then add frictions as necessary to understand
second-order e¤ects.


5.2   Interest rate targets

This discussion about money may seem quaint, because our Federal Reserve explicitly targets
interest rates rather than monetary aggregates, and obviously will continue to do so. So, the
central class of theory needed is a theory that describes how Fed manipulation of interest rate
targets, not M , controls the price level.
    Even without interest on reserves – when the Fed controls interest rates through open market
operations –a theory of how pure interest rate targeting controls in‡ation with passive …scal policy
took a long time to construct. Friedman (1968) warned verbally that an interest rate target would
lead to unstable in‡ation. Sargent and Wallace (1975) showed that in‡ation is indeterminate with
an interest rate target. The Fisher relation it = r + Et t+1 means that controlling the interest rate
can determine expected in‡ation, but unexpected in‡ation t+1 Et t+1 can be anything. Sargent
and Wallace show that this basic logic survives in a carefully speci…ed general equilibrium model
–considering all the equations of the model except a valuation equation (1), t+1 Et t+1 is still
not tied down.
    As I pointed out above, adding back an active …scal policy via (1), we resolve Sargent-Wallace
indeterminacy, as well as Friedman’s instability. Even …xed interest rate targets control both
expected and unexpected in‡ation. The question here is, can one proceed to describe in‡ation de-
termination by interest rate control without active …scal policy instead, and how does the approach
I followed compare with that more conventional approach?
   McCallum (1981) and Hall (1984, 2002) suggested that an interest rate target that varies more
than one for one with in‡ation it = r + t ; > 1, is su¢ cient overcome Friedman and Sargent-
Wallace’s di¢ culties. Taylor (1999) formalizes this logic in a backward-looking old-Keynesian
model, showing that an active interest rate policy it = r + t ;      > 1 makes in‡ation and the
economy stable, addressing Friedman’s (1968) concern, while a passive policy < 1 has the opposite
e¤ect. I do not follow that path here, as even Taylor admits the model, with backward-looking
expectations and a static IS curve, is “ad-hoc.”
    New-Keynesian models, summarized in Woodford (2003) and described above, are now the
standard way to model an economy under interest rate targets. In this model, the Fed deliberately
introduces instability to the economy so that all but one path explodes. Choosing the one non-
explosive path, we obtain determinacy: A pure interest rate target can, apparently, determine the
in‡ation rate. This kind of model, unlike standard Keynesian models, has exquisite and explicit
micro-foundations. It also has a version without pricing frictions as well as no apparent monetary
frictions, outlined above, so it is a much more promising candidate for this kind of exercise.
    “Indeterminacy” and “instability” are distinct issues. A model t+1 = 1:5 t + "t+1 , where
"t+1 is an economic shock, is determinate but unstable. A model t+1 = 0:5 t + t+1 , where
 t+1 is an expectational error, so all we know is Et t+1 = 0, are stable but indeterminate. Old-
Keynesian models in the Friedman-Taylor tradition have backward-looking dynamics, or adaptive


                                                 27
expectations, for example a Fisher equation it = rt + t , not it = rt + Et t+1 . As a result, they
su¤er from instability but not indeterminacy. The Taylor rule stabilizes their dynamics. New-
Keynesian models in the Woodford tradition have forward-looking agents, for example a Fisher
equation it = rt + Et t+1 . They su¤er from indeterminacy, and the Taylor rule de-stabilizes their
dynamics to try to restore determinacy.
   Cochrane (2011, 2014) argues that Sargent-Wallace indeterminacies remain in new-Keynesian
models even with > 1. The rule that only locally-bounded equilibria are valid is not usually
part of economics. More importantly, the assumption that people expect our Fed to deliberately
de-stabilize the economy seems strained, is not veri…able or learnable in data, and is loudly not
how our Fed describes its role. The assumption requires the Fed to precommit to take actions that
ex-post are ruinous for its own objectives.
   Now, Woodford (2003) and the surrounding new-Keynesian literature explicitly recognizes that
the government valuation equation (1) is part of the model. However, they assume that the Trea-
sury adjusts surpluses fst g to validate any price level, so that equation has no force in in‡ation
determination, “passive” …scal policy in Leeper’s (1991) taxonomy.
   One can reinterpret any new-Keynesian model solution with …scal backing in place of explosive
o¤-equilibrium threats by the Fed. To do so, restore “active” …scal policy so that (1) uniquely
determines the price level. Then, coordinate …scal and monetary policies, so that …scal policy
choose to follow the Fed’s price level target. The di¤erence: this …scal policy would not validate
other paths, such as an o¤-equilibrium de‡ation requiring large taxes to pay o¤ bondholders. Then
we observe the same equilibrium output and in‡ation as the new-Keynesian model predicts.
    To be speci…c, the New-Keynesian Taylor rule is it = it + ( t        t ) where it represents the
interest rate target, including monetary policy shocks such as the xit of my above new-Keynesian
models, t represents the in‡ation target, and it and t represent how the Fed would respond to
o¤-equilibrium in‡ation. (For the relation between this and other statements of the Taylor rule,
see King 2000, Cochrane 2014.)
    As a minimal modi…cation, we might think of the ( t t ) reaction as a Sargent-Wallace (1981)
style game of chicken between Federal Reserve and Treasury. Rather than view hyperin‡ation as
a threat which might “coordinate expectations” of the private sector on the unique nonexplosive
equilibrium t , as Woodford (2003) suggests, we can regard it as a threat against the Treasury, to
induce the Treasury to follow an appropriate …scal policy.
    Better, I think, since it avoids all such subgame-imperfect threats, is simply to study coordinated
active-…scal and monetary policy without modeling the coordination game. Replace this the new-
Keynesian rule with it = it , and let an active …scal policy choose in‡ation t . If …scal policy agrees
to follow the Fed’s in‡ation target, and can do so, then we observe exactly the same equilibrium
outcomes fit ; t g as the standard new-Keynesian model predicts.
   One might object that Taylor-rule regressions such as Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000) establish
the ( t     t ) part of the Taylor rule, but this is not the case. We only see it and t , never o¤-
equilibrium threats, so Taylor-rule regressions only document the correlations between it and t ,
not the ( t      t ) reaction.
    While we can observe the same equilibrium as predicted by new-Keynesian models, however, we
do not have to do so. For example, …scal policy might not agree to tighten when the Fed changes
the interest rate target, and we might see the response of Figure 5 not Figure 4. Or, …scal policy,
facing a La¤er limit, might not be able to back up monetary policy. More deeply, recognizing
that …scal and monetary policy are separate but coordinated changes deeply our understanding


                                                  28
of how each operates. As we have seen, monetary policy without the usual …scal coordination is
expansionary throughout, raising interest rates raises in‡ation.


5.3   Big picture

Fundamentally, there are three possibilities for price-level determination with …at money. First,
money might be valued because it is uniquely useful in transactions and limited in supply; the
quantity theory; MV=PY. But under the interest on reserves regime, the whole point is that money
is not scarce. We will be satiated in liquidity and hold far more than needed for transactions. And
already, interest rate targets do not limit money supply.
   Second, money might be valued because it is backed by convertibility to a real good or asset.
The government debt valuation equation reveals that apparently …at money is in fact backed by
the present value of surpluses which will retire government debt. Backing theories survive intact
as monetary frictions disappear.
    The new-Keynesian Taylor-rule model represents an attempt to construct a third kind of theory,
in which …at money is valued and in‡ation determined based on active interest-rate setting alone,
with neither scarcity in exchange or backing. My survey concludes that this interpretation of the
equations is unsuccessful. It too is really a theory of …scal backing, with a particular monetary-
…scal coordination mechanism by which Fed actions lead the Treasury to adjust surpluses as the
Fed wishes.
    Ad-hoc backward-looking and mostly static Keynesian ISLM equations with a Taylor rule also
give stable and determinate in‡ation responses to interest rate targets, while ignoring the govern-
ment debt valuation equation. This kind of analysis remains popular in policy circles, and underlies
most of the verbal explanations the Fed gives of its actions and their e¤ects on the economy. How-
ever, it doesn’t anymore qualify as an “economic”theory. For thinking about how an economy will
work, out of sample, with the disappearance of crucial frictions, with profoundly new institutions,
and how it might work better with di¤erent institutions, it is better to start with something a bit
more structural.
    I conclude that an analysis of in‡ation based on the government debt valuation equation (1)
is the only currently available framework for understanding in‡ation in the interest-on-reserves
regime, i.e. at the limit that monetary frictions vanish.


5.4   Fiscal-theory controversies

The …scal theory of the price level represented by (1), or a slightly more general version which
applies when consumption is not constant over time

                                             X1           0
                                   Bt 1                j u (ct+j )
                                        = Et                       st+j ;
                                    Pt                    u0 (ct )
                                              j=0

      has a long tradition. Like much of economics, it starts with Adam Smith, who wrote that
“A prince, who should enact that a certain proportion of his taxes be paid in a paper money of
a certain kind, might thereby give a certain value to this paper money.” (Wealth of Nations, Vol.
I, Book II, Chapter II).The modern theory has its roots in Sargent and Wallace (1981) and then
pure statements and elaboration in Leeper (1991), Woodford 1995, Cochrane (1998, 2001, 2005,


                                                  29
2011b) and Sims (2001, 2005). Sims (2013) is an excellent treatment covering issues similar to
those covered here. Cochrane (2005) answers many common objections in detail.
   Use of the valuation formula (1) to think about in‡ation is clouded in myriad unnecessary
controversies. I address some here. (See also Cochrane 2005, 2011b on these points.)
    It is helpful to derive (1) in aPfully-speci…ed model, which I do in the Appendix. The repre-
sentative consumer maximizes E t t u(ct ) and has a constant endowment y: This speci…cation
produces a constant real interest rate 1 + r = 1= . The government sells one-period nominal debt
with face value Bt 1 at the end of time t 1. It redeems debt with money at the beginning of time
t, then soaks up that money at the end of time t with lump-sum real surpluses st and bond sales
with value Qt Bt ; where Qt is the one-period bond price. Interest is paid overnight, and people do
not want to hold non-interest paying money overnight, so money printed in the morning must be
soaked up in the afternoon,
                                                         Pt
                                    Bt 1 = Pt st + Et          Bt ;
                                                        Pt+1
or, in real terms.
                                     Bt 1                    Bt
                                          = st + Et                  :                           (25)
                                      Pt                    Pt+1
Iterating forward and applying the consumer’s transversality condition, we obtain the basic equi-
librium condition (1). (At a zero interest rate, people may be willing to hold money overnight, but
money and bonds are now the same assets so the same equations hold.)
    Equation (1) is not a “budget constraint.”It is a valuation equation, an equilibrium condition.
Its ingredients include the household budget constraint and …rst-order conditions. It works the
same was as the valuation equation by which stock prices adjust the present value of expected
dividends. There is no “budget constraint”that forces the government to respond to a de‡ation in
Pt by raising surpluses, any more than a stock price “bubble” forces a company to raise earnings
to justify the stock price. And just as well, because there is a La¤er curve limiting surpluses, but
there is no limit to de‡ation, so there must be some price at which (1) is violated while budget
constraints can never be violated.
    Equation (1) has a natural “aggregate demand” interpretation. (Woodford 1995). If the real
value of nominal debt is less than the present value of surpluses, then people try to spend their debt
and money on goods and services. But collectively, they can’t, so this “excess aggregate demand”
just pushes up prices until the real value of debt is again equal to the present value of surpluses.
Aggregate demand is nothing more or less than demand for government debt. By the private-sector
budget constraint the only way to spend more on everything else is to spend less on government
debt. This equation also expresses a “wealth e¤ect” of government debt.
    Though the literature spends a lot of time thinking about “regimes”and testing for them, there
is really not much point to that exercise. As a simple example, suppose we modify the model to
add a demand
                                             Mt V = P t y                                     (26)
 for money held overnight that does not pay interest. Equation (1) now includes a seignorage term,
                                     1
                            Bt 1 X         j               Mt+j     Mt+j   1
                                =              Et st+j +                       ;                 (27)
                             Pt                                   Pt+j
                                     j=0




                                                    30
or equivalently
                     Bt   1   + Mt   1
                                             X                        it+j Mt+j
                                         =       Et mt;t+j st+j +                   :
                              Pt                                    1 + it+j Pt+j
Both equations (26) and (27) must hold in equilibrium.
     Now, following Leeper (1991) we often talk of a money-dominant “regime” as one in which the
Fed sets Mt , Pt follows from (26), and then the Treasury sets fst g in (27) to validate the Fed-chosen
Pt , and a …scal-dominant “regime” as the opposite case. One might say that in the absence of
monetary frictions, the government must “switch” to a “…scal-dominant regime.”
    But both equations (26) and (27) hold in both regimes, so there is no testable content to the
regime speci…cation from observations of fMt ; Bt ; Pt ; st g, (Cochrane 1998). This observation should
already alert us to the sterility of the “regime” investigation.
   One can read the equations of a supposedly …scal-passive regime as instead verifying the power
and necessity of the …scal backing. Monetary policy only a¤ects in‡ation because, and only because it
induces changed expectations of …scal surpluses. The change in “aggregate demand”that ultimately
a¤ects the price level comes only from the induced change in …scal surpluses. Is it the foot on the
gas pedal, or the engine which ultimately causes the car to go? If a man (Fed) induces a horse
(Treasury) to pull a cart by putting a carrot under the horse’s nose, does that mean the man pulls
the cart?
    The same points hold if the Fed follows an interest rate target. Again, a valuation equation like
(1) holds, and the Treasury is assumed to adjust fst g to validate the model’s price-level predictions.
If the Treasury will not or cannot follow through, the hypothesized price level won’t happen. The
interest rate only a¤ects the price level because of the induced …scal response. There is no testable
content to whether the Treasury or Fed drives the “regime.”
    Money and …scal policy must always be coordinated. Monetary contractions without …scal
support and coordination fail. Fiscal contractions with loose money stop in‡ations (Sargent and
Wallace 1981). If the Fed were to try a 50% de‡ation now, this would mean doubling the real
value of publicly-held debt from $12 trillion to $24 trillion, and the value of the government’s credit
guarantees by additional trillions. The “passivity” of …scal policy would be sorely tested.
    As these examples emphasize, for (1) to hold and play a central role in price determination,
one does not have to, and one should not, think of surpluses fst g as being “exogenous,” or set
without regard to other variables, including prices. Equation (1) tells us what the equilibrium price
level must be, conditioned on the equilibrium fBt g and fst g. That h 0is all. Byianalogy, we have
gotten used to using the standard asset pricing equation pt = Et uu(c0 (ct+1t)
                                                                               )
                                                                                 xt+1 without needing
to assume that consumption fct g or payo¤ fxt g are exogenous, …xed, endowments, and so forth,
understanding that all elements of the equation are endogenous and simultaneously determined.
    Some economists regard …scal price determination as a matter for extremes; currency crashes
and hyperin‡ations maybe, but not normal times. But even in “normal times”monetary and …scal
policy must be coordinated; monetary policy only works if the …scal backing – the response of
surpluses fst g –is there, even when that response is “small.” And cyclical variations in aggregate
demand, the right hand side of (1), are not usually thought of as being that “small.”
     Perhaps the “exogenous” confusion is behind this point. Equation (1) holds even when the
surpluses s are within the government’s control, and the government could choose to raise surpluses
if it wished, not just when the top of the La¤er curve or other disaster means the government loses
control of surpluses.


                                                       31
    It’s tempting and useful for comparative-statics exercises to think about …xing fst g or fBt g
holding the others constant, as I have done above. However, real monetary and …scal policy is
always coordinated, and most events contain large movements in both quantities at the same
time. Good monetary policy institutions carefully think through …scal-monetary coordination. For
example, wars and recessions feature big increases in debt Bt with big negative current surpluses st .
But these events come with big increases in expected future surpluses Et st+j , because governments
want to raise real revenue, not cause in‡ation. So fst g follows a response that is negative now,
and positive later, to such a shock, nothing like an AR(1), and fst g and fBt g move together in
response to such typical economic shocks.


5.5   Interest on reserves

Most of the recent literature focuses on the desirability of the interest-on-reserves regime. Stein
(2012), Kashyap and Stein (2012), Keister, Martin, and McAndrews (2008) and Goodfriend (2002,
2011) praise the regime, because it allows the Fed to purchase and sell assets, without changing
interest rates, and vice versa. As Kashyap and Stein put it, the Fed can separate interest rate
changes used to “manage the in‡ation-output tradeo¤” from balance sheet policy by which the
Fed will “regulate the externalities created by socially excessive short-term debt issuance on the
part of …nancial intermediaries.”Likewise, Goodfriend praises the fact that the interest on reserves
regime “frees monetary policy to fund credit policy independently of interest rate policy.”
    In a series of thoughtful speeches, Charles Plosser (2009, 2010, 2012, 2013) disagrees strongly
that opening these doors is a good idea. For example, Plosser (2010, p.8) writes: “the composition
of the portfolio has changed for the explicit purpose of supporting a particular sector of the economy
– housing – which breaks entirely new ground. The public and market participants may believe
that the Fed can and will use its purchases to pursue other sorts of credit policies than has been
its practice in the past.”
    All of these views add something I have left out of the model, …nancial frictions by which Federal
Reserve purchases a¤ect asset prices or ‡ows, at least temporarily. Curdia and Woodford (2010,
2011) and Gertler and Karadi (2011) write explicit new-Keynesian DSGE models with …nancial
frictions, in which optimal policy involves changes in the size and composition of the balance sheet.
Here, brie‡y and in Cochrane (2014), in depth, I praise the …nancial stability bene…ts of interest
on reserves, but with an entirely di¤erent mechanism. I focused on the …nancial stability bene…ts
of the Fed’s liabilities, abundant interest-paying reserves which create narrow-banking deposits,
rather than the potential bene…ts of asset-market manipulation in the Fed’s asset choices. These
authors, and Plosser especially, also bring up important political-economy considerations, which I
ignore. The Fed’s powers are limited as the price of its independence. Greater power, especially
in politically-sensitive areas, may cost independence.
    Federal Reserve policy in the future goes so far past “monetary,” that the label will no longer
be appropriate. As in these author’s focus, active management of the …nancial system and …nancial
‡ows is likely to occupy much of the Fed’s attention, and inexorably to be mixed with in‡ation and
macroeconomic goals. If, as I have argued, reserve requirements no longer have any e¤ect on bank
lending and deposit creation, why not use capital requirements to reimpose such control? Why not
use the Fed’s abundant regulatory powers to tell banks how much to lend and who to lend to? The
“macroprudential” policy idea really amounts to a set of temptations, or intriguing possibilities,
depending on your view, for the Fed to control …nancial and thereby economic activity. And these
ideas will be increasingly tempting as pure “monetary” policy, setting short-term interest rates,


                                                 32
loses power.
   But all that discussion is beyond the scope of this paper. None of these authors are concerned
with the basic questions of interest rate and price level control I have focused on here. Stein (2012)
even uses the …scal theory for price-level determination.


6    Concluding comments

The interest-on-reserves regime with a big balance sheet is an attractive extension of a decades-
long period of …nancial and monetary innovation. It gives us interest-paying money, the end
of monetary frictions, and the foundation of a more stable …nancial system in which government
short-term debt drives out private short term debt, much as government notes drove out banknotes
in the 19th century. But this apparently small extension of our institutions challenges the core
of traditional monetary theory. One might argue that this monetary theory had ceased to matter
already. But interest on reserves and a large balance sheet force us to confront that fact.
    Some of the questions and doctrines I have addressed: The government need not lose control of
in‡ation in this regime. We can have price level control with no control of “money,” no rationing
of liquidity, no limit on central bank balance sheets, no limit of private intermediation, and under
interest rate targets, even targets that violate the Taylor principle. We can enjoy full interest
on “monetary” assets. We can be satiated in liquidity. The Federal Reserve has the power to
target nominal interest rates in this regime, though whether it can simultaneously control the size
of its balance sheet is more open to question. Fortunately the size of its balance sheet is also
irrelevant to monetary a¤airs, so long as we stay comfortably above the bound of satiation in
reserves. Interest-paying reserves are not in‡ationary. The money multiplier, the link between
open market operations and lending, and velocity both become meaningless.
   I have explored these issues with extremely simple models. Obviously more realistic models
with more realistic pricing frictions, and producing more interesting dynamics, are all in need of
exploration.
    In particular, though I have shown how purely “monetary” policy without …scal coordination
can produce changes in the real interest rate and output, I found that an interest rate rise produced
by monetary policy alone is expansionary, …rst for output and then for in‡ation. To produce the
classical sign, that in response to a rise in interest rates output falls, then recovers, and then in‡ation
declines, I had to pair the interest rate rise with a …scal contraction. Examining a standard simple
new-Keynesian model, I veri…ed the same result: monetary policy only produces a contraction in
that model, only if we assume a simultaneous contractionary …scal policy shock. My sticky-price
model is a standard simple new-Keynesian model, just with a di¤erent equilibrium concept, so this
is not a surprising result.
    Now, perhaps more complex models will reverse this result. Perhaps they will not. Perhaps
we will …nd the temporary opposite sign is only a feature of monetary frictions, and once those
frictions disappear so does the conventional sign. Or perhaps the model is right and an interest
rate rise without …scal coordination is expansionary. P
                                                      In the real world, monetary and …scal policy
are always coordinated –changes in expectations of t mt st accompany all monetary moves, and
respond to the same shocks as monetary policy changes, so all of the “monetary policy shocks”we
have studied in the data combine …scal and monetary policy shocks.
    Many additional outstanding issues remain. First, I have not touched optimal monetary and


                                                    33
…scal policy. Something simple such as a Taylor rule guide for good policy has not emerged from
this analysis. To study optimal policy, however, we need a model with realistic pricing frictions,
shocks which policy is trying to o¤set, distorting taxes, and a maturity structure of debt. For
both theory and empirical work, time-varying discount rates and risk premiums loom large in the
present value of future surpluses.
    I suspect optimal policy will not be so simple, which will be a relief to Fed o¢ cials who would
rather not lose their jobs to a computer which implements the Taylor rule. If we want to stick
with the standard one-shock view of monetary policy shocks and their e¤ects, rather than study
separate monetary and …scal shocks, we have to understand why interest rate increases have been
correlated with …scal contractions. The bottom left panel of Figure 2 suggests that a coordinated
monetary-…scal tightening is a good way to control the real economy without a¤ecting the price
level at all. That is, perhaps exactly what our authorities are trying to do, and gives a good reason
for such coordination. It also helps to explain why in VARs it is so hard to …nd in‡ationary e¤ects
of monetary policy shocks.
    But if all one wants to do is to reduce in‡ation, then this kind of coordination makes less
sense. The contrast between the upper right and lower right-hand panels of that Figure suggest
that expansionary monetary policy can o¤set the e¤ects of a …scal contraction, but also o¤set its
disin‡ationary e¤ects as well. If all you want to do is reduce in‡ation, this does not seem like an
ideal policy. That line of thought suggests inevitably that we will end up with something more
complex –one kind of coordinated monetary - …scal policy for o¤setting recessions and …ghting real
shocks, and a di¤erent kind of coordinated monetary-…scal policy for …ghting in‡ation or de‡ation.
   In the model considered here, a better course for reducing in‡ation would be to announce a
reduction in nominal interest rates, to occur after prices are able to move. Perhaps that is not so
unreasonable. As we look over the period since 1980, in‡ation has been on a slow downward trend,
along with nominal interest rates. Perhaps that’s pretty much what happened.
   I suspect optimal monetary-…scal policy will broaden the set of tools substantially, and will
involve developing a better regime for coordinating, communicating, and committing to the …scal
underpinnings of monetary policy.
    The weak spot of …scal theory is the nebulousness of the expected present value of future
surpluses, just as the weak spot of …nance is the nebulousness of the expected present value of
future dividends.
    But the …scal theory does not spring in a vacuum from the day Ben Bernanke received autho-
rization to pay interest on reserves. Rather, it describes a long period of historical and institutional
evolution. And new, better monetary policy institutions will follow smoothly.
    The gold standard seems like a pure monetary policy, but it is not. Since no government ever
backed 100% of its nominal debt with gold, the gold standard was a way to communicate and
commit the government to raise the appropriate surpluses to pay o¤ its nominal debt. If needed,
the government would raise the gold with current and or, via borrowing, future taxation. The gold
standard is impractical, of course, since we want to stabilize the CPI not the price of gold. And its
history is full of crashes, when the “commitments” fell ‡at.
    The disin‡ation of the 1980s in the US was a classic coordinated …scal-monetary tightening. The
higher real interest rates raised interest payments on the debt by two percentage points of GDP for
a decade, and the disin‡ation was a bonanza for holders of long-term debt. These …scal resources
came from somewhere. In the US, the simultaneous …scal reforms of the 1980s, and consequent
strong growth, produced surpluses through the late 1990s, which paid for the 1980s bondholder


                                                  34
bonanza. Without that …scal backing, the disin‡ation would have failed as so many others.
    The success of in‡ation targeting, in particular in Sweden and New Zealand, (Grimes 2013,
Svensson 2010) can be read in the same light. In each case, the in‡ation target for monetary
policy accompanied a far-reaching …scal reform. And we can read the in‡ation target equally as a
commitment by the Treasury, to fund debt at the targeted level of in‡ation, as it is a commitment
by the central bank to target that level of in‡ation via interest rate policy. The history of in‡ation-
targeting countries looks much more Fisherian – interest rates and in‡ation fall together – than
Taylorite, bursts of in‡ation and de‡ation controlled by even larger interest rate swings.
   With this historical context, we are at a ripe moment to widen the set of tools for monetary
and …scal policy, and to reconsider the regime and coordination mechanism, taking the next step
past in‡ation targeting.
    Now that we have real debt, for the central bank to target the spread between real and nominal
rates rather than the level of the nominal rate is an attractive possibility. The spread more directly
controls expected in‡ation in an environment where real rates vary. Targeting the spread, by
standing willing to buy and sell nominal vs. indexed debt, amounts to a gold-standard-like rule,
which promises to exchange something real for something nominal at …xed value. But it targets
the expected CPI rather than the price of gold. In the …scal theory, writing the value of real debt
as bt 1 , the basic equation becomes
                                                                  X     1
                                                        Bt 1                   j
                                              bt   1+        = Et                  st+j                               (28)
                                                         Pt
                                                                        j=0

and, moving back a period,
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                     X
                            Bt   1   Qt   1               Bt   1              Pt 1                         j
                  bt   1+                     = bt   1+            Et   1                 = Et   1             st+j   (29)
                            Pt   1                        Pt   1               Pt
                                                                                                     j=0

If the Fed targets the spread Qt 1 = , that policy obviously targets expected in‡ation. If people
think in‡ation will be higher than the target, they will sell a lot of nominal debt in exchange for real
debt. But (28) shows, if the quantity of nominal debt Bt 1 relative to bt declines, then expected
in‡ation must also decline. So it has a natural stabilizing mechanism, just as allowing the quantities
of paper notes and gold outstanding does.
   More generally, we can add control of the real vs. nominal composition of government debt to
our list of “QE” tools, though like the gold standard or foreign exchange rate peg it is obviously
one with …scal implications.
   My section 2.4 already pointed to state-contingent adjustments of the maturity structure of
government debt as a potentially important tool for joint monetary-…scal policy to respond to
shocks.
    The gold standard and exchange rate pegs are plagued by crises and defaults when the under-
lying …scal commitments can’t be met. Pure nominal debt means that shocks to surpluses are met
by in‡ation, which transfers wealth from all savers to borrowers and which causes many distortions
in sticky-price economies. Government debt with explicitly variable coupons would allow …scal ad-
justments without explicit default, crisis, or in‡ationary consequences. Then, adjusting the coupon
rate in response to shocks becomes a vital policy tool.
    I have highlighted that in‡ation targets can be interpreted as …scal commitments. A Taylor
rule for …scal policy would formalize this commitment. For example, purely real (indexed) debt

                                                               35
seems to leave out price level determination in (28). But if we have purely real debt and a rule
that surpluses must adjust to the price level,
                                                  1
                                                  X
                                                        j
                                  bt   1   = Et              s0t+j + Pt+j ;
                                                  j=0

where s0t is a potentially stochastic temporary de…cit/surplus, and Pt+j represents a rule by which
long-run tax rates or the cyclically adjusted budget must respond to the price level, we again have
a determinate price level.
    None of these ideas are really new and radical. They represent a continuation of the long
trend of monetary-…scal policy coordination, and building of better institutions to manage that
coordination.
    We started with what seemed like minor and rather technical issues, whether the Fed pays
interest on bank reserves, and whether in order to raise interest rates, the Fed needs to sell o¤ its
balance sheet, or whether the Fed can just raise interest on reserves and keep the huge balance
sheet. We have ended up, really, at a once per generation rede…nition of role and nature of monetary
policies, and of the institutions that generate price stability and …nancial stability, the proper role
of a central bank, the question of what monetary policy can do, what it can’t do, what it should
do, and what it shouldn’t do.




                                                        36
7    References

Bernanke, Ben S., 2010, “Federal Reserve’s Exit Strategy” Testimony Before the Committee on
Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. February 10,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100210a.htm.
   Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler, 2000, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeco-
nomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147-180.
    Cochrane, John H., 1998, “A Frictionless model of U.S. In‡ation,”in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio
J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998 Cambridge MA: MIT press, pp. 323-384.
   Cochrane, John H., 2001, “Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the
Price Level,” Econometrica 69, 69-116.
    Cochrane, John H., 2005, “Money as Stock,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 501-528.
   Cochrane, John H., 2011a, “Determinacy and Identi…cation with Taylor Rules” Journal of
Political Economy 119, 565-615.
    Cochrane, John H., 2011b, “Understanding policy in the great recession: Some unpleasant …scal
arithmetic,” European Economic Review 55, 2-30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2010.11.002.
   Cochrane, John H., 2013, “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap,” Manuscript, University of
Chicago.
   Cochrane, John H., 2014, “Toward a Run-Free Financial System," Manuscript, University of
Chicago.
    Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, 2010, “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Pol-
icy,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
   Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, 2011, “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument
of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics.
   Ennis, Humberto M., 2014, “A Simple General Equilibrium Model of Large Excess Reserves”
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond July 3, 2014 Working Paper No. 14-14.

    https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/working_papers/2014/pdf/wp14-14.pdf.
    Fama, Eugene F., 1983, “Financial Intermediation and Price Level Control,”Journal of Mone-
tary Economics 12, 7-28.
    Fama, Eugene F., 2013, “Does the Fed Control Interest Rates?”Review of Asset Pricing Studies
3, 180-199.
   Federal Reserve, 2014, Minutes of the July 17-18 2014 Federal Open Market Committee Meeting,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20140618.htm.
   Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2014, “FAQs: Overnight Fixed-Rate Reverse Repurchase
Agreement Operational Exercise,” January 13,
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/rrp_faq.html
   Friedman, Benjamin M.,2013, “Toward a New Understanding of Monetary Policy, ”Monetary
Authority of Singapore Macroeconomic Review.
    Friedman, Milton, 1959, A Program for Monetary Stability, New York: Fordham University


                                               37
Press.
   Friedman, Milton, 1968, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review
  Friedman, Milton, 1969. “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” In The Optimum Quantity of
Money and Other Essays, pages 1–50. Chicago: Aldine
   Galí, Jordi, 1999. “Technology, Employment and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89, 249-271.
   Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi, 2011, “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,”Journal
of Monetary Economics.
    Goodfriend, Marvin, 2002, “Interest on Reserves and Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Economic Policy Review, 8(1): 77–84.
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/02v08n1/0205good.pdf.
   Goodfriend, Marvin, 2011, “Central banking in the credit turmoil: An assessment of Federal
Reserve practice,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58, 1-12
   Grimes, Arthur, 2013, “In‡ation Targeting: 25 Years’Experience of the Pioneer”
http://www.motu.org.nz/…les/docs/Lecture_1_-_Arthur_Grimes_-_
In‡ation_Targeting_-_Bank_of_England_-_24_Sept_2013.pdf
   Hall, Robert E. 1984. “A Free-Market Policy To Stabilize the Purchasing Power of the Dollar,”
in Barry N. Siegel (ed.), Money in Crisis: The Federal Reserve, the Economy, and Monetary
Reform, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing, pp. 303-321.
   Hall, Robert E., 2002, “Controlling the Price Level,”Contributions to Macroeconomics 2, 1-19,
http://www.stanford.edu/~rehall/Controlling%20Price%20Level%202002.pdf.
   Ireland, Peter N., 2008, “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism,” In Lawrence Bloom and
Steven Durlauf, Eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Hampshire: Palgrave-MacMillan
   Ireland, Peter N. 2012, “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Interest on Reserves,” Manuscript,
Boston College
    Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2012, “The Optimal Conduct of Monetary Policy with
Interest on Reserves,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1): 266-82.
DOI: 10.1257/mac.4.1.266
   King, Robert G., 2000 “The New IS-LM Model: Language, Logic, and Limits,”Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 86, 45-103.
   Keister, Todd, Antoine Martin, and James McAndrews, 2008, “Divorcing Money from Monetary
Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 14 (September)
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/08v14n2/0809keis.html
   Leeper, Eric M., 1991. “Equilibria under ‘Active’and ‘Passive’Monetary and Fiscal Policies.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 129–47.
   McCallum, Bennett T., 1981, “Price Level Determinacy With an Interest Rate Policy Rule and
Rational Expectations,” Journal of Monetary Economics 8, 319-329.
   Plosser, Charles I., 2009, “Ensuring Sound Monetary Policy in the Aftermath of Crisis,”Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, speech given at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, The Initiative on
Global Markets, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York February 27.
   Plosser, Charles I., 2010, “Credible Commitments and Monetary Policy After the Crisis 2010,”


                                               38
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Speech given at the Swiss National Bank Monetary Policy
Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 24.
    Plosser, Charles I., 2012, “Fiscal Policy and Monetary Policy: Restoring the Boundaries” Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Speech given at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, The Initiative
on Global Markets, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 24.
   Plosser, Charles I., 2013, “A Limited Central Bank,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Speech given at Cato Institute’s 31st Annual Monetary Conference “Was the Fed a Good Idea?”
Thursday, November 14.
   Sargent, Thomas J., 2010, “Where to Draw Lines: Stability Versus E¢ ciency,” manuscript,
Department of Economics, New York University.
   Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, 1981, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,”Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall
    Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, 1975, “ ‘Rational’Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy 83, 241-54.
   Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, 1985, “Interest on Reserves,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 15, 279-290.
   Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe, 2013, “The Making Of A Great Contraction With
A Liquidity Trap and A Jobless Recovery,” Manuscript, Columbia University.
  Singh, Manmohan, 2014, “Financial Plumbing and Monetary Policy,” IMF Working Paper
WP/14/111 http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp14111.pdf
   Sims, Christopher A., 2001, “Fiscal Consequences for Mexico of Adopting the Dollar” Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking, 33(2,part2), 597–616.
  Sims, Christopher A., 2005, “Limits to In‡ation Targeting,” in Bernanke, Ben, and Michael
Woodford Eds., The In‡ation Targeting Debate Ch.7 283-310 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Sims, Christopher A., 2013, “Paper Money,” American Economic Review 103, 563-84.
    Stein, Jeremy C., 2012, “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,”Quarterly Journal
of Economics 127, 57-95, http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/127/1/57.full
  Svensson, Lars E. O., 2010 “In‡ation Targeting,” in Friedman, Benjamin M., and Michael
Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3b, chapter 22, Elsevier, 1237-1302.
    Taylor, John B., 1993, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Con-
ference Series on Public Policy 39, 195–214.
    Taylor, John B. 1999, “The Robustness and E¢ ciency of Monetary Policy Rules as Guidelines
for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” Journal of Monetary Economics 43,
655-679.
   Woodford, Michael, 1995, “Price Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggre-
gate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1-46.
    Woodford, Michael, 2001, “Monetary Policy in the Information Economy,”in Economic Policy
for the Information Economy, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
   Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Woodford, Michael, 2012, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower
Bound,” presented at the Jackson Hole symposium


                                               39
8     Appendix

8.1   Frictionless Model

This section sets out a very simple, but complete, model of frictionless price determination, to
verify that analysis using (1) is not incomplete. This is a simpli…ed version of Cochrane (2005).
    The representative household maximizes
                                                        1
                                                        X
                                                               t
                                                    E              u(ct ):
                                                        t=0

The household receives a constant endowment yt = y:
    It is easier to imagine a sequence of events in each period or day, though that sequencing is
not important to the model. Each evening, the government sells a face value Bt 1 of nominal debt
due the next period. Each morning t then, the government prints up Bt 1 new dollars to pay o¤
the outstanding debt. Households receive the dollars, sell their endowments y for dollars and buy
goods ct for dollars. At the end of the day, they must pay lump sum taxes less transfers Pt st in
dollars.
   I …x the real value of net taxation. This is realistic: With standard income taxes, the nominal
amount of taxes are a rate times nominal income, Pt st = Pt yt , and if the price level doubles so
does the nominal amount of taxes. However, I wish to leave tax distortions out of the model.
   The government also sells new debt Bt at a nominal bond price Qt , thereby soaking up cash.
The government sets fBt ; st g. The household chooses fct g and along the way demand for bonds
and money, and the price level and asset prices clear markets.
    The household period budget constraint is

                              Bt    1   + Pt y = Pt ct + Pt st + Qt Bt + Mt

where Mt is money held overnight. I assume that the nominal interest rate is positive, so the
household chooses zero overnight money holdings, Mt = 0 and thus

                                   Bt    1   + Pt y = Pt ct + Pt st + Qt Bt :

    The household’s …rst order condition with respect to ct and ct+1 yield

                                                  u0 (ct+1 ) Pt       Pt
                             Qt = Et                  0
                                                                = Et
                                                   u (ct ) Pt+1      Pt+1

where in the second equality I have used the equilibrium condition ct = y. Dividing by Pt and
substituting, the money in = money out condition reads
                                    Bt 1                     Bt
                                         + y = ct + st + Et
                                     Pt                     Pt+1

Iterating forward,
                                        1
                          Bt 1 X              j                                j         Bt+j
                              =                   (ct    y + st ) + lim            Et
                           Pt                                            j!1            Pt+j+1
                                    j=0



                                                              40
     I impose the usual condition that the last term is zero. This transversality condition is a con-
dition for household optimality, and a constraint on household borrowing from the government. If
it is positive, then the household can increase consumption over income by simply not buying so
much government debt. If it were negative, then the household could roll over debt forever. If
we just assume that the government borrows but never lends and the price level is positive, that
condition is assured.
   Then, the equilibrium condition ct = y at every date implies

                                                          X         1
                                                Bt 1                      j
                                                     = Et                     st :
                                                 Pt
                                                                    j=0

I took some time to derive this equation in order to emphasize that it is not an “intertemporal
government budget constraint.”It combines the household budget constraint, the household’s desire
not to hold money, the household optimality condition, and equilibrium in the goods market. If
the household wished to die holding money, the government could print money and leave money
outstanding. If the household wished to hold ever increasing amounts of government debt, the
government would never have to pay its debts, and the transversality condition would not hold.
If the household were a growing set of overlapping generations, that condition would not, in fact
hold. The fact that OLG models relieve the government of its “budget constraint” shows it isn’t a
“constraint” in the …rst place.
    While I described a “day,”and nominal debt exchanged for money and back again, that feature
is clearly inessential. People can transact directly with maturing government debt, and pay taxes
or buy new debt by delivering maturing government debt Bt 1 . While this looks like a cash-in-
advance economy it is not by one crucial di¤erence: the securities market is always open, and people
can hold zero cash overnight.


8.2   Sticky-Price Model

In this section I build an explicit model in which prices are set one period in advance. The sticky-
price setup is a simpli…cation of Galí (1999). The contribution is to combine that price-stickiness
framework in a model of …scal price determination.
   Each household derives utility from the consumption of a range of goods j. Its objective is
                                     1
                                     X                                         Z     1        1     1
                                           t
                         max E                 [u(ct )       nt ] ; ct =                   cjt dj       :
                        fcjt ;nt g                                                   j=0
                                     t=0

The households’period budget constraint is
                                         Z               1
                           Bt 1 + t =                          pjt cjt dj + St + Qt Bt
                                                         j=0

and a transversality condition I will describe below. The household enters the period with Bt 1 face
value of government debt, receives pro…ts from selling goods,described below, purchases a range of
goods from other households, pays nominal taxes less transfers St , and buys new bonds Bt at price
Qt .




                                                               41
8.2.1   Demand for varieties

We can solve the household problem in two steps: First, …nd the allocation across goods cjt condi-
tional on the overall level of purchases ct , and then …nd the optimal allocation across time ct and
labor supply decision nt . We can …nd the …rst step by the associated cost minimization problem,
                                    Z     1                                           Z   1                     1            1
                              min              pjt cjt dj s.t. ct =                                   cjt dj
                              fcjt g j=0                                                 j=0


   The …rst order conditions for buying good j are
                                                             Z     1            1
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                  1             1
                                          pjt =                          cjt dj                           cjt
                                                                  j=0

                                                                                          1
                                                                               cjt
                                                        pjt =                                                                                           (30)
                                                                               ct
where is the Lagrange multiplier. Raising both sides to the 1                                                                       power and integrating to
evaluate the multiplier, we have
                                   Z                                                      1       Z
                                                                               1                                    1
                                        p1jt       dj =           1
                                                                                                           cjt dj
                                                                               ct
                               Z                        1                                 Z
                                                   1                             1                              1            1
                                   p1jt       dj             =                                        cjt dj
                                                                                ct
                                              ( Z                              1 )
                                                                                          1
                                                                           1
                                                             1
                                                            pjt dj                                = :

De…ning the price index
                                                                  Z                   1
                                                                                          1

                                                   pt                   p1jt     dj                   ;

and substituting   in to (30), we obtain the conditional (on ct ) demand curve for each good,

                                                            cjt           pjt
                                                                =                         :                                                             (31)
                                                            ct             p

   Total expenditure is
                          Z                                   Z
                                                        ct                                 ct 1
                               pjt cjt dj =                           p1jt dj =               pt                        = pt ct :
                                                       p                                  p
This lovely result allows us to express the consumer’s problem in terms of aggregates. Now, the
consumer’s problem simpli…es to
                                                                  1
                                                                  X
                                                                          t
                                               max E                           [u(ct )            nt ]
                                              fct ;nt g
                                                                  t=0

with budget constraint
                                          Bt       1   +      t   = pt ct + St + Qt Bt

                                                                        42
8.2.2   Production

Each household also owns a …rm, which produces only one variety of good using the household’s
labor, with production function
                                         yit = Ant
and facing the demand curve given by (31) from all the other households. The household earns
 t = pit yit . The household’s problem is then

                                                       1
                                                       X
                                                               t
                                      max          E               [u(ct )       nt ] s.t.
                                  fct ;nt ;pit g
                                                       t=0




                                   Bt    1   + pit yit = pt ct + St + Qt Bt
                                                       yit = Ant
                                                       yit          pit
                                                           =
                                                       yt           pt

I use yt in the last equation to emphasize that each household takes the aggregate consumption =
output and all the other household’s pricing decisions as …xed when making its own output and
consumption decisions.
   Given the constraints, we can let the household choose price, quantity or labor supply. This
being a “sticky price” model, I express the decision in terms of price
                                         1
                                             "                    #
                                         X            yt   p it
                                           t
                             max E            u(ct )                 s.t.
                          fct ;nt ;pit g              A pt
                                             t=0


                                                       pit
                             Bt   1   + pit yt                      = pt ct + St + Qt Bt         (32)
                                                       pt

8.2.3   Flexible prices

In the ‡exible-price case, the household can set its price at time t. The …rst order condition for pit
is then
                              yt   pit      1                    pit
                                               =     t (1   )yt                                  (33)
                              A     p      pit                    p
where t is the Lagrange multiplier on the nominal period t budget constraint (32), the value of a
dollar at time t. Simplifying,
                                               1
                                        pit =
                                              A t    1
   This optimal price is the same for all households, so all prices are identical, and
                                                              1
                                                   pt =                                          (34)
                                                             A t             1
With all prices equal, we have yit = yt and nt = yt =A.


                                                             43
   Substituting this result in the remaining household problem, we obtain
                                                         1
                                                         X            h            yt i
                                                                  t
                                            max E                         u(ct )
                                        fct ;Bt g                                  A
                                                         t=0


                                   Bt        1   + pt yt = pt ct + St + Qt Bt :
Now we can solve the household problem and equilibrium condition. The …rst order condition with
respect to ct gives
                                                     1
                                   u0 (ct ) = pt t =      :                                (35)
                                                     A  1
The latter equality comes from the pricing decision (34). This is a frictionless economy, so as in
our endowment economy consumption is constant with no real shocks, no matter what happens to
nominal quantities.
   The …rst order condition with respect to Bt gives

                                                       Qt    t   = Et       t+1

so the bond price satis…es

                                                                 u0 (ct+1 ) pt
                                            Qt = Et
                                                                 u0 (ct ) pt+1
                                                                  pt
                                                     = Et
                                                                 pt+1

(pt is known at time t, but this is prettier.)
   Substituting, the ‡ow budget constraint becomes

                                                                                     pt
                              Bt   1   + pt yt = pt ct + St + Et                         Bt :
                                                                                    pt+1

8.2.4   Taxes and Present values.

The government charges net lump-sum real taxes in the amount st so St = pt st . This is not
an unnatural assumption. For example, if the government charged a rate on nominal income
St = pt yt , then the real tax revenue would be …xed st = yt . I specify lump sum taxes to avoid
dealing with distortions.
   Dividing by pt
                                   Bt 1                      Bt
                                        + yt = ct + st + Et
                                    pt                      pt+1
and iterating forward,

                                   X    k
                         Bt 1                    j                                          Bt+k
                              = Et                   (ct+j       yt+j + st+j ) + Et
                          pt                                                               pt+k+1
                                       j=1

I impose that the limit of the term on the right hand side is zero. In the positive direction, this is
a condition for consumer optimality. If not, the consumer could increase consumption and hence

                                                                 44
utility. In the negative direction, this is a standard no-Ponzi condition preventing the consumer
from borrowing larger and larger amounts. B > 0 and p > 0 –the government does not lend, and
prices must be positive –serve the same purpose.

                                          X        k
                                Bt 1                      j
                                     = Et                     (ct+j         yt+j + st+j )
                                 pt
                                                  j=1


   Finally, we impose the equilibrium condition,

                                                       ct = yt .

This condition determines the overall price level,

                                                      X            k
                                            Bt 1                        j
                                                 = Et                       st+j
                                             pt
                                                                  j=1

just as in the endowment-economy model.


8.2.5   Prices set one period in advance

To create a sticky-price version of this model, I require that each household set its price pit one
period in advance. The household is committed to supply whatever demand there is at the posted
price. The demand curve faced by each household producer is still

                                                  yit         pit
                                                      =                     :
                                                  yt          pt

so, with all prices still equal, individual demand will equal aggregate demand. But now aggregate
demand yt can vary over time.
   The …rst order condition of the problem (32), which I repeat here,
                                         1
                                             "                 #
                                         X           yt p it
                                           t
                            max E             u(ct )              s.t.
                          fct ;nt ;pit g             A pt
                                           t=0


                                                   pit
                              Bt   1   + pit yt                    = pt ct + St + Qt Bt
                                                   pt
     with respect to pit in this case becomes, in place of (33),
                                                      "                                           #
                            yt    pit      1                                                pit
                      Et 1                    = Et 1 t (1        )yt
                            A      p      pit                                                p

which we simplify to
                                                              1
                                           pit =                                    :
                                                   AEt        1 ( t)            1
again all prices are identical, and
                                                              1
                                            pt =                                                      (36)
                                                   AEt        1 ( t)            1

                                                              45
   Output now is yit = yt and thus labor supply nt = yt =A. The household problem simpli…es
then to
                                          1
                                          X    h        yt i
                                             t
                                 max E           u(ct )
                                fct ;Bt g               A
                                                             t=0


                                           Bt     1   + pt yt = pt ct + St + Qt Bt :
The …rst order condition with respect to ct still gives

                                                          u0 (ct ) = pt t :

However, the new pricing rule (36) now means (35) becomes
                                                                                        1
                                      Et    1   u0 (ct ) = pt Et         1 ( t)     =                  :             (37)
                                                                                        A          1
This is really the crucial di¤erence. Expected marginal utility is constant. But nominal shocks will
have real e¤ects. A too low price will induce too much output, and too much consumption.
   The …rst order condition with respect to Bt gives

                                                         Qt   t    = Et       t+1

as before, and thus
                                                                   u0 (ct+1 ) pt
                                                Qt = Et                           :
                                                                    u0 (ct ) pt+1
However, from (37), we can no longer conclude that ct and the real interest rate are constant.
   The ‡ow budget constraint becomes
                                                                                    u0 (ct+1 ) pt
                         Bt       1   + pt yt = pt ct + pt st + Et                                 Bt
                                                                                     u0 (ct ) pt+1
                                      Bt 1                  Et u0 (ct+1 ) Bt
                                           + yt = ct + st +
                                       pt                     u0 (ct ) pt+1
where I have used the fact that pt+1 is known at time t. Using (37),
                                  Bt 1                                                                         Bt
                       u0 (ct )        = u0 (ct ) [ct              yt + st ] + Et u0 (ct+1 )
                                   pt                                                                         pt+1
                                           X             1
                           0     Bt 1                          j 0
                         u (ct )      = Et                         u (ct+j ) [ct+j           yt+j + st+j ]
                                  pt
                                                        j=0

equilibrium ct = yt requires that pt obey
                                                            X       1
                                                  Bt 1
                                       u0 (ct )        = Et               j
                                                                               u0 (ct+j )st+j
                                                   pt
                                                                   j=0

Now, in this simple model with one-period price stickiness, we have from (37) that Et u0 (ct+j ) =
1
A  1 for j    1. If the covariance between marginal utility and surpluses is zero, then
                                                                                             1
                                                                                             X
                                           Bt 1                1
                               u0 (ct )         = u0 (ct )st +                          Et         j
                                                                                                       st+j
                                            pt                 A                    1
                                                                                             j=1


                                                                    46
                                                                      X                      1
                                     u0 (ct ) Bt 1   u0 (ct )                                         j
                                       0
                                                   =   0
                                                              st + Et                                     st+j
                                     u (c) pt        u (c)
                                                                                            j=1

in this case, marginal utility     u0 (ct )   must do all the adjusting when there is a surplus shock, as the
price level cannot move.


8.2.6   Algebra for the k-period sticky price example.

As a reminder, surpluses are st = 0; t < k. Before time 1, surpluses were expected
                                                                           P        to be st = s;
t k. At time 1, expected surpluses change to st = s0 ; t k. Denote S = 1     j=0
                                                                                 j s = s=(1      )
      0   0
and S = s =(1      ). The steady state implies from (16) that nominal debt Bt 1 =      k t P S for
t k.
     To derive the path shown in Table 1 and Figure 1, express equations (16) and (17) at each date,
substituting in c; P ; B; where appropriate, and remember the rules, B0 = B0 , P1 ; P2 ; ::Pk = P , and
u0 (ck ) = u0 (ck+1 ) = ::: = u0 (c) do not change.
   For t = 1;
                                                           X              1
                                                   B0
                                        u0 (c1 )      = E1                       j 0
                                                                                  u (c1+j )s1+j
                                                   P1
                                                                        j=0
                                                 1                    u0 (c2 ) P1
                                                      =                           :
                                               1 + i1                 u0 (c1 ) P2

With Bt       =   k tP S   for t   k and substituting in c; P ; B; we have
          1

                                                          k 1P S
                                              u0 (c1 )                      =     k 1 0
                                                                                        u (c)S 0                 (38)
                                                              P
                                                                      1           u0 (c2 ) P
                                                                            =                :                   (39)
                                                                        1         u0 (c1 ) P
Equation (38) tells us right away that consumption at time 1 is determined only by the …scal shock,

                                                                                   S0
                                                         u0 (c1 ) = u0 (c)            :
                                                                                   S
Equation (39) then gives us time 2 consumption,

                                                             1                      1                S0
                                        u0 (c2 ) =                   u0 (c1 ) =             u0 (c)      :
                                                              1                        1             S

   For t = 2;
                                                              B1
                                                 u0 (c2 )        =             k 2 0
                                                                                   u (c)S 0                      (40)
                                                              P
                                                              1                u0 (c3 ) P
                                                                 =                        :                      (41)
                                                                  2            u0 (c2 ) P
Equation (41) tells us time 3 consumption

                                                          1                             1                   S0
                                     u0 (c3 ) =                      u0 (c1 ) =                   u0 (c)
                                                         1       2                      1     2             S

                                                                          47
and (40) tells us the less interesting time 1 debt required by the interest rate peg (recall the initial
values Bt 1 = k t P S)

                                     1                S0                                        S0
                                            u0 (c)       B1 =             k 2 0
                                                                                  u (c)P S
                                        1             S                                         S
                                                         B1 =               1 B1


   For t = 3;
                                                         B2
                                             u0 (c3 )       =             k 3 0
                                                                                  u (c)S 0
                                                         P
                                                         1                u0 (c4 ) P
                                                            =                        :
                                                          3               u0 (c3 ) P
hence, similarly,
                                                                      1                    S0
                                            u0 (c4 ) =                            u0 (c)
                                                                  1     2     3            S
and
                                     1                   S0                                      S0
                                                u0 (c)      B2 =              k 3 0
                                                                                    u (c)P S
                                    1       2            S                                       S
                                                            B2 =              1     2 B2


   For t = k; we know that u0 (ck+1 ) = u0 (c), so instead
                                                      Bk 1
                                        u0 (ck )           = u0 (c)S 0                                (42)
                                                       P
                                                        1     u0 (c) P
                                                           =               :                          (43)
                                                         k   u0 (ck ) Pk+1

   Now, u0 (ck ) = ( 1 :: k 1 ) 1 u0 (c)S 0 =S is already determined, and u0 (ck+1 ) = u0 (c) as well, but
not the price Pk+1 is free. So, rather than determine u0 (ck+1 ), equation (43) implies

                                                                                         S
                                            Pk+1 = (              1    2 ::       k) P      :
                                                                                         S0
Equation (42) continues to ‡esh out the debt required to support the interest rate target,

                                         Bk       1   =       1       2 :::    k 1 Bk 1




   For t = k + 1;
                                                        Bk
                                                            = S0                                      (44)
                                                       Pk+1
                                                        1      Pk+1
                                                            =       ;                                 (45)
                                                        k+1    Pk+2
and similarly for t = k + 2; t = k + 3; :::
   Table 1 gives the evolution of each variable in this scenario. I present the algebra below.

                                                                  48
                     t:                   Before            Shock                  After shock
                     t:                   0                 1                      2                        3                                ...
                     1 + it :             1+                (1 + )       1         (1 + ) 2                 (1 + )           3               ...
                     u0 (ct )=u0 (c) :    1                 S 0 =S                 1= 1 S 0 =S              1= ( 1       2) S
                                                                                                                                     0 =S    ...
                     1 + rt :             1+                (1 + )       1         (1 + ) 2                 (1 + )           3               ...
                     Pt :                 P                 P                      P                        P                                ...
                     Bt :                 Bt                   1 Bt                  1 2 Bt                     1   2   3 Bt                 ...
                                               Panel A: t = 0 and initial response

 t:                           After shock                               Last stuck P                                                  P unstuck                 etc.
 t:                     ...   k-1                                       k                                                             k+1                       ...
 1 + it :               ...   (1 + ) k 1                                (1 + ) k                                                      (1 + ) k+1                ...
 u0 (ct )=u0 (c) :      ...   1=( 1 2 ::: k 2 )S 0 =S                   1=( 1 2 ::: k 1 )S 0 =S                                       1                         ...
 1 + rt :               ...   (1 + ) k 1                                (1 + ) =( 1 2 ::: k 1 ) S 0 =S                                (1 + )                    ...
 Pt :                   ...   P                                         P                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                        1 2 ::: k P (S=S )      ...
 Bt :                   ...     1 2 ::: k 1 Bt                            1 2 ::: k Bt                                                  1 2 ::: k k+1 Bt        ...
                                          Panel B: Response as sticky prices end

 Table 1. Responses to a surprise increase in nominal interest rates from 1 +                                                               to f(1 + )   t g,
                           together with a …scal shock from st to s0t .


8.3     Three-equation new-Keynesian model

This section sets out the algebra for the three-equation new-Keynesian model. Cochrane (2011a,
online appendix) has a more extensive but more cumbersome treatment.
    The model is

                                               yt = Et yt+1                  (it       Et        t+1 )   + xdt
                                                t   = Et        t+1     + yt + x             t
                                               it =           t + xit

In vector form,
         2                3     2   1                                                                           32               3      2            3
            yt+1                         ( +        )          (1              )         1                              yt                    yt+1
         6 t+1            7 6                                       1
                                                                                        0            1
                                                                                                            0   76 t             7 6 t+1             7
         6                7 6                                                                                   76               7 6                 7
         6 xdt+1          7=6             0                         0                              0        0   7 6 xdt          7 + 6 "dt+1         7
         6                7 6                                                            d                      76               7 6                 7
         4 x t+1          5 4             0                         0                   0                   0   54 x t           5 4 " t+1           5
            xit+1                         0                         0                   0          0        i       xit                "it+1
                     Xt+1 = AXt + "t+1

The central issue in this class of models is that the model only determines Et yt+1 and Et t+1 . Older
Keynesian models had lagged values on the right hand side, and thus no indeterminacy issues.
    The solution can be found by eigenvalue decomposing the transition matrix,
                                                                                   1
                                                        Xt+1 = Q Q                     Xt + "t+1
                                                        1                      1                    1
                                                Q           Xt+1 = Q               Xt + Q                "t+1

                                                                             49
                                                  Zt+1 = Zt + Vt+1
                                                  zjt+1 =      j zjt    + vjt+1

    New Keynesian models overcome indeterminacy with the rule that we pick nonexplosive solu-
tions limk!1 Et Zt+k ! 0. This rule means that for j > 1, we must have zit = 0. Then, the
dynamics of the X variables can be written in terms of the …rst K < N nonzero z as
                     2       3
                        x1t
                     6 x2t 7                         2        3
                     6       7                          z1t
                     6 .. 7                          6 z2t 7
                     6 . 7                           6        7
                     6       7 = q1 q2           q   6 .. 7
                     6 xKt 7                       K
                                                     4        5
                     6       7                           .
                     6 .. 7
                     4 . 5                              zKt
                        xN t
                   2         3 2                     32         3 2       3
                      z1t+1         1                      z1t      v1t+1
                   6 z2t+1 7 6                       7 6 z2t 7 6 v2t+1 7
                   6         7 6         2           76         7 6       7
                   6    ..   7=6            ..       7 6 .. 7 + 6     ..  7
                   4     .   5 4               .     54 . 5 4          .  5
                         zKt+1                                      K          zKt               vKt+1
where qj denote the columns of Q.
    Z is a linear combination of X, so zjt = 0 is a relationship linking endogenous variables t ; yt to
shocks xt . Equivalently, zjt+1 = 0 means vjt+1 = 0: vjt+1 is a linear combination of and " shocks,
so this requirement picks the shocks that index alternative equilibria.
   The eigenvalues of the transition matrix are
                         =        ;   +; d;       ;   i
                                                          q
                              1
                         =            1+      +            (1 +          +     )2     4 (1 +             )
                             2
The eigenvectors of the …rst two (model) eigenvalues are
                    2              q                                                             3
                      1           + (1 + + )2 4 (1 +                                      )
                    6                                                                            7
                    6                       2                                                    7
                    6                                                                            7
                    6                        0                                                   7$          ;
                    6                                                                            7
                    4                        0                                                   5
                                             0
                     2                        q                                                  3
                                                                    2
                         1                     (1 +        +        )        4 (1 +          )
                     6                                                                           7
                     6                                    2                                      7
                     6                                                                           7
                     6                                     0                                     7$      +
                     6                                                                           7
                     4                                     0                                     5
                                                           0
The eigenvectors of the shock eigenvalues are
                           2                                                          3
                                          1     d
                           6                                                           7
                           6                                                           7
                           6 (1    d ) (1     d) +                       (             7
                                                                                    d) 7 $
                           6                                                                     d
                           4                  0                                        5
                                              0

                                                               50
                          2                                                                       3
                                                     (                   )
                          6                           1                                         7
                          6                                                                     7
                          6                                    0                                7$
                          6                                                                     7
                          4 (1             ) (1                 )+               (            ) 5
                                                               0
                           2                                                                      3
                                                       (1           i        )
                           6                                                                      7
                           6                                                                      7
                           6                                   0                                  7$
                           6                                                                      7              i
                           4                                   0                                  5
                                   (1      i ) (1          i    )+               (           i)

   In the standard new-Keynesian equilibrium selection, we assume > 1:Then both + > 1 and
   > 1, two z are equal to zero so we determine both y and . The model dynamics can then be
written                                                               2      3
                                                                         zdt
                     yt        1    d     (      ;0 )      (1  i )    4 z t 5
                          =
                      t                     1
                                                                         zit
                        2      3 2               32          3 2       3
                           zdt         d   0 0        zdt 1       vdt
                        4 z t 5=4 0           0 54 z t 1 5 + 4 v t 5
                           zit        0 0      i      zit 1       vit
where the z and the x are related by

                           xdt = [(1            d ) (1          d        )+          (             d )] zdt
                          x    t   = [(1            ) (1                 )+              (                )] z       t
                           xit = [(1            i ) (1          i    )+              (            i )] zit :

Similarly the shocks v are related to fundamental shocks x by

                           "dt = [(1           d ) (1           d       )+           (             d )] vdt
                           "   t   = [(1            ) (1                 )+              (                )] v       t
                           "it = [(1           i ) (1           i    )+              (            i )] vit :


   It’s interesting to carry along the i response. From

                                                    it =             t   + xit ;

we can simply append the i to the response variables as
          2     3 2                                                                                                            32     3
             yt       1     d      (       ;0 )            (1                                         i    )                      zdt
          4 t 5=4                    1                                                                                         54 z t 5
             it                  (1     )            i + (1                                       i ) (1                 i   )    zit

For the response to a monetary policy shock, we only need the last column.




                                                                51
   In the end, then, I plot the response to a monetary policy shock by simulating forward
                         2     3 2                               3
                            yt                   (1    i )
                         4 t 5=4                                 5 zit
                            it             i + (1   i ) (1  i )
                              zit =   i zit 1   + vit
                                                          "it
                              vit =
                                      (1       i ) (1    i )+               (      i)
                                                          xit
                              zit =
                                      (1       i ) (1    i )+               (      i)


8.3.1   Fiscal solution

In the …scal solution, we pick the in‡ation shock directly, from the change in present value of future
surpluses. Ideally, the present value should contain interest rates and risk premiums as well as
surpluses. Monetary policy may a¤ect the present value of surpluses by changing discount rates,
even if it cannot change surpluses. We should also have a serious analysis of monetary and …scal
policy coordination. For my illustrative calculation, I will simply choose to pair monetary policy
with no change in present value of surpluses, as I have done in the other illustrative calculations,
resulting in t+1 Et t+1 = 0. This choice generally does not mean no change in surpluses, but a
change in surpluses that matches the change in discount rate e¤ects on their present values.
    Since we pick one innovation t+1 = 0, we only need one eigenvalue greater than one. Hence,
following the usual rules, we need a “passive” monetary policy < 1. This choice implies + > 1
but     < 1. Hence, the model dynamics keep an additional eigenvector,
                                                                             2      3
          2     3 2                                                        3 zdt
             yt        1    d     (        )             (1   i )        k   6      7
          4 t 5=4                  1                                    2  56 z t 7
                                                                             4 zit 5
             it                     (1     ) (1    i ) (1   i )     i 2
                                                                                z t
                                  q
                k=1             + (1 + + )2 4 (1 +                )

and we add
                                           z   t+1   =    z   t   +      t+1

   Now we can compute responses to …scal shocks, identi…ed by the innovation in t+1 , and to
other shocks orthogonalized, i.e. holding …scal shocks and thus the innovation in in‡ation constant.
   To impose no shock to in‡ation, we must have
                                                                        2     3
                                                                          vdt
                                                                        6 v t 7
                                      1                       2         6     7
                                                                        4 vit 5 = 0
                                                                          v t

In my calculations, when there is only a monetary policy shock vi , this means

                                                                  vit
                                                     2                      = 0;
                                                                  v t


                                                         52
i.e. we pair the vi shock with a contemporaneous shock

                                                      v   t   =       vit :
                                                                  2

   In sum, then, to …nd the response to a monetary policy shock, we simulate
 2     3 2                                          q                              3
   yt                    (1   i )      1         + (1 + + )2 4 (1 +            )       zit
 4 t 5=6  4
                                                                                   7
                                                                                   5
                                                             2                         z t
    it       (1    i ) (1   i  )    i                      2
   zit+1 =          i zit
   z   t+1     =      z     t
       zi1 = vi1 = 1= [(1           i ) (1   i   )+   (            i )]
       v   1   =z    1   = =2 vi1




                                                              53
